For Owners and Operators

of Ford Cars and Trucks

Published by J
FORD MOTOR. COMPANY
Detroit, Michigan, U.S. A. .



Ss Foreword

' is a significant fact that nearly all Ford cara are driven by
laymen—by owners, who in the. great majority of cases have
FOr no practical experience with things mechanical.

- ' Ford sttvice statichs distributed throughout the civilized world —
N ' where Sdfust i A wit

But while it is not imperative, it is, however, altogether desir-
able that every Ford owner should thoroughly understand his
car, With euch knowledge at his command he ia always master ;

; ‘The mastery of a thorough lmowledge of Ford construction is
by no means a difficult or time-consuming task. The Ford is the
simplest car made. It is easy to understand, and is not difficult
te keep in proper adjustment and repair.
and that there may be an authoritative guide for the making of

Important

itis most important that owners of Ford cars shaltinsist
upon getting the genuine Ford-made materials, or “Parts,”
schen having repairs or replacements made, This will be
assuted when the car is taken to the authorised Ford
. ‘agegt, Imitation, or “bogus” or counterfeit parts of
é. ‘ by i quality are being made and sold as “Ford Parts.”

mvid their use by. dealing with the authorized Ford



ON PE aeee

-1 a ~y

The Car and Its Operation

What must be done before «
starting the Car? Answog No, 1

Before trying to start the car, fill the radiator (by rem cap at top). with clean
fresh water. If perfectly clean water cannot be obtained is advisable to strain
it through muslin or other similar material to prevent foreign matter from getting
in and obstructing the small tubes of the radiator. The system will hold approxi-
mately three gallons. It is important that the car ahould not. be run under
own power unless the water circulating system haa been filled. Pour in the wai
until you are sure that both radiator and cylinder ater jackets are:
water will run out of the overfiow pipe onto the ground when the
system has been properly filled. During the firet days that a
being driven it is a good plan to examine the radiator frequently and
is kept properly filled. The water supply should be replenished as
be found necessary. Soft rain water, when it ia to be had in a clean
superior to hard water, which may contain alkalies and other salts which
deposit sediment and clog the radiator. (See chapter on Cooling System.)

¢

4

cD

ai
fe

What about 4
Gasoline? Answer No; 2

rapidly. Atways be careful about lighting matches near where gasoline has been
spilled, as the air within a radius of several fect is permeated with the hi
explosive vapor. The small vent hole in the gasoline tank cap should not be
allowed to get plugged up, as this would prevent proper flow of the gaacling to
the carburetor. The gasoline tank may be drained by opening the pet cock in
the sediment bulb at the bottom. ,

Slow about - .
the Oiling System? Answer No. 3

Upon receipt of the car see that a supply of medium light, high-grade gas engine
oll is poured into the crank case through the breather pipe at the front of the.
engine (a metal cap covers it). Down under the car in the flywheel casing (
reservoir which holds this oil) you will find two pet cocks. Pour off in sléwly -
until it runs out of the upper cock. Leave the cock open until it stopd running—
then close it. ‘After the engine has become thoroughly limbered up, the best
results will be obtained by carrying the oil at a level midway between the two
cocks—but under no circumstances should it be allowed to get
coclc, All other parts of the car are properly oiled when it leaves the factéry.
However, it will be well to see that all grease cupe are filled and that oil is supplied
tomecessary parts, (See Cut No. 18, also chapter on Lubrication.) i
?
How are Spark and Throttle ;
Levers used? Answer No. 4.

Under the steering wheel are two small levers, The right-hand (throttle) lever:
cotitrols the amount of mixture (gasoline and air) which goes into the efgine.
When the engine is in operation, the farther this lever ix moved dowsiward toward ¢
the driver (referred to as “opening the throttle”) the faster the engine runs. and
explodes: the gas in the cylinde:

1 of the engine. ‘The advancing oF ela lever
. {3}

od

a he i |


Imernal Gear Case

Planetary Pinion
Drive Pinion with Short Shafi
Drwe Pinion Shafi Bushing yf

Horn Bution and Light Sy,
- Spark Lever, —

a Throule Rod
Be Steering Gear

‘ _—
a a

|


er Senne = a *

THE CAK AND ITS OPERATION ot &

advances the spark,’ and it should be moved down nbtch by notch until the |
motor seems to reach its maximum speed: If the lever is advanced beyond this
point a dull knock will be noticed in the engine. (See chapter on Ignition.)
Where should these levers be.when ‘ . ‘

atarting the Engine? Answer No. 3

The spark lever should usually be put in about the third or fourth notch of the
quadrant (the notched half-circle on which the levers operate). The throttle
should usually be opened about five or six notches. A little experience will soon
teach you where these levers should be placed for proper atartidg, Care should be
taken not to advance the spark lever too far, as the engine tity “back kick.”

What else is necessary before . .
starting the Engine? Answer No. 6

¢

First, see that the hand lever, which comes up through the floor of thie car at the
left of the driver, is pulled back as far as it will go. The lever in this position
holds the clutch in neutral and engages the hub brake, thus preventing the car
moving forward when the engine is started. Second, after inserting the awitch
key in the switch on the coil box, throw the switch lever as far to the left as it will
go—to the point marked “magneto.” This switch connects the magyeto with
the engine. The engine can’t be started until it is on—and the throwing off of this.
switch stops the engine.

How is the Engine , '
started? _ Answer, No. 7

If the car is not equipped with a starter the engine is stdrted by the lifting of the
starting crank at the front of the'car. Take hold of the le and push firmly
toward the car till you feel the crank ratchet engage, then lift upward with a
quick swing. With a little experience this operation will become an easy matter.
Don't, as a usual thing, crank downward against the compression—for then an
early explosion may drive the handle vigorously backward. ‘ This does not mean
however, that it is not advisable, when the car is hard to start, to occasionally
“spin” the engine by the use of the atarting handle—but be sure the spark lever
is retarded when spinning or cranking the engine against compression, vi

a sudden backfire may injure the arm of the operator. When the engine is cool
it is advisable to prime the carburetor by pulling on the small wire at the | i
left corner of the radiator while giving the engine two or three quarter turne wi
the starting handle. 7 :

If the car is equipped with a starter the spark and throttle levers shoud be placed
in the same position on the quadrant as when cranking by hand, ar ignition
switch turned on. Current from either battery or magneto may be used
ignition. However, we recommend that the magneto be used at all tim
The to was designed to furnish ignition for the Model T engine‘andl bette
results be obtained by operating in this:-way. Special attention muat ‘be
paid to the position of the spark lever as a advanced spark will cause serious
backfiring which in turn will bend or break the shaft in the starter. The starting.
motor is operated by a push button, conveniently located in the floor of the car
at the driver's feet. With the spark and throttle levers in thé proper podition,
and the ignition switch turned on, press on the push button with the foot. This
closes the circuit between the battery and starting motor, causing the finion
of the Bendix drive shaft to engage with the teeth on the flywheel, thus tuming
over the crankshaft. When the engine is cold it may be necessary. to prime it
by pulling out the carburetor priming rod, which is located on the inatrument
board. In order to. avoid flooding the engine with an over rich mixture of gas, the
priming rod should only be held out for a few seconds at a time. ‘



dian | oy ° aK: 3 Spe eee oo

THE FORD MANUAL

started in cold weather? ‘Answer No. &

‘Aa gasoline dogs not vaporize readily in cold west et of starting th dif
to atart the: under such conditions. The usual method of starting the

when cold is to turn th. carburetor dash adjustment one-quarter turn to the
én order to allow a richer mixture of gasoline to be drawn into the cylinders;
held out the priming rod, while you turn crank from six to eight one-qu
turns in quick succession, or turn the motor over a few times with the ste
Another method of starting a troublesome coid engine is as follows: 3B
you throw on the magneto switch, (1) close throttle lever; (2) hold out pri
rod while you give crank several quick turns, or turn the motor over a few bin
with the starter, then let go of priming rod (being careful that it goes be
ail the way); (3) place spark lever in about third ngtch and advance throt
lever several notches; (4) throw on switch (being suse to get it on side ma
“Magneto”); (5) give crank one or two turns, or close the starting switch, and
motor should atart. After starting the motor it is advisable to advance the sp:
eight or ten notches on the quadrant and let the motor run until thoroughly:
heated up. If you start out with a cold motor you will not have much powé
and ere liable to “stall.” The advantage of turning on the switch last, or ¢
priming, is that when you throw. on the switch and start the motor, you ha
Mlenty of gas in the cylinders, to keep the motor running, thereby eliminating )
trouble of the motor starting and stopping. After. motor is warmed up
éarburetor adjystment back one-quarter turn. |
To facilitate starting many drivers make practice of stopping their engine by
pulling gut on the pe full © which has the effect of shutting off the air suctio
Sling the cylinders full of a very rich gasoline vapor. This should not.
Gone unless the car is going to stand over night or long enough to cool off. Tf th
thotor is stopped in this way and then started when hot, starting is apt to be dif
ficult on account of the surplus gasoline in the carburetor.

What function does the a
Hand Lever perform? Answer No. $
Tes chief purpose is to hold the clutch in neutral position. If it were not for thi
Jever the driver would have to stop the engine whenever he left the driver's seats’
He would also be unable to crank the engine without the car. starting forward
with the first explosion. When pulled back as far as it will go, the hand } y
acts as an emergency brake on the rear wheels, by expanding the brake shoes i¥
the rear: wheel drums. Therefore the hand lever should be back as far as it will
go when cranking the engine or when the car is at rest. It should be only in aj
vestical position, and not far enough backward to act as a brake on the rear wheelsy
when the car ia to be reversed. When the car is operating in high or low speed
the hand Jéver should be all the way forward. . :
How do the Foot Loe
Pedals operate? Answer Ng. 1 i
The first one toward the left operates the clutch. When pressed forward. tht
clutch pedel engages the low speed. When half-way forward’ the clutch is
neutral (i. e., discorihected from the driving mechanism of the rear wheels),
operates the reverse. The right-hand pedal operates the transmission
How is the Car : - 7 so
started? eel . Answer No.
* half way forward, theteb: » dinkdieg: the efetch in a neutral position

Bre



throwing the hand lever forward; then press the pedal forward into slow speed
and when under sufficient headway (20 to 30 fect), allow the pedal tp drop
back slowly into high speed, at the same time partially closing the throttle, which .
- will allow the engine to pick up its load easily. With o Uttle practice.
change of speeds will be easily accomplished, and without any eciatte’
effect on the emooth ruining of the machine. ve
a
How is the Car -
stopped? ‘ Answer No. 12

Partially close the throtte; felease the high speed by pressing the clutch petal
forward into neutral; apply the foot Brake slowly but firmly until the car |

to a dead stop. Do not remove foot from the clutch pedal without first

the hand lever back to niystral position, or the engine will stall. To stop the
motor, open the throttle a trifle to accelerate the motor and then throw off the
switch. The engine will then. stop with the cylinders full of explosive gas, which
will naturally facilitate starting.

Endeavor to so familiarize yourself with the operation of the dar that to disengage
the clutch and apply the brake becomes practically automatic—the natural thing
to do in case of emergency

How is the Car
reversed? . Answer No. 13

It must be brought to a dead stop. With the engine running, disengage the clutch
with the hand lever and press the reverse pedal forward with the left foof} the |
tight foot being free to use on the brake pedal ifneeded. Do not bring the hand “4
lever back too far or you will set the brakes on rear wheels. Experienced drivers :
ordinarity reverse the car by simply holding the clutch pedal in neutral with the

| left foot, and operating the reverse pedal with the right.

Bow ia the Spark
controlled? per Answer No. 14

By the left-hand lever under the steering wheel. Good operators drive with ;
the spark lever advanced just as far as the engine will permit, However, ad- .
vancing the spark too far will case a dull knock in the motor, due to the feet that -4
b the explosion occurs too early. The spark should only be retarded when the
| engine slows down on a hzavy road or steep grade, but care should be ‘exercised’
not to retard the spark too far as this will result in late ignition, which causes '
' loss of power and overheating of the motor and may also reaulf in warped,
burned or cracked valves, Learn to operate the spark as the occasion
The greatest economy in gasoline consumption is obtained by driving orien the the

spark advanced sufficiently to obtain the maximum speed. a. ‘
How is speed of : ’
Gar controlled? | btiswer No. 15°

The diferent spends required to mest road conditions ere obtained by opening
or cloging the throttle. Practically all the running speeds needed! for drdinery.
Ce ee eee ee ee tine ce wae erties Daye eae
File the cutk he Denali the: ‘ ng one



oo *

- sit + advieable for owners to.

; inst aatisfactory service in the end. Never start out with your car until you aré-

make their own + Adjustments? ‘

the cor—and who will have no motive fon inving up useless repair bills.
entire Ford orgenization is interested in keeping every individual Ford. car
constant operation, at the lowest possible cost. We have known of much dé

done to miany cars by unskilled repair men.

What attention. Z
does the Car need? Answer No. vA

mer that a new machine requires more careful attention during the fiz
few é itis being driven than efter the parts have become thoroughly “worked!
‘he car which is driven slowly and carefully when new usually gives thei

aure that is has plenty of oil and water. Frequently inspect the running gear;
Se that no unnecessary play exists in either front or rear wheels, and that
bolts 'gnd nuts are. tight. Make a practice of taking care of every repair '
adjustment as soon as its necessity is discovered. This attention requires but

little time and may. avoid delay or possible accident on the road. We aim 19°.
deli t f e r mechanical adjustment. Afterwards it is plainly the j
peep it in that condition.

7”

: to _ es
Pa toy a oa a of


_ The Ford Engine

What ts the principle of the

gasoline-driven Engine?

Gasoline when mixed with air and compressed is highly explo: fm explosion
ia @ violent expansion caused by instantaneous combustio afined. gases.
In the gasoline engine the mixture is drawn into a cylinder, where itis compress

by an advancing piston and then exploded by: an electric spark, which send#-the

piston downward, and through the connecting red iniparts a rotary motion: tothe

crankshaft. (See Cut No. 2.)

What are functions ; ;
of the Pistons? Answer No. 19

On-the downward stroke the suction of the piston draws thi fresh gag.
carburetor, through the inlet pipe and valve, inte the cylinder. The
movement of the piston compresses the'gas into. # very small apace, bi
top of the piston and the depression in the cylinder head, known as the
tion chamber.” (The compressed gases exert a pressure of approxi
pounds per square iach.) At this point the electric spark, gene

drives the exploded gas
(See Cut No. 3.)

tt le a steel rod, connecting piston and crank shaft. Should the babbitt beating
become worn, or burned out through lack of oil, a knocking in the engine
reault—in which case the entire connecting rod should be replaced. To make this
ent, (1) drain oil from crank case; (2) take off cylinder head: (3) i
detachable plate on bottom of crank case; (4) disconnect connecting red from ergnk
shaft; (8) tale piston and rod out through top of cylinder.

Whas is the Valve .
Arvangomen iP _ Answer No, 221

One intake and one exhaust valve are located in each cylinder. The former ad-
mits the fresh gas drawn from the carburetor through the inlet pipe—the latter
permits the exploded gas to be driven out through the exhaust pipe. ‘Phe valves
are alternately opened and closed (see Cut No. 3) by the cams on the ‘cpm shaft
striking against push rods which in turn lift the yalves from their seat,

What about oe ie

Falee timing? Answer Ng, 22
In timing theengine the points of opening and closing of the valves ate, 96 0 afse,
when thefengine is built the necessity for retiming would occur only when sich

patts‘ax ‘the cami shaft, time gears or valves were removed in overhauling. -the
e te; +8 ‘ . : .
In Atting the large time gear to the cam shaft it is important to.see that the h

ipsints ing direction opposite to the zero marie (eee Cut No, 3). ‘The’

r must also mesh a0 that the tooth marked zero (0) on the amall time gtar  ayvill
| oad

between the two teeth on the large gear at the zero point.
: . 7 cm PI


»
ie

Chich Spemg.

” Chich Retenve Fort

G

Chath Retesre Rang
Choch Sti

Chuch Fieaget

Os Lew!

Ne Shafi Contes Berson,
. Crank Shaft

Connecting Rad
Cam Shaft Rear Bearing
Crank Salt Rear Bearing

Sectional View of the Model T Motor.

(Cut No. 2)

.
;

Terminal

ie

| Sree Cm Rit
: Staring Crank Spring
Searing Crank Steeve

Camm Stadt Fron Bearing
Sina Tre Gear

Crank Shaft Front Bearing
Cain Shaft

Crank Case OM Take
Prot Pad



fon
7s,
aoe
=,

~ . . - ‘eg - ‘ant i ve -
—_a ae . on a ee
= 8 —.-_ 2 a oe

" Cylinder Assembly, the correct position of the valves with time gears properly set according to punch marks on the
gears, also the relative p ion of the pistons in their sores as indice ted above. The firing order of the cylinders is 1, 2, 4, 3.
ut No.



12 THE FORD MANUAL

now being properly set, the exhaust valve on No. 1 cylinder is open and the in-
take valye closed, the other valves being in the position indicated in Cut No. 3.

The opening and clositig of the valves being as follows: The exhaust valve opens ©

when the piston.reaches 5-16” of bottom center, the distance from the top of the
piston head fo the top of cylinder casting measuring 3 3-8’. The exhaust valve
will close on top centre, the piston being 5-16” above the cylinder casting. The
intake valve opens 1-16" after top center, and closes 9-16" after bottom center,
ine Giatance from the top of the piston to the top of the cylinder casting measur-

glk mee -t a ft tay 2d

How the valve lifting tool should be used. (Cut No. 4)

The clearance between the push red and valve stem should never be greater than
1-32" nor less than 1-64", The correct clearance is naturally half way between
these two measurements. The gap should be measured when the push rod is on
the heel of the cam.

What about the
care of the Valves? ! Answer No. 23

They-seldom get out of order—but they do get dirty, as a result of carbon collect-
ing on the valve. seats. These carbon deposits by preventing proper closing of the
valves, permit the gases under compression to escape, resulting in loss of power
and gneven sinning of the motor. If, when turning the engine over slowly, there is
a ack of resistance in one or more cylinders, it is probable that the valvea need
re-grinding. As the “life” of the engine depends largely upon the proper seating
of the vaives, it is necessary that they be ground occasionally.

How are Valves remored
for grinding? . ._ Answer No. 24

(1) Drain radiator; (2) remove cylinder head; (3) remove the two valve coverson ,

the right side of engine; (4) raise the valve spring with lifting tool (see Cut No. 4) °

and puil out the little pin under the valve seat. The valve may then be li
out by the head, . * . lifted

'

ah.

t-

\



— = — = -_ ca
How are Valves

| ground? . Answer No. 25

For this work use a good grinding paste of ground giaes and oil—procurable from

_ auto supply houses. A convenient way is to put a small amount in a suitable

o

dish, adding a spoonful or two of kerosense and a few drops of lubricating:oil to
make a thin paste.

Place the mixture sparingly on the
bevel face of the valve. Put the
vaive in position on the valve seat,
and rotate it back and forth (about

@ quarter turn) a few times, with a
Ford grinding tool. Then lift slight-
ly from the seat, change the position
and continue the rotation, and keep
on repeating this operation until the -
bearing surface is smooth and bright.
The valve should not be turned
through a complete revolution, as this

is apt to cause scratches running
around the entire circumference of the
valve and seat. When the grinding
is completed the valve should be re-
moved from the cylinder, thoroughly
washed with kerosene, and the valve
care sho taken that no abrasive indi

substance gets into the cytinders or Method of grinding valve. (Cut No. 5)
valve guides. This can be avoided

if the grinding paste is applied sparingly to the bevel face of the valve.
If the valve seat is worn badly or seamed, it is best to have it reseated with a valve
seating tool. This operation requires considerable skill, and perhaps had better be
done by an expert mechanic. Care should be exercised against making too deep a
cut, necessitating the retiming of the valve.

When the Valves and Push
Rods are worn—what?. Answer No. 26

When the valves or push rods become worn, 80 as to leave too much play between
them, thus reducing the lift of the valves and diminishing the power of the motor’,
it is best to replace the push rods with new ones. The clearance between the push
rods and the valve stem should never be greater than #,” nor leas than ¥4”. Ifthe
clearance is greater, the valve will open late and close early, resulting in uneven
running of the motor. If the clearancé is less than 4,” there is danger of the valve
remaining partially open all the time. If replacing the push rod does not give the
proper clearance, the valve should also be replaced. We do.not recommend draw-

ing out the valve stem, as the operation requires experience and the price of the
new part docs not warrant the time and expense necessary to properly do the work,

What about the
PaiugSiprings? ; Answer No. 27

Whees-ttie valves fail to seat themselves properly, there is a possibility that the
springgeney be weak or broken. A weak inlet spring would probably not affect
the rimming of the engine; but weakness in the exhaust valve spring causes a very «
uneven.action, which isdifficult tolocate. The symptoms area lag in the engine die
to the exhaust valve not closing inetantancously, and as a resulta certain percent-
s@° of the charge under compression escapes, greatly diminishing the force of the

THE FORD ENGINE  B



14 : TRE FORD MANUAL
explosion. Weeksiess in a valve spring can usually be detected by the following
method: Remove the plate which encloses them at the side of the cylinder and
jnsect 4 screw-driver between the coils of the spring while the engine is running,
If the extra tensiow thus produced causes the engine to pick up speed, the spring is
obviously wegk and should be replaced with a new one.

What cause “Knocking” Answer. No. 28
SWer- *

‘Flere are several causes, which may be enumerated as follows: (1) carbon kmock
which ia by far the most comman—resulting from carbonizing of cylinders; (2)
Knock caused by a too.advanced:spark; (8) connecting rod knock; (4) crank shaft
tain bearing Imock; (5) knock.duetoJoose-fitting piston or broken ring; (6) knock
aused by the piston striking the cylinder head gasket. When the engine knocks.
from any cavse whatsoever, the. matter should be promptly investigated by an
How inay the different _
Knocks be distinguished? . Answer No. 29
(t) ‘Phe carbon knock is a clear, hollow sound, most noticeable in climbing sharp
gvedes,-particularly when the engine is heated. It is also indicated by a sharp
rap immediately on advancing the throttle. (2) Too advanced spark will be
incinated by adult Imnock in the motor. (3) The connecting red knock sounds like
the distant tapping of steel wi a small hammer, and isreadily distinguished when
the car is. allowed to run idly down grade—or upon speeding the car to twenty-five
miles an hour, then suddenly closing the throttle, the tapping will be very distinct.
(4) The crank shaft main bearing knock ¢an be distinguished, when the car ig

going uphill, asadullthud. (5) ‘The loose piston knock is heard only upon suddenly’

e throttle, when the sound produced might be likened to a rattle. The
remedies for these knocks are treated under their proper division.

How is carbon removed from
Combustion Chamber? Answer No. 30

First, drain the.water off by opening the pet cock at the bottom of the radiator;
then disconnect the wires at the top of the motor and also the radiator connection
attached to the radiator. Remove the 15 cap screws which hold the cylinder head
in place. Take off the cylinder head and, with a putty knife or acrew-driver, scrape,
the carbonized matter from the cylinder head and top of pistons, being careful to
prevent the specks of carbon from getting into the cylinders or bolt holes. In re-
’ placing the cylinder head gasket turn the motor over 30 that No. 1 and No. 4
pistons are at top center; place the gasket in position over the pistons and then put
the cylinder head in place. Be sure and draw the cylinder head bolts down
evenly (i.-e., give each bolt a few turns at a time); do not tighten them on one end
“before drawing them up at the other. ,

How are Spark .
Plugs cleaned? Answer No. 31

After removing the plug from the engine the points may be cleaned with an old

tooth-brush dipped in gasoline. However, in order to do the work thoroughly, - |

the plug should be taken apart by securing the large hexagon steel shell in a vise
and loosening the pack nut which holds the porcelain in place. The car
deposits can then be easily removed from the porcelain and shell with 4.
imife.” Gare should be exercised not to scrape off the glazed surface of the porcelain, |
otlierwise it will be apt to carbonize quickly. The porcelain and other parts should
finally be washed in gasoline and wiped dry with a cloth. oe

~ . _—_



THE FORD ENGINE is

In assembling the plug care should be taken to see that the pack nut ia net tight-
ened too much so as to crack the porcelain, and the distance between’ the sparking
points should be 74", about the thickness of a smooth dime.

Dirty plugs usually result from an excess of oil being carried in the crank case—
or from using oil of poor quality.

How is the Power Plant ;
Femoved from Car? Answer No. 32.
(1) Drain the water out of the radiator and disconnect the radiator hose; *
(2) disconnect the radiator stay rod which holds it to the dash; ; _—
(3) take out the two bolts which fasten the radiator to the frame and take radiator

(4) disconnect the dash at the two supporting brackets which rest on the frame;
(5) loosen the steering post bracket, fastened to the frame, when the dash and
steering gear may be removed as one assembly—the wires first. having: been

(6) take out the bolts helding the font rad’us rods.in the gocket underneath the
crank case; ‘
(7) remove the four bolts at the universal joint; -

+

{8) remove pana on either side of cylinder casting and turn off gasoline, disconnect
feed pipe from carburetor; ‘

(9) disconnect exhaust manifold from exhaust pipe by unscrewing large brass
pack nut;

(10) take out the two cap screws which hold the crank case to the front frame;
(11) remove the bolte which hold the crank case arma to the frame at the side.
‘Then pass a rope through the opening between the two middie cylinders‘and tiein
a loose knot. Through the rope pass a “2x4,” or a stout iron pipe about ten feet
tong, and let a man hold exch end; ict a third man take hold of the starting crank
handle, when the whole power plant can be lifted from the car to the work bench
for adjustment. - ° . :

Connecting Rod Bearings
—how adjusted? Answer No. 33

Connecting rod bearings may be adjusted, without taking out the engine, by. the
following method: (1) drain off the oil; (2) remove plate on bottom of crank case—
exposing connecting rods; (3) take off first connecting rod cap, and draw-file the
endg—a very little at a time; (4) replace cap, being careful to see that file marks
correspond, and tighten bolts until it fits shaft snugly; (5) test tightness 6f bearing
by turning engine over by the starting handle. Experienced mechanics tisually
determine when the bearing is properly fitted by lightly tapping each side of the
cap with a hammer; (6) then loosen the bearing and proceed to fit the other
bearings in the same manner; (7) after each bearing has been properly fitted and
tested—then tighten the cap bolts and the work is fished. ;

Remember, there is a possibility of getting the bearings too tight, and under such
conditions the babbitt is apt to cut out quickly, unless precaution is taken to run
the motor slowly at the start. It is a good plan after adjusting the bearings to
jack,up the rear ‘wheels and let the motor run slowly for about two hours. (keeping
it well supplied with water aud oil) before taking it out‘on the road. Whenever
possible these bearings shonid be fitted by an expert Ford mechanic,

‘Worti connecting roda-snay be returned, prepaid, to the nearest dealer or branch
house for exchange at a price of $1.00 each to cover the cost of rebabbitting. Itis
not advisable for any owner or repair shop to attempt the rebabbitting of connect.
ing rods or main bearings, for without a.special jig in which to form the be



THE FORD MANUAL
satisfactory results will not be obtained. The constant tapping of a loose connect-
ing rod on the crank shaft will.eventually produce crystallization of the stecl—
result, broken crank shaft and possibly other parts of the engine damaged.

Crank Shaft Moin Beari
—how adjusted? earns Answer No. 34

Should the stationary bearings in which the crank shaft revolves become worm
‘(evidenced by a pounding in the motor) and need replacing or adjusting, proceed

Q) After the engine has been telen out of the car, semove crank case, trans-
mission cover, cylinder head, pistons, connecting rods, transmission and magneto

coils, Take off the three babbitted caps and clean the bearing surfaces with gaso-

line. Apply Prussian blue or red lead to the crank shaft bearing surfaces, which will
enable you, in fitting the caps, to determine whether a perfect bearing surface is
obtained, :

(2) Place the rear cap in pogition and tighten it wp as much as possible without
stripping the bolt threads. When the bearing has been properly fitted, the crank
shaft can be turned with one hand. If the crank shaft cannot be turned with one
hand, the contact between the bearing surfaces is evidently too close, and the cap
requires shimming up, one or two brass liners usually being sufficient. In case

. the crank shaft moves too easily with one hand, the shims should be removed and,
the steel surface of the cap filed off, permitting it to set closer.

(3) After removing the cap, observe whether the blue or red “spottings” indicate a
full bearing the length ofthe cap. If “‘spottings” do not show a true bearing, the
babbitt should be scraped and the cap refitted until the proper results are obtained.

(4) Lay the rear cap aside and proceed to adjust the center bearing in the same
mann a Repeat the operation with the front bearing, with the other two bearings.
d aside.

(5) When the proper adjustment of each bearing has been obtained, clean the
babbitt surface éarefully and place a little lubricating oil on the bearings, also.on
the crank shaft; then draw the caps up as closely as possible—the necessary shims,
of course, being in place. Do not be afraid of getting the cap bolts too tight, as
the shim under the cap and the oil between the bearing surfaces will prevent the
metal being drawn into too close contact. If oil is not put on the bearing surfaces,
the babbitt is apt to cut out when the motor is started up before the oil in the crank
cade can get into the bearing. In replacing the crank case and transmission cover
on the motor, it is advisable to use a new set of gaskets to prevent oil leaks,

,



The Ford Cooling System

Haw ia che - yy

Engine cooled? Answer No. 35
The heat generated by the constant giond in the engine would soc -overlgeat
is cooled by the circulation of water in jackets around the cylindera, ‘The hog i

extracted from the water by its passing through the thin metal tubing of the radia-
tor—to which are attached scientifically worked out fins, which assist in the rapid
radiation of the heat. The fan, just back of the radigtor, sucks the air aroundsthe
tubing—around which the air is also driven by: the forward movement of the car.
The belt should be inspected frequently and tightened when necessary—not ‘too
tight, however—by means of the adjusting screw in the fan bracket, Take upthe
slack till the fan starts to bind when turned by hand. ‘

Hon does the :
Water circulate? ; Answer No. '36

The cooling apparatus of the Ford car is known as the Thermo-syphon syatem.
It acts on the principle that hot water seeks a higher Jevel than cold watgr—
consequently when the water reaches a certain heat, approsimately 180
Fahrenheit, circulation commences and the. water flows ‘frgoa the lower radttij!
outlet pipe up through the water jackets, into the upper radiator water tank, And
down through the tubes to the lower tank, to repeat the process,

What are the causes of . ;
Overheating? Answer No.*37
(1) Carboniged cylinders; (2) too much driving on low spéeds.(3) spat a
too far; (4) poor ignition; (5) not enough or poor grade oil; (6} rading
clogged muffler; (8) improper carburetor adjustment; (9) fan not work

on account of broken or slipping belt; (10) improper circulation of +
clogged or jammed radiator tubes, leaky connections or low water. os

What should be done when the _ _
Radiator overheats? Answer No.

Keep the radiator full. Don’t get alarmed if it boils occasicnally—especial
driving through mud and deep sand or up long hills‘in extremely warm weath
Remember that the engine develops the greatest efficiency when the wateris hea
nearly to the boiling point. But if there is persistent overheating when the ff
is working under ordinary conditions—find the cause of the trouble and'ren
it. The chances are that the difficulty lies.in improper driving or car 2
cylinders, Perhaps twisting the fan blades at a greater angle to produce ghore
suction may bring desired results, By reference to the proper division of this'ook
each of the causes which contribute to an overheated radiator is
remedies suggested, No trouble can result from the filling of a
with waters

roviding the water system is not entirely empey—i Wh

the motor should ¢ allowed to cool before the cold water is in’

‘


The Thermo-Syphon Cooling System, showing course of water through water passages. (Cut No. 6)


allow the Neo enter into linider head connection and to How through the
waver jacket and pos phicc phy Arocha

Will the Radiator oo
Sreene in winter? Answer No. #0

Yes, unless an-anti-freezing solution is uséd.in the circulating sxstety
bound to experience trouble. ‘Aa the ciréulation doce not commence itl the
water becomes heated, it is apt to freeze at low temperature before it coninierives
to'circulate. In case any of the radiator tubes happen to be plugged or jammed
they are bound to frceze and burst open if the driver undertakes to get aleng
without rang non- freezing solution. Wood he denatured alcohol can be tiped
to good vantage. otlowing le gives freezing points o' tutions Gon-
taining different percentages of alcohol:
20% solution freezes at 15 degrees above zero.
30 ‘solution freezes at 8 degrees below zero.
p-solution freezes at 34 degrees below zero.
Awoluticn composed of 60% water, 110% glycerine and 30% alcohol is comm
used, its freezing point being abo & degrees below zero. ot
Ox account of evaporation fresh aeohal must be added frequently in. of:

*

How are leaks and jams in the - es
pperethsaninad Answer No. 441
A small be temporarily repaired by applying brown soap or white leal—
but the repair el Sn Uo ah ile ee cen Oa ag
ied ee ta ewith th Siecle, ts bom ca peicmpctoskned aaa

ie to

ond below the jam and invert the beavetinee
Say an bd Samed cr bos ers be a
install a new one.



iin Ta i Se

nt i

This cut illustrates the principle of Ford Carburetion.

»

(Cut No. 7)


- . aa - ' a

The Gasoline System
The Carburetor—how

does it work? Answer No. 42
The carburetor is of the automatic float feed type, having but one adjustment:
shows how the gasoline enters the carburetor, is vaporized by a current Of aif and
passes through the inlet pipe to the engine in the form of an explosive mixture.
The gasoline, entering the bow! of the carburetor, gradually raises the float to.a
point where the inlet needle is forced upwards into its seat, thus cutting off the
flow of gasoline. As the gasoline in the bowl recedes, the float lowers, allowing
the needie to drop from ita seat and the flow of gasoline is resumed. It is plaia to
see that a constant level of gasoline is maintained in the carburetor by the auto-

matic action of float and needle. The quantity of gagoline entering into the mixture
is governed by the needle valve (see Answer No. 45). The volume of gas mixture
entering the intake pipe is controlled by opening and closing the throttle, accord-
ing to the speed desired by the driver.

Why is Carburetor adjustment
placed on dash? Answer No. 43

For the convenience of the driver in adjusting the carburetor. After the new car
has become thoroughly worked in, the driver should observe the angle ofthe car-
buretor adjusting rod at which the engine runa most satisfactorily. In cold
weather it will probably be found necessary to turn the dash adjustment one-
quarter turn to the left, particularly in starting a cold engine. As gasoline vapor-
izes readily in warm weather, the driver will find it economical to reduce the quan-
tity of gasoline in the mixture by turning the carburetor adjustment to the righ t
as far as possible without reducing speed. This is particularly true when 4
long drives where conditions permit a fair rate of speed being maintained, ahd

accounts for the excellent gasoline mileage obtained by.good drivers.

What is meant by a “lean”
and a “rich” Mixture? Answer. No. 44

A lean mixture has too much air and not enough gasoline. A rich mixture has go:
much gasoline and not enough air. A rich mixture will not only quickly coved
cylinders, pistons and valves with carbon, but will tend to overheat the cyli
and is likewise wasteful of the fuel. It will often choke the engine and cans s-
firing at slow speeds, although at high speeds the machine will run perfectly. The
mixture should be kept as lean as possible without the sacrifice of any of the power
of the motor. A lean mixture will often result in backfiring through thé carburetor.
for the reason that the gas burns slowly in the cylinder, and is still biteting when
the.inlet valve opens again, which causes the gas in the intake to ignite. A rich
mixture is shown by heavy, black exhaust smoke with a disagreeable smell.
Proper mixture will cause very little smoke or odor.

How is. the Carburetor gt

adjusted? , Answer No. 45
The yéual method of regulating the carburetor is to start the motor, advancing
the thivttle lever to ubotit the sixth notch, with the spark retarded fo-ahout the
fourth notch. The flow of gasoline should now be cut off by acrewing the needle

valve down to the right until the engine begins to misfire, then gradually. inere
the gasoline feed by opening the needle valve until the motor pickup and féathes
its highest speed and no trace of black amoke comes from the exhaust. Whenever
it is neceseary to turn, the adjusting needle down more thatia quarter turn ‘below
_ 7 ‘Pend

,


eee ————

92 _ THE FORD MANUAL

its normal position, the loti nut on. topvof the carburétac at the point through
which needle pesses should first be loosened, as otherwise it is impossible to tell
when the needle is turned down in its seat too far. Turning the needle down too
tightly will result in its becoming grooved and the seat enlarged. When these parts
are damaged it is difficult to maintain proper adjustment of the carburetor. Hav-

y determined the point where the motor runs at ite maximum speed, the needle
valve lock nut should be tightened to prevent the adjustment being disturbed. For
average running, a lean mixture will give better results than a rich one.

Why does water
clog the Carburetor? Answer No. 46

The presence of water in the carburetor or gasoline tank, even in small amounts,
will prevent easy starting and the motor will misfire and stop. As water is heavier
than gasoline it settles to the bottom of the tank and.into the sediment bulb along
with other foreign matter. As it is difficult nowadays to get gasoline absolutely
free from impurities, especially water, it is advisable to frequently drain the sedi-
ment bulb under the gasoline tank. During cold weather the water which accumu-
lates in the sediment bulb is likely to freeze and prevent the flow of gasoline
through the pipe leading to the carburetor. Should anything of this kind happen
itis possible to open the gasoline line by wrapping a cloth around the sediment
bulb and keeping it saturated with hot water for a short time. Then the water
should be drained off. In event the water gets down into the carburetor and
freezes, the same treatment may be applied.

What makes the
Carburetor leak? Answer No. 47

The flow.of gasoline entering the carburetor through the feed pipe is automati

regulated by the float needle raising and lowering in its scat. Should any particle
of dirt become lodged in the seat, which prevents the needle from closing, the
gasoline will overflow in the bowl of the carburetor and leak out upon the ground.

When there is dirt :
in the Carburetor—what? Answer No. 48

. The | nozzle of the carburetor having a very small opening, a minute
paticle of grit or other foreign matter will clog up the orifice, and result: motor will
béidn to misfire and slow down as soon as it has attained any considerable speed.
This is accounted for by the fact that at high speeds the increased suction will
draw the particles of dust, etc., into the nozzle. By opening the valve needle half a
turn and giving the throttle lever two or three quick pulls the dirt or sediment
will often be drawn through, when the needle may be turned back to its original
place. If this does not accomplish the purpose, the carburetor should be drained.

If Engine runs too fast or chokes

with throttle retarded—what? Answer No. 49

If the engine runs too fast with throttle fully retarded unacrew the carburetor
throttle lever adjusting screw until the engine idles at suitable speed. Uf the motor
chokes and when throttle is fully retarded the adjusting screw should be

screwed in un’ it strikes the bose, preventing the throttle from closing too far.

When proper adjustment has been made, tighten lock-screw so that adjustment
will not be disturbed.

What is the
the Hot dir Pipa? a Answer No. §0

It takes the hot air from around the exhaust pipe and conducts it to the catbure-

tor—where the heat facilitates the yaporiging:of the gasoline. It is usually advis- ‘

.-

te 8 Pel - uJ

‘
4
d
‘
&

t
é


Shiguild Priming Rod be used in
starting whan Motor is warm?

Teedle down (to the right) Snes

t inonder to exhaust the cee : ‘As sped aa the motor
She ale ete ee ae he soo

of




+ —---.

- - eee —— i pe

Phat ia the purpose o ;
the Ignition System? . Answer No. 53

It furnishes the electric spark which explodes the charge in the combustion cham-
ber, thus producing the power which runs the engine. It is important that the
charge be correctly ignited at the proper time, in order to obtain satisfactory .
results in running the cer. In the Ford car the ignition ayetem is as aimple.ag it is ‘N
possible for human invention to make it, |

How does the Magneto
generate the current? Answer No. 54

In revolving at the same rate of speed as the motor, the magnets on the flywheel
passing the stationary coil spools create an alternating low tension electri¢ current
in coils of wire which are wound around spools fastened to the stationary part of
the magneto, and is carried from these coils to the magneto connection (wire)

mane «

leading to the coil box of the dash. vot ae
Adjustment be diaturbed? _ Amawer . vo. 55
The present atyle of coil_unit is properly adjusted when it Iesves the factory and '

this dajust ‘be disturbed unless to install new points or:
the gap between the points which may have increased fragi-wear. Wherijadjust- |
mentyare necessiry they should, whenever possible, be mais by"
statignes, who have special equipment for testing and aejtist

a fing dawble-faced file and the adjusting thumb nut turned down 20 # h the
spring held down the gap between the points will be a trifle Jess than. inch.

Then: set the lock nut so that the adjustment can not be disturbed:(Do not

bendior hammer on the vibrators, as this would affect the operafian’ ahion |
Howzis a Weak Mt
Unit'detected?!- hos - wariswersid, 56

With the vibrators properly adjusted, if any particular cylinder fails or seems to
develop only a weak action, change the position of the unit to determine if the
fault ig actually in the unit. The first symptom of'a defective unit is the buzzing of }
the vibrator with no spark at the plug. Remember that a loose wire connection, .
faulty spask plug, or worn commutator may catme irregularity in the running
of the motor. These are points that should be considered before laying the blame
on :

How may short circuit in . 4
Commutator Wiring be detected? Answer Ne, 57 ,
Should the insulation of the primary wires (running from coil to commititator)

become worn to stich an.eéxtent that the copper wire is exposed—the current will
leak. out (i. e. short circuit) whenever contact with the engine pan or other metal
parte is made. A steady buzzing of one of the coil units will indicate a “éhért’’ in
the wiring. When driving-the car the engine. will suddeniy lag end pound on
aceount of the premature explosion. Be careful not to crank the engine downward
against compression when the car is inthis condition, es the “short” is apt to. :
cause a vigorous kick back.

{284

ety Ci


26 THE FORD MANUAL

Does Coil Adjustment. oa a
affect starting? Answer No, 58

Yes. When the vibrators are not properly adjusted more current is required to
make and break the contact between the points, and, as a result, at cranking
speeds you would not get a spark between the spark plug points. Do not allow
the contact points to become “ragged,” otherwise they are apt to stick and cause
unnecessary difficulty in starting, and when running they are apt to produce an
occasional “miss” in the engine.

What is the purpose of
the Commutator? Answer No. 59

The commutator (or timer) determines the instant at which the spark plugs must
fire. It effects the “make and break” in the primary circuit. The grounded wire
in the magneto allows the current to flow through the metal parts to the metal
roller in the commutator. Therefore, when the commutator roller in revolving

The Ford Commutator. (Cut No. 9)
connected with a coil unit, an electrical circuit is passed through the entire system
of primary wires. This circuit is only momentary, however, as the roller passes
over the contact point very rapidly and sets up the circuit in each unit as the roller
touches the contact point connected with that unit. The commutator should be
kept clean and well oiled at all times.

What about
the Spark Plugs? Answer No. 60

One is located at the top of each cylinder and can easily be taken out with the
spark. plug wrench included with every car, after the wire connection is removed.
The high voltage current flows out of the secondary coils in the coil box and on
reaching the contact points in each spark plug it is forced to jump a ¥;" gap,
thereby forming a spark which ignites the gasoline charge in the cylinders.

The spark plugs sliould be kept clean (i. ¢., free from carbon) and should be re-
placed if they peréist in not working properly. There is nothing to be gained by
experimenting with different makes of plugs.. The make of plugs with which Ford
engines are.equipped when they leave the factory are best adapted to the require-
ments of our motor, notwithstanding the opinion of various garage men to the


THE FORD IGNITION 8YSTEM | 27

contrary. All wire connections to spark plugs, coil box and commutator should,
of course, at all times be kept in perfect contact.

What are the indications of
Ignition trouble? : Answer No. 61

The uneven sputter and bang of the exhaust means that one or more cylindera are
exploding irregularly or not at all, and that the trouble should be promptly located
and overcome. Misfiring, if allowed to continue, will in time injure the engine and
the entire mechanism. If you would be known as a good driver you will be satis-
fied only with a soft, steady purr from the exhaust. If anything goes wrong, stop
and fix it if possible—don’t wait until you get home.

How can one tell which
Cylinder is missing? ‘ - Answer No. 62

This is done by manipulating the vibrators on the sperk coils. Open the throttle
until the engine is running at a good speed and then bold down the two outside
vibratora,.No. 1 and No. 4, with the fingers, so they cannot buzz. This cuts out
the two corresponding cylinders, No. 1 and No. 4, leaving only No. 2 and No. 3
running. If they explode regularly it is obvious the trouble is in either No. lor No.
4. Relieve No. 4 and hold:down No. 2 and No. 3 and also No. 1; if No. 4 cylinder
explodes evenly it is evident the misfiring is in No. 1. In this manner all of the
cylinders in turn can be tested until the trouble is located. Examine both the spark
plug and the vibrator of the missing cylinder.

The § ‘probably due to an iniproperly eépted

eee ty et ty Jor

e commutator wiring.

sho

dete: ‘by lifting the starting crank

cylin turn, a strong or com, in any pur

detecfeq.. 1¢ sometimes happens that the cylindet hesd

les ng the gat under compressiofi to egvape, a ‘cog

deteckey by running a littielubricating oil around the edge of the gateteny

ing whether bubbles appear. or not, - re a “Fy
Does'g worn Commutator Te 7 a

ever cause misfiring? . Answer No. 64

nilafiring occurs when running at high speed, inspect the coftimptator.
Mittace of the circle around which roller (see Cut No. 9) travelg should be
clean anid smooth, so that the roller makes a perfect contact at all points, If the
§ falle to raake a good contact on any one of the four contact points, ites
‘cylinder will not fire. Clean these surfaces, if dirty. In case the ffbze, con-

tact pe nd roller of the ¢ommutator are badly worn the most satisfactory
remeiy ia to replace them with new parts. The spring should be strong enough to
make ¢firm contact between the roller points if they are worn or dirty. {

Com : 65
cap sete whith i 2 pe-on top of time. gi will

readily removed. Unscrew lock nut; withdraw steel brush cap and drive out the
retaining pin. The brush can then be remnoved from the carn shaft,



a8 THE FORD MANUAL
ye Pr SPSS

| Tn replacing the brush, care must be exercised to see that it is replaced so that the
exhaust valve on the first cylinder is closed when the brush points upward. This

| may be ascertained by removing the valve door and observing the operation of No.
1 valve.

|

|

Does. cold weather affect
the Commutator? Answer No. 66

It is a well-known fact that in cold weather even the best grades of lubricating oil
are apt to congeal to some extent. If this occurs in the commutator it is very apt
to prevent the roller from making perfect contact with the contact points imbedded
in the fibre. This, of course, makes difficult starting as the roller arm spring is not
stiff enough to brush away the film of oil which naturally forms over the contact ‘
points. To overcome this, as well as any liability of the contact points to rust, we a
recommend a mixture of 25% kerosene with commutator lubricating oil, which will ¢
thin it sufficiently to prevent congealing, or freezing, as it is commonly called. You

have probably noticed in starting your car in cold weather that perhaps only one

or two cylinders will fire for the first minute or so, which indicates that the timer

is in the condition described above and as a consequence a perfect contact is not

being made on each of the four terminals,

How is the
| Magneto removed? Answer No. 67

| It is necessary to take the power plant out of the car (see Answer No. 32) in order
| to remove the magneto. Then remove crank case and transmission cover—take
out the four cap screws that hold the flywheel to the crank shaft. You will then

. .

a wy i, 4,
ao ms a. Li oa

The Ford Magneto. The flywheel, with magnets revolves while
magneto coils remain stationary. (Cut No. 10)

og |



When the the Magneto
gets out of eee

iy secre f th

80 ¢ faces'o' ¢ magnets are ag

just gy of aninch. Totake out the old misigne
{' bronte screw which holds each in oaete 6 '

the trouble tea week current catiecd by w v

crank case cover.
Co eae nee eaee after f
regnoved.



Stow Speed Or
7 uch. Bases,
Flywheel — ee x . . Clutch Dise Drum
Fly Wheel | | a
Ring Gear

Transmission showing all gears in mesh. (Cut No. 11)


cee eee . epg hee mre am ey ~

The Ford Tranemission

What is the function af:

the Transmission? _Anever No, 69
Te is that part of the methuniem.of an sutomdbile w: Hes between the crank
shaft and Bi ar ator end by whic con aed fo moves

different speeds
from the other I it is thapeed gear of the car. Tt sends the ear formats) ah low aid
high epeeds and by ie thc car la reversed.

Whatis meant by the term 4
“Planetary Transmission?” Answer No, 70
in which the groups of gears always remain in mesh and revalve around. main

one - ‘Phe different seta of gears are brought into action by y stopping the revolution
of the parts which support the gears. By means of bands (sintilar to brake bands)
the sotation of the different parts is stopped. The planetary transmission is
Sit cnt mot dec meu of psd contra a dae advantage
the car,

What is the |
on the Clutch? Answer No. 71

If tie crank shaft of the engine ran without break straight through to the differen-
and through it applied its power direct to the rear wheels—the car would
start forward immediately upon the starting of the engine (were it possible to. get
it skarted under such conditions). To overcome this difficulty the

divided and by means of the clutch the part of the shaft to ee -
is delivering its power is enabled to take hold of the unmo if
and start the car without jolt or jar. The forward part of the sha tered

to ap te crank shat, the rear part as the drive

F; the : ae
soln ts ‘eontrolled? Answer No. #2

By the eft petal at the driver's feet (see Answer No. 10), tfttie clutch pedal, when
pushed forward into slow speed, has a tendency to sticie and not come bai
Pte high, dghiten up the slow speed band as directed in Answer ‘No. "4
the'machine- an inclination to creep forward when cranking, it it indicates ‘that
the élutch levet ecrew which bears on the clutch leve¢ cam has worn, adh sequil
an extfa tum to hold the clutch in neutral position. When the clutch is released by
ng backs tie hand lever the pedal should move forward a diatance of I 14" in
ic from high speed to neutral. See thaf th lub brake shor. ene connec ors
order so that the brake will act sufficiently to tthe car creeping
Also be sure the slow speed band does not bi d on account of being
dee Boat use ato hese rate fon col went a wl
f fo cingeal between the n chateh dace and prevent Pooper abtion of

. Answer No. 45
‘floor boards at tie driver's *


Magneto Coniact
—— Transmission Core:
Reverse Pedal Shatt

‘Transmission Band Specs
Reverse Adpstinigy Nu:

fo stow Speed Adjusting Nut“
Stow Spees Adnenns Screw

¥ wing Place Screw .
~ Driving Plate Screws Loca Wire:
Ctuich Finger
— Clash Finger Adjatmy Screw
~ Clich Release Fork .
Chueh

+ Church Lever Screw Nut
Church L

oN . i moe . - — ot
va we te _ : - ent .
i ia - “

The above drawing of Transmission shows clearly the operation of Clutch, Reverse and Brake Pedals. (Cut Ne. 12)



. How are the

‘How are the

THE FORD TRANSMISSION

the wear in the clitch may be taken up by installing another pair of clutch dis,
rather than by turning the adjusting screws in too far. ;

CAUTION: Let us warn you against placing any small! toala or objects over or'ip
the transmission case without a good wire or cord attached to them. Otherwise if
they are dropped into the transmission case it is almost impossible to recover them

‘ée

Bands adjusted? Answer No. TH

The slow.speed band.may be tightened by loosening the lock nut at the tight side
of the transmission cover, and turning the adjusting screw (see Cut No. 12)'té tf

right. To tighten the brake and reverse bands remove the transmission cover

doof and turn the adjusting nuts on the shafts to the right. See that the bands do :
not dragon the drums when disengaged, as they exert 2 brake effect, and tend to
overheat the motor. However, the foot brake should be adjusted so that a suddén
preasure will stop the car immediately, or slide the rear wheels in case of emergency,
The bands, when worn to such an extent that they will not take hold properly,
ahould be relined, so that they will engage smoothly without causing a jerky move-
ment-of the car. The lining is inexpensive and may be had at any Ford.service
station at small cost. ‘

a
aw
“ad

Bards removed? Answer No. %

Remove the starting motor (see Answer No, 128). Take off the door on: top of
enission cover. Turn the reverse adjustment nut and the brake adjustment
nut to the extreme end of the pedal shafts, then remove the slow speed’ adjusting
screw, ‘Remove the bolts holding the transmission cover to crank case ahd liftoff
the cover assembly. Slip the band nearest the flywheel over the first of the triple
gear, then turn the band around so that the opening-is downward: The:
can now beremoved by lifting upward. Theoperatioi is more easily actomplishid
if the threesetsof triple gears are soplaced that one set is about ten degrees to’

sufficient. cleararice in the crank case to allow the cars of the transmission bands ;
to be turned downward. By reversing this operation the bands may be installed.
After being placed in their upright position on the drums pass a cord around the
ears of the three bands, holding them in the center so that when put@ilg: the
transmission cover in place no trouble will be experienced in getting the. pedal
shafts to rest in the notches in the band ears. The clutch release ring must Be
placed in the rear groove of the clutch shift, With the cover in-place remove
the cond which held the bands in place while the cover was being installed... ;

How is the Transmission , a
assembled? Answer N6,,.76
Cut No. 13-shows the transmission parts in their relative assembling povitiiggnd ,
grouped in their different operations of assembling. eee, aX)
‘The firat operation is the assembling of group No. 2, which is as follows: . =
the brite ‘drum-on table with the hub-in.a vertical position, place the Se ‘

platwayer the hub with gear uppermost. Then place reverse

pei so that the revecse gear surrounds the ns. RC bh

the teeth downward so that they will come next to theslow speed geat:. ‘Dik .



Transmission parts in their relative assembling positions. (Cut No. 13)



THE FORD TRANSMISSION

downward. After making sufe that the triple gears are properly meshed 34! ar
in place by passing a cord around the outside of the three gears. Take.the
wheel and it on the table with the face downward api the t ao

drum, then a amall disc, alternating with large and small dieca until the eee
set of diecs dre.in position, ending up with a large disc on top. ; re hQ
If aemall discis on top itis liable to fall over the clutch drum in changing the apg
from high to low and as a result you would be unable to change the speed back ig
high. Next put the clutch push ring over the clutch drum, and on top ot ee {
with the three pins projecting upward (see Group No. 4, Cut No. 13). ¥6
note the remaining parts are placed as they will be assembled. Next bolt the-dg
ing plate in position so that the adjusting screws of the clutch fingers will b
against the clutch push ring pina, Before proceeding further it would be a gad
plan to test the transmission by moving the plates with the hands.. If che trapis-
mission is properly assembled they will revolve freely. The clutch parté.m
be assembled on the driving plate hub asfollows: Slip the clutch shift over %
hub)so that the small end rests on the endsoftheclutch fingers. Next put.ofth
cuteh . apring, placing the clutch su; inside so that the flange trond
upper coll of the spring and press into place, inserting the pin in the driving
plate hub through the holes in the side of the spring support. Then turn fhe
clutch spring sup until the pin fits into the lugs on the bottom of the euppg
The easiest m: of compressing the spring sufficiently to insert the pir
to igosen the tension of the clutch finger by means of the adjusting sttews.
within aspace of two or two and one-sixteenth inches to insure against the clafch
slipping. Care should be exercised to see that the screws in the fingers areigd-
justed so the apring is compressed evenly all around.

'
{
H

_t .
ee on See er iad

“~«~
te we en
Ve

wel — fee a _ in on 1 |





TO

How is the Rear

ing.

cotter-pinned wonatle” nut, "Remove the castle nttt, and ative the pinion off

How are the Differential .
Gears removed? -Answer No. 81“

The differential gears are attached to the inner ends of the rear gigs shaft. They
work upon the. ferential pinions when turning a corner, s0-that the axle shafts
. tevalve: erisreadention but when the car is moving in a ‘straight dine the differen;’ ~
tial pinions and differential gears and axle shafts move as an integral part, | if you a]
will examine the rear: axle shafts you will notice that the gears are keyed. on, and ‘
held in. position by a ring which is in two halves and fits in a groove in the rear
axle shaft... To remove the differential gears, force them down on the shaft, thatis,
away from the end to w hich they are secured, drive out the two halves of ring in the
ow in shaft with acrew-driver or chisel, then force the gears off the end of the fi
$i !

‘The Rear Axle Systera. (Cut No. 14)

How is the Rear Axle 7 ‘
Shaft removed? . . Answer No. 87 ;
Disconnect sear axle as directed in Answer No. 77, then unbélt the drive shift‘as-

sembly where it joins the rear axle housing at the differentialy Disconnect | jas
rods and brake rods ut the cuter ends of the hausing. Take out the bal "7
hold the two halves of the reer sxle housing together at the center and
housing. ‘Take the inter differential casing apart and ‘dpaw the axle'shaft
After replacing the adie shaft shaft be sure that the rear wheels are fitmly

the outer end of the ha ale ahaft and the key in proper . Wi
Se yo ee

le



3B THE FORD MANUAL

Sato mightchee . It is extremely
important that the are’ At, ©

wise the constant rocking back
and forth against the keyway may in time cause serious trouble.

The Ford Bmergency Brake. (Cut No. 15)

Tf the rear axle or wheel is sprung by skidding against a curb, or other accident, it is
false economy to drive the car without correcting the trouble, as tires, geara and
all other parts will suffer. If the axle shaft is bent, it can, with proper facilities,
be straightened, but it is best to replace it.



Answer No. 83

diecohnpeted? - Answer No. 8&4
remove the bolts which hold the muffler to the frame. ‘After the muflet hee been

bal
]
‘ .
. °*



What care should the
Ruzning Gear hove? Answer No. 85

In the first place it at all times should have proper lubrication (eee chapter on
Lubrication). Once in every thirty days the front arid rear axles should be care-
fully gone over to see that every moving part, such as the bushings in spring con:
nections, spring hangers, steering knuckles and hub_ bearings, are thoroughly tu-
bricated, and that all nuts and connections are secured with cotter pins in place.
The spuing clips, which attach the front epring to the frame, should be inspected
frequently to see that everything isin perfect order.

How is the Front Axle
removed? a Answer No. 86

Jack up front of car so wheels can be removed (see Answer No. 89), disconnect
steering gear ball arm from the spindle connecting rod, disconnect radius rod at
ball joint, and remove two cotter pin bolts from spring shackle on each side, so
detaching front spring.

To disconnect radiua rod from axle, remove cotter-pinned nuts. To remove radius
rod entirely, take the two bolts out of the ball joint and remove lower half of cap.

In case of accident, how is the
Front Axle straightened? Answer No. 87

Should the axle or spindle become bent extreme care must be used to straighten
the parts accurately. Do not heat the forgings, as this will untemper the steel, but
straighten them cold. If convenient it would be better to return such parts to the
dealer, where they may be properly straightened in jigs designed for that purpose.
It is very essential that the wheels line up properly (see Answer No. 90).

- "the Ford Spindle and Front Hub Assembly. (Cut No. 161

eye ia not sufficiently accurate to determine whether the parts have been
ei traightened, and excessive wear of the front tires will occur if every-



What about the * ‘+ ‘
Wheels?

. pijabvloniie should, after packer i come to rest with the tire valve ety: be
the hub. Undue wear of the hub bearings is usually caused by eee oft 28 -
cation and excessive friction, due to the adjusting cone being screwed up ea
tight. It is a good plan to clean the bearings frequently and keep the -

; filled with grease.

How are'the
I heels removed? Answer Ne. 8

Front wheels: Take off hub remove cotter pin

wheel removed. Care should a ie taken to oct that the Kk ROB
replaced on the same spindle from which they. were removed, otherwise. thd
a liability of stripping the threads which are feft on the left spindle end rightop'

opposite as you stand facing the car. Rear wheels: They should not be remg
unless: absolutely necessary—in which case proceed as abdve, then wi hal woe
puller remove the wheel from the tapered shaft to which & ig lacked

In replacing rear wheels be sure that nut on axle shaft Sight as as ite ete
cotter pin in place. The hub caps of the rear wheels ble 8
ally and the lock nuts which hold the hub in place mote f'these mits

are allowed to work loose, the resulting play on the hub key may eventuny
_ twist off the axle shaft.

How does the setting of the Front Wheels $o

differ from. that of the Rear Wheels? Answer No.

It will be observed that the front wheels are ‘“‘dished;"’ that. is,, the’
given a slight outward flare to enable them to meet: ‘with!
resistance—while the spokes of the rear wheels are
are also placed at an engle—that is to say, the di:
front wheels i is about three inches greater than be
give ¢ perfect steering qualities and.to save wear on tk
t wheels should not, however, “toe-in” at :
than & quarter of en inch, Lines drawn along the outsidt of:
latter are ‘straight in a forward position should be: Peraliel.
always’ be kent i in proper alignment, otherwise steering will-
wear gréatly increased. Adjustment can be made by tutning,
left end of the spindle connecting rod, to draw the wheels into @'p

What. obbout ingtalling
g Cups?



—EEE—E——M—_—X -

Sectional view of Hub showing Roller Bearings.

(Cut No. 17)



THE RUNNING GEAR _ «3

He the Roller Beari “
installed? renee Answer No. 92

First, pack the hub full of clean good quality cup grease. Take the inner cone
with its rollers and pack it with grease, filling all of the space around and between
the rollers. Then place the inner cone in the larger cup. Next, drive the dudt
ring with felt washer into the inner end of the hub eo that it is flush with the end
of the hub,

Place the whee! carrying the inner bearings with dust ring on the epindle.’ The
inner cone ie a one-thousandth fit, or, in other words, a slip fit on the spindle.
(See Cut No. 17.) It is never necessary to force the cone onto the epindie as the
cups are forced into the hub. Pack the outer or threaded conc rollera with
cup grease, filling all the space between the rollers, as was done with the inner cone.
The cones are made up in right- and left-hand threads to correspond to the threads
on the spindles. Cave should be taken that a right-hand threaded cone is not
forced onto a left-hand threaded spindle. The right-hand thread is on the left-
hand side of the car, while the left-hand thread is on the right-hand side of the
car. Place the cone on the spindle, running it up tight enough eo that the wheel ©
seema to bind; give the wheel a few turns to te Sure that all the working parte
are in perfect contact; then back off the cone 14 to }4 a turn which will be suf-
ficient to allow the wheel to revolve freely without end play: To determine if

spindle to take up any play while testing the bearings. Next, put on the spindle
washer and nut, drawing the nut to a firm bearing. Make sure that the cone
has not been forced out of adjustment. This can be determines PY eae, ail
wheel a few turns. Insert the cotter pin which locks the nut on the spiridie, fill
the hub cap with grease and screw it in place on the hub.

Hi ‘ten should the ,
Booties be labricuted? ' Answer No. 93

Every three or four months the wheels should be removed, the old grease taken
out and the hubs and bearings thoroughly cleansed with kerosene. Then repack
the hub and bearings with clean grease and readjust the bearings.

What care do
the Springs need? Answer No. 94

The springs should be lubricated frequently with oll or graphite. To do this,
pry the leaves apart near the enda arid insert the lubricant between them. When-
ever a cat is given a general overhauling, the springs should be disassembled and
the leaves polished with emery cloth, afterwards packing them with graphite
when reassembling. Rust can be prevented from accumulating on the spri

by painting them when necessary with a quick drying black paint. You will,
find that these suggestions if carried out will not only improve the riding qualities |

of the cat but prolong the life of the parts as well. 2
Should Spring Clips
be kept tight? Answer No, 95
Yea, If the spring clipe are allowed to work loose the entire strain is put on the. .

to be sheared off and allow the frame and body to shift a trifle to one side, ft
t heared | and body. trifle t0 one sie ae



eo as oe - ' inde os ~~ ~ ee
Fr THE FORD MANUAL ,
snenethegemaneemn : ithe .

Wheat about the Stgering Se ar a
Apparatus? Answer No. 96

It is exceedingly gipple and will need little care—except, of course, proper lubri-
. cation. The post’ gears which are arranged in the “sun and planet” form are
By lneotion” ae. of the Post just below Ube bub of the wheel (see Cut No. 1).
steering wheel—they may readily be inspected and replenished with grease. To
remove the steering wheel, unecrew the nut on top of the post and drive the wheel
off the shaft with a block of wood and hammer.

How is Steerin, . .
Gear tightened? _ Answer No. 97

Should the steering gear become loose, that ia, so that a slight movement of the
- wheel does not produce immediate results, it may be tightened in the following
manner: Disconnect the two halves.of the ball socketa which surround the bali

arm at the lower end of the steering post and file off the surface until they fit.
anugly around the ball, If the ball is badly worn it is best to replace it with a new
“one. Also tighten the ball caps.at the other end of the steering gear connecting
3 rod in the same manner. If the bolts in the steering spindle arms appear to be
é loost, the brass biishings should be replaced with new ones (see Cut No. 16).
i Excessive play in the front axle may be detected by grasping one of the front
J wheels by the spokes and jerking the front.axle back and forth, After the car
wy haa. been in service two or three years excessive play in the steering gear may
‘ - * make necessary the renewal of the little pinions, as well as the brass internal.gear

a just underneath the steering wheel spider.
It is. aleo acivisable to inspect the front spring and front spring perches occasionally
to determine whether or not new bushings are necessary to overcome any exces-
ve. vibration,



' .
ta al Pc

Lubrication Chart. (Cut No. 18)

a


THE FORD LUBRICATING SYSTEM a7

Don’t be afraid to put a little oil into the commutator every other day—at least
every 200 miles, Remember that the commutator roller revolves very rapidly,
and without sufficient lubrication the parts soon become badly worn. When
in this condition perfect contact between the roller and the four contact points is
impossible, as a result the engine is apt to misfire when running at a good rate

of speed.

Oiling the Ford Commutator. (Cut No. 19)

What about Lubricating
the Differential? Answer No. 103

Do not make the mistake of putting too much grease in the differential housing.
The housing should not be more than one-third full. The differential is supplied
with the required amount of lubricant when the car leaves the factory. The
oil plug should be removed about every 1000 miles and more grease added if
necessary. If a fluid grease is used the level should be approximately one and
one-half inches below the oil hole.


Care of the Tires
How are Ford

Tires removed? Answer No. 104

rts jack up the ri clear of ave road. The Naive cap should be unscrewed,
nut aa Vien ve stem into tire until its bead is
a : tra dee up te ad of th se the stn of

rie of the driver
shoe fa handy ins cae of ones bs the other two ar

sti handy ina'caae ofa “one-man j

@anipuiated in working the shoe clear of the rim. Aftet fre recing & |

Fe ee ae ce ae ete eaee ot eeceoncd ont “patehed Teadily
' detachig- the hands, and the damaged inner tube removed
or

S tube-inserted. Always use plenty of sodpstone in replacing Maal inner

+ - 1 *
How a Distnes |
repaitgd? Answer No. 105
Sho ; casing be cut so there ig danger of the inner tube being Bic through
it, a te ry tepair c can. be mae be cementing a canvas patch on ‘inside
of the j i: plying. the pa ich the part of the casing affe | should

a ssement applied i bo both and

To prolong the life of the tire casings, any small cuts in the tread should be filled
with patching cement and a specially prepared “plastic” sold by the tire com-
panies.

How may Tire Expense .
be reduced? Answer No. 106

Tire cost constitutes one of the most important items in the running expenses of
an automobile. To get the most service at the least expense, the tires should be-
inspected frequently and. all small cuts or holes properly sealed or repaired—
thus preventing dirt and water working in between the rubber tread and the fabric,
causing blisters or sand boils.
Tires should never be run partially deflated, as the side walls are unduly bent
and the fabric is subject to stresses which cause what is known as rim cutting.
The chances of getting a puncture will be greatly reduced by keeping your tires
properly inflated, as a hard tire exposes much less surface to the road than a soft
tire, and also deflects sharp objects that would penetrate a soft tire. .
Running a tire flat, even for a short distance, is sure to be costly. Better run
on the rim, very slowly and carefully, rather than on a flat tire.
Remember that fast driving and skidding shorten the life of the tires. Avoid
locking the wheels with the brakes—-no tire will stand the strain of being dragged
over the pavement in this fashion.
Avoid running in street car tracks, in ruts, or bumping the sides of the tire against
= curbing.

_ The wheel rims should be painted each season and kept free from rust.

tay

va ae . me ra “* > ~e 2 - La a > a



dnedigMpould be jacked up to
Af the car is ISG up for aaeny months it is best to
store them in a dark room not exposed to extreme temperatures. Remove. oil

Inner Tube repaired? Answer No. 107

A cement patch is not usually perianent and the tube should be vulcanized as .

soon as possible. Ia replacing the tire on rith be very careful not to pinch
tul



the running gear may be removed with a gasoline-
nickeled parts may be polished with any good metal

8
‘<
g

Answer No. 109

When putting the top down be careful in folding to see that the fabric is not
pinched between the bow spacers, as they will chafe a hole through the top very
quickly. Applying a good top dressing will greatly ituprove the appearance of
an top.

What should'be done whe .
the Car is stored? ™e Answer) No. 110

Drain thie water from the radiator, and then put in about a quart of denatured
fall the gasoline. Drain the dirty oil from the crank case and cleanse the engine
with kerosene as directed in Answer No. 101. Refill the crank case with fresh
the’tires and store them away. Wash up the car, and if possible cover the body
with a ‘sheet of muslin to-protect the finish.
- What attention do the Electric
Head Lights require? Answer No. 111
“ery little. When the cars leave our factory the lamps are properly focused
‘and unless the bulb burns out there should be no occasion for rémoving the door,
as there is nothing to get out oforder. Should the door be removed for any reason
_ care should be exercised not to touch the silver-plated reflector or the bulb with
“© anything but a soft, clean rag, preferably flannel. To focus the lamps turn the
{ adjusting ecrew in the back of Inimp in either direction until the desired! focus is
| attain



The Ferd Model T Que Tow Fruck

Do the Instructions relative to _
the Car apply to the Truck? Answer No, 112

ee ee Teo nd Bee Oar ate applicable to the trate, with the-cxnsp-
tion of Nos. 79, &0 and 81,

How are the Rear Azle
and Differential disassembled? Answer No. ‘jl 3

With the universal joint disconnected, remove the bolt in front end of rgdlua sods

and the cap screws which hold the drive shaft tube to the rear axle housing.

Then remove the rear axle housing cap; also the bolts which hold the two halves

of the differential housing together. With the differential exposed to, view, the '
manner of disassembling it will be apparent. Care must be exercised to. get ’
every part back in its correct position when reassembling, being-sure fo use new
paper liners.

How is the :

Worm removed? answer No. 114
‘To remove the worm, drive out the pins which hold the éoupting to the ¥ ancl
diye shaft. Then remove the felt washer, pacer age cake yom i
bearing by slipping them over the coupling. — the coupli :
will permit the removal of the retaining washer, thrust bee rear’ |
roller bearing. In reassembling be sure that the pin which Eh re
washer stationary is in place. .

How is the Differential Gear
removed from the Shaft? Answer No. 115

The differentil gear is fastened to the inner end of the rear axle shaft by means
of splines, and is held in position by a ring which is in two halves and fits in a
groove in the rear axle shaft. To remove the gear, force it ddwn on the :

that is, away. from the end to which it is fastened, drive out the two. hia i
ring in groove in shaft with screw-driver or chisel, and force the geay

of the shaft. " ha -

What about Lubricating ‘ " a oe
the Rear Axle? Answer No.. his.
Extreme care must be used in lubricating the differential, An 4-1 heayy

of semifinid cil, such as Mobiloil C or Whittemore’s Wort Gear Brotectit
should be used and carried at a level with the upper oil plug, The aiicrentil 4)

with th uired amount of lubricant hen the truck feaves
: Bethe ae ele cece weer a egraek ae :

tory and



ih

Aale Housing Bolt

Diferensial Gear Cave Boh Nut
Ditforensal Gear Case Bolt Cont
Differential Gear Case Bolt
Differernst:Geat Care
Axte'Shat Bearing Cone
A” Rea Se heee Axle Stats Bearing Balt
‘Axle Sah Dus Axle Shalt Ball Bearing Cup \
= Rear Hub Ale Shaty Felt Rerawer Plne\,
Anke ‘Shot: TB evig ‘Axe Shale t Eel Retuner Cup

Aste Hersing Tube yen Howung tlefp..
Ante Shaft .

be tas > a ee 3 ee

Axle Shalt Bearing Retaner
‘Axle Shati Beanng Felt
= fst Shaft Bearing Re lamer Wanker
aig oe ee Lever
Beate ec a

pander Nia
Bate pander Ba Caner
eae E oak Aa Ad Collar
‘Bre Aa or: Adasstinernn
Bone xparuder’ kn Fie

pander
Brake Expareder

Hous Plate-tLefiy

Truck Rear Axle—Longitudinal View. (Cut No. 20)

‘

ee

a

Aale Fouvwng. Gasker ¢
Ade Houng Bol eee ‘
= Anie Mousey Bolt "Cottee:

Ez,

Daterena fen inven Shaft
ale Houser

_ Differerina ‘on

- Differennel Gear



a - : '

[a . Dine Sha Tube Pl Sc

\ Owe Shafi
_ Drove Shaft Tube

-Drive Shaft Tube Flange
\- Dre Shafi Tube Flange Rwvet ;
ave Shaft 1. Worn Coupling oe
‘Shaft so Weer Coupling Fin on a

WN Wear
. Pier t ar-sey sel

Differential. Gear Case -
Wore Ger vo
meal t
% . = ar a 1
; : * “tes '

Truck Rear Axle—Cross Section showing Worm and Worm Gear. (Cut No. 21)



Starter and Generator Units.

(Cut No. 22)

Armature Shaft

Generator Driving
Pinion

__ ee ol


Of what does the Starting anal ,
Lighting System consist? Answer No. 1 Dp
motor, generator, » anmeter, and » together with the neces,
sary wiring and connections, ey ‘
Where is the 7
Starter located? . Answer No. 118
The starting motor is mounted on the left-hand side of the engine and bolted to
the transmission cover. When in operation the phtion oti the Bendix drive shaft
engages with the teeth on the flywheel.

What if the Engine ;

Sails to, start? Answer No. 119

If the: starting motor is turning the crank shaft over and the engine fails to start,

the trouble is not in the starting system. In this event release the button at once

sO as Not to unnecessarily discharge the battery and inspect the carburetor and:

ignitién system to determine the trouble. . .

What ¥ the Starting _ 7

Motor fails to act? Answer No. 120

If the! starting motor fails to act, after pushing the button, firet inspect the tere

minal‘on the starting motor, the twe terminals on the battery and the two. ter-

minalg on starting switch, making sure all of the connections are tight; thew ‘
cxamine the wiring for a break in the insulation that would cause a short circuit,
If the wiring and connections are O. K. and the starting motor fails to act, test t
the battery with a hydrometer. If the hydrometer reading is less than 1.225) ’
the trouble is no doubt due to a weak or discharged battery. . *

What if the driver steps on Starting ,
Button when engine is running? Answer No. 1h :

Should, the driver accidentally step on the starting button while the engine oY “x

running, no harm will result, The pinion, merely touches the revolving Sywheel .- *
* pear once and immediately rotates with the threaded shaft out of contact withthe ,

flywheel, inthe same manner as when it has been disengaged by the engine’s

starting. : : .

’
{
How is the Ganerator ee og oot *
The generator is mounted on the right-hand side of the engine and bolted ta
cylinder front end cover. It.is operated by the pinion ost © sématre

operation of cutting 2 in-and cutting cut at suitable speeds is accomifiished by the __
cut-out, which is mounted on the generator. This cat-out is, property st the, ‘

. : , , S87

t a .
* _ 3 alder é ‘ .
ae” ae, a oe ee . eg a an





THE FORD STARTING AND LIGHTING
What about
Oiling? Answer No. 123

The starting motor is lubricated by the Ford splash system, the same aa the
engine and transmission. The generator ie lubricated by a splash of oil from the
time gears. In addition an oil cup is located at the end of the generator housing
and a few drope of oil should be applied occasionally.

What should be done when
repairing the Ignition? Answer No. 124

The introduction of a battery current into the magneto will discharge the magnets
and whenever working on the ignition system or wiring do not fail to discontiect
the positive wire from the battery. The end of this wire should be wound with
tape to prevent its coming in contact with the terminal again.

How does the
Ammeter operate? Answer No. 125

The ammeter is located on the instrument board. This indicator registers
“‘charge”’ when the generator is charging the battery and ‘‘discharge” when the
lights are burning and the engine not running above 10 miles per hour. At an
engine speed of 15 miles per hour or more the ammeter should show a reading
of from 10 to 12. If the engine is running above 15 miles per hour and the
ammeter does not show a proper reading, first inspect the terminal posts on the
ammeter, making sure that the connections are tight, then disconnect the wire
from the terminal on generator, and with the engine running at a moderate
speed, take a pair of pliers or a screw-driver and short-circuit the terminal stud
on the generator to the generator housing. If the generator is O. K., a good live
spark will:be noted. (Do not run the engine any longer than is necessary
with the terminal wire disconnected.) Next inspect the wiring from the generator

; through the ammeter, to the battery for a break in the insulation that would
. result in a short-circuit. If the trouble is not located, then remove the dust’

cap from the end of generator and thoroughly clean the generator commutator,
using for this work a fine grade of sandpaper which has been slightly oiled.
With the motor running hold the sandpa; against the commutator with
the fingera until all dirt h&s been removed a bright surface attained.

How are the Lights |
operated? . Answer No. 126

The lighting system consists of two headlights and a tail light operated by a
combination lighting and ignition switch located on the instrument board:
headlamp bulbs are of 6-8 volt, double filament type. The major filament is
18 candle-power, and the minor filament is 234 candle-power. The small bulb
used in the-tail light is of 6-8 volt, single contact, two candle-power type. All
of the lamps are connected in parallel so that the burning out or removal of any
one of them will not affect the other. Current for the lamps is supplied by the
battery. Do not connect the lights to the magneto as it will reault in burning
out the bulBs and might discharge the magnets, Cut No, 23 shows the different
circuita and the course of the current.

What about repairing '
Starter and Generator Answer No. 127

If either the starter or generator fails to give proper service, the owner should at
once consult an authorized Ford dealer. Owners should not attempt to
repair or adjust the mechanism of the starter and generator. :

¥

a | a ~_ ae : i



5 _ _— 3
2 _ . THE FORD MANUAL oo, {
How is the Starter
. removed? Answer No. 128
+ ‘When removing the starter to transmission bands, or for any other reason,
y first remove the engine pan on left-hand side of the engine and with a screw- ~
. deiver remove the four emall screws holding the shaft cover to the transmission
edver. Upon removing cover and gasket, turn the Bendix drive shaft around
+ +0 that the eet screw ori the’end of the shaft is at the top. Immediately gy
. the set screw is placed a lock washtr, designed with lips or
2 _Ofiposite each other. One of these is turned against the collar a
“other ‘fs turned up against the side of the screw head. Bend back
- 5 which has been forced against the screw and remove the set-screw. As
washer will no doubt be broken or weakened in removing the starter, an

housing to the transmission cover, and/pull out the

same down through the chassis this ie why it was necessary to

the engine pan. Extreme care should be used in removing the Bendix

misplaced nor lost and that they aré replaced

fn thelr forms former position. In replacing the starter, be sure that the terminal

connection is placed at the top. If the car is to be operated with the starter

.. removed, be sure to put the transmission cover plates in position. These plates
may be obtained from the nearest dealer.

atl
ik
i
ap
4

How is the Bendix sprive
assembled to the Start-
* ing Motor? Answer No. 129

too tight; also chat the Dosing ie be rene, atten
- -with the bracket. The bearing itiahd be cles end then Sted so that it can be 4
. tgrned readily with the fingers. If the bearing is too tight, it should be dressed
doen with an oil stone. Too tight 2 fit will cause the bearing to freeze to the |
bracket, resulting in serious damage to the starter. ' :

-i{6w is the Generator ;
eel - Answer No. 130
‘ahit is found necemary to remove the-eenerator, Sat 'take ont the ches cap
Genes! thal generator and feent end cover, Sos toontotor maybe forced of te
poiand snerator and front end cover, the generator may be forced off the
: ‘Alwaya start at the top of the generator and force it backward

‘at tie-same time. Plates maybe obtained from the negrest dealer
be time gear if the car is to be operated with the generator removed.

' i sl oe te Answer No. 131

When installing the, generator, the drive pinién must be properly meshed with

the large time gear. The generator Peder Uletk ead the rashine at the

generator is bolted is separate from the block and the meshing of the

generator driving pinion with the large.time gear can be regulated by the use of h

one or more paper gaskets between the bracket ard the cylinder block. The ;
bracket should rest tightly on the crankcase gasket add line up with the fate of

J

_

a +} 1 : cy Lee gh . _ 7 an? ae -d


Can pEngine be run with the n
Genergtor disconnected from ,
the battery? Answer No. .132

“If for aty. reason the engine is run with the generator disconnected from from the bet-

tery, as or. a block test, or when battery been removed for repair or retharging,
be sure that generator is grounded bg running-a wire from the terminal on.
generator to one of-the dust cover the yoke. Two strands of shipping
tag wire be ufled for this p sure that the cannections at ‘beth
ends of the wire are tight. Fal oho nag ct th
generator disconnected from the -battiry will result in serious injury to the

ator. Never ground the genevator through the cut-out.

Whai ¢: Botte ‘’
is used? a ~ y. . Answer No. 133

The Ford, ing System pses a six-volt, three-cell battery.

Answer No. 134

%, gee
ai

gee

ae ae

Raysere

?)
5
$

indicate “complete

hydrometer shows the lesa
than one-half , it should be taken
to the nearest authorized Battery Service
Station for opera-
half-charged condition is injurious to the Beles ty somewhat
or deflated tire is injurious to the tire, Before. replacing the

of the discharged condition should be removed. "Tt may may be"

nds in the car wiring or to the electri having gotten
that the battery is ot keene ied with the proper
the generator. If the reading ix ceil is mote than

ae gy" ee
—" ‘e/ tam. om a an

beter
*



THE FORD MANUAL

50 points different from the others, it indicates that the cell is not in good ofiter
and the tyatiery should be taken to a skilled service man for attention.

ms stat water be an Answer No. 135.

Aa nething but pure wate othe ces and doit often enough to keep the plates
covered at all times. The solution (electrolyte) should be maintained
level with the bottom of the filling tube. Distilled water, melted arti
(but not natural) ice and rain water, if obtained in the open country from.
clean slate or shingle-covered roof, are generally satisfactory. All water
battery use should be kept in clean, covered vessels of glass, china, earthenw@
rubber or lead. In cold weather add water only immediately before
engine so that the charging will mix the water and electrolyte, and avoid
ing. Hf, for any reason, it is necessary to add acid, the battery should. be t
to an authorized Servi ice Station.

He

What care should be given the . - gas
Filling Plugs and Connections? Answer No. 136

Keep the filling plugs and connections tight and the top of the battery
Wiping the battery with a rag moistened with ammonia will counteract the effe
of. any of the sohution which may be on the dw of the’ A

of heavy oil or vaseline will protect the cofinectors from

battery firmly secured in position. If clanipe. aré-loose, the
about in the compartment and résult in loos¢ connections, broken cells and o

tranble. If repairs are necessary or if the & fo be laid up for the
take the battery to a skilled : man for. attention and. storage.
‘net entrust the battery to in or willed band ;



THE FORD MANUAL

Summary of Engine Troubles and Their Counta

ENGINE FAILS TO START

-2, Water in gasoline.

3.° Vibrators adjusted too close.

4.. ‘Water or congealed oil in commu-
| tator.

'§, Magneto contact point (in trans.
Meee obstructed with foreign
matter.

6. Gasoline supply shut off.
7. Carburetor frozen (in zero weather).

‘8. Water frozen in gasoline tank
sediment bulb.

oo Coil switch off.

ENGINE LACKS | POWER—RUNS
-IRREGULARL

; At Low Speeds.

1. Poor compression—account leaky
‘valves.

2. Gas mixture too rich or too lean.
3. Spark plugs dirty.
4. Cbdil vibrator improperly adjusted.
| S Air leak in intake manifold.
6. Weak exhaust valve spring.

, 7. Too great clearance between valve
, eter and push rod.

| 8. Too close gap between spark plug

‘At High Speeds.
1. ‘Commutator contact imperfect.
3. Too much gap in spark plug.
4, Imperfect gas mixture,

ENGINE STOPS SUDDENLY ~, |

1. Gasoline tank empty...
Water in gasoline.
3. Flooded carburetor.
4. Dirt in carburetor or feed pips:
5. Magneto wire foose at either
terminal.

6. Magneto contact point obstructed.
Overheated—account lack of oil

or water.
8 Gas mixture too lean. ta
@ @
ENGINE OVERHEATS
1. Lack of water.
2. yack of oil.

3. Fan belt torn, loose or slipping.

4. Carbon deposit in combustion
chamber.

5. Spark retarded too far.
6. Gas mixture too rich.

7. Water circulation retarded ‘by
sediment in radiator. .

8 Dirty spark plugs.

ENGINE KNOCKS

1. Carbon deposit on piston heads.
2. Loose connecting rod bearing.
3. Loose crank shaft bearing.

4. Spark advanced too far.



What It Is For
How to Disconnect

OPERATION
Alustments—What to Do vere... cong

Model T Truck

‘Worm, How Removed rar bo eee ne ceeaee ba eeeeeces reer er rrr

The Ford Starting and Highting System



