For Owners and Operators

of Ford Cars and Trucks

Published by J
FORD MOTOR. COMPANY
Detroit, Michigan, U.S. A. .



Ss Foreword

' is a significant fact that nearly all Ford cara are driven by
laymen—by owners, who in the. great majority of cases have
FOr no practical experience with things mechanical.

- ' Ford sttvice statichs distributed throughout the civilized world —
N ' where Sdfust i A wit

But while it is not imperative, it is, however, altogether desir-
able that every Ford owner should thoroughly understand his
car, With euch knowledge at his command he ia always master ;

; ‘The mastery of a thorough lmowledge of Ford construction is
by no means a difficult or time-consuming task. The Ford is the
simplest car made. It is easy to understand, and is not difficult
te keep in proper adjustment and repair.
and that there may be an authoritative guide for the making of

Important

itis most important that owners of Ford cars shaltinsist
upon getting the genuine Ford-made materials, or “Parts,”
schen having repairs or replacements made, This will be
assuted when the car is taken to the authorised Ford
. ‘agegt, Imitation, or “bogus” or counterfeit parts of
é. ‘ by i quality are being made and sold as “Ford Parts.”

mvid their use by. dealing with the authorized Ford



ON PE aeee

-1 a ~y

The Car and Its Operation

What must be done before «
starting the Car? Answog No, 1

Before trying to start the car, fill the radiator (by rem cap at top). with clean
fresh water. If perfectly clean water cannot be obtained is advisable to strain
it through muslin or other similar material to prevent foreign matter from getting
in and obstructing the small tubes of the radiator. The system will hold approxi-
mately three gallons. It is important that the car ahould not. be run under
own power unless the water circulating system haa been filled. Pour in the wai
until you are sure that both radiator and cylinder ater jackets are:
water will run out of the overfiow pipe onto the ground when the
system has been properly filled. During the firet days that a
being driven it is a good plan to examine the radiator frequently and
is kept properly filled. The water supply should be replenished as
be found necessary. Soft rain water, when it ia to be had in a clean
superior to hard water, which may contain alkalies and other salts which
deposit sediment and clog the radiator. (See chapter on Cooling System.)

¢

4

cD

ai
fe

What about 4
Gasoline? Answer No; 2

rapidly. Atways be careful about lighting matches near where gasoline has been
spilled, as the air within a radius of several fect is permeated with the hi
explosive vapor. The small vent hole in the gasoline tank cap should not be
allowed to get plugged up, as this would prevent proper flow of the gaacling to
the carburetor. The gasoline tank may be drained by opening the pet cock in
the sediment bulb at the bottom. ,

Slow about - .
the Oiling System? Answer No. 3

Upon receipt of the car see that a supply of medium light, high-grade gas engine
oll is poured into the crank case through the breather pipe at the front of the.
engine (a metal cap covers it). Down under the car in the flywheel casing (
reservoir which holds this oil) you will find two pet cocks. Pour off in sléwly -
until it runs out of the upper cock. Leave the cock open until it stopd running—
then close it. ‘After the engine has become thoroughly limbered up, the best
results will be obtained by carrying the oil at a level midway between the two
cocks—but under no circumstances should it be allowed to get
coclc, All other parts of the car are properly oiled when it leaves the factéry.
However, it will be well to see that all grease cupe are filled and that oil is supplied
tomecessary parts, (See Cut No. 18, also chapter on Lubrication.) i
?
How are Spark and Throttle ;
Levers used? Answer No. 4.

Under the steering wheel are two small levers, The right-hand (throttle) lever:
cotitrols the amount of mixture (gasoline and air) which goes into the efgine.
When the engine is in operation, the farther this lever ix moved dowsiward toward ¢
the driver (referred to as “opening the throttle”) the faster the engine runs. and
explodes: the gas in the cylinde:

1 of the engine. ‘The advancing oF ela lever
. {3}

od

a he i |


Imernal Gear Case

Planetary Pinion
Drive Pinion with Short Shafi
Drwe Pinion Shafi Bushing yf

Horn Bution and Light Sy,
- Spark Lever, —

a Throule Rod
Be Steering Gear

‘ _—
a a

|


er Senne = a *

THE CAK AND ITS OPERATION ot &

advances the spark,’ and it should be moved down nbtch by notch until the |
motor seems to reach its maximum speed: If the lever is advanced beyond this
point a dull knock will be noticed in the engine. (See chapter on Ignition.)
Where should these levers be.when ‘ . ‘

atarting the Engine? Answer No. 3

The spark lever should usually be put in about the third or fourth notch of the
quadrant (the notched half-circle on which the levers operate). The throttle
should usually be opened about five or six notches. A little experience will soon
teach you where these levers should be placed for proper atartidg, Care should be
taken not to advance the spark lever too far, as the engine tity “back kick.”

What else is necessary before . .
starting the Engine? Answer No. 6

¢

First, see that the hand lever, which comes up through the floor of thie car at the
left of the driver, is pulled back as far as it will go. The lever in this position
holds the clutch in neutral and engages the hub brake, thus preventing the car
moving forward when the engine is started. Second, after inserting the awitch
key in the switch on the coil box, throw the switch lever as far to the left as it will
go—to the point marked “magneto.” This switch connects the magyeto with
the engine. The engine can’t be started until it is on—and the throwing off of this.
switch stops the engine.

How is the Engine , '
started? _ Answer, No. 7

If the car is not equipped with a starter the engine is stdrted by the lifting of the
starting crank at the front of the'car. Take hold of the le and push firmly
toward the car till you feel the crank ratchet engage, then lift upward with a
quick swing. With a little experience this operation will become an easy matter.
Don't, as a usual thing, crank downward against the compression—for then an
early explosion may drive the handle vigorously backward. ‘ This does not mean
however, that it is not advisable, when the car is hard to start, to occasionally
“spin” the engine by the use of the atarting handle—but be sure the spark lever
is retarded when spinning or cranking the engine against compression, vi

a sudden backfire may injure the arm of the operator. When the engine is cool
it is advisable to prime the carburetor by pulling on the small wire at the | i
left corner of the radiator while giving the engine two or three quarter turne wi
the starting handle. 7 :

If the car is equipped with a starter the spark and throttle levers shoud be placed
in the same position on the quadrant as when cranking by hand, ar ignition
switch turned on. Current from either battery or magneto may be used
ignition. However, we recommend that the magneto be used at all tim
The to was designed to furnish ignition for the Model T engine‘andl bette
results be obtained by operating in this:-way. Special attention muat ‘be
paid to the position of the spark lever as a advanced spark will cause serious
backfiring which in turn will bend or break the shaft in the starter. The starting.
motor is operated by a push button, conveniently located in the floor of the car
at the driver's feet. With the spark and throttle levers in thé proper podition,
and the ignition switch turned on, press on the push button with the foot. This
closes the circuit between the battery and starting motor, causing the finion
of the Bendix drive shaft to engage with the teeth on the flywheel, thus tuming
over the crankshaft. When the engine is cold it may be necessary. to prime it
by pulling out the carburetor priming rod, which is located on the inatrument
board. In order to. avoid flooding the engine with an over rich mixture of gas, the
priming rod should only be held out for a few seconds at a time. ‘



dian | oy ° aK: 3 Spe eee oo

THE FORD MANUAL

started in cold weather? ‘Answer No. &

‘Aa gasoline dogs not vaporize readily in cold west et of starting th dif
to atart the: under such conditions. The usual method of starting the

when cold is to turn th. carburetor dash adjustment one-quarter turn to the
én order to allow a richer mixture of gasoline to be drawn into the cylinders;
held out the priming rod, while you turn crank from six to eight one-qu
turns in quick succession, or turn the motor over a few times with the ste
Another method of starting a troublesome coid engine is as follows: 3B
you throw on the magneto switch, (1) close throttle lever; (2) hold out pri
rod while you give crank several quick turns, or turn the motor over a few bin
with the starter, then let go of priming rod (being careful that it goes be
ail the way); (3) place spark lever in about third ngtch and advance throt
lever several notches; (4) throw on switch (being suse to get it on side ma
“Magneto”); (5) give crank one or two turns, or close the starting switch, and
motor should atart. After starting the motor it is advisable to advance the sp:
eight or ten notches on the quadrant and let the motor run until thoroughly:
heated up. If you start out with a cold motor you will not have much powé
and ere liable to “stall.” The advantage of turning on the switch last, or ¢
priming, is that when you throw. on the switch and start the motor, you ha
Mlenty of gas in the cylinders, to keep the motor running, thereby eliminating )
trouble of the motor starting and stopping. After. motor is warmed up
éarburetor adjystment back one-quarter turn. |
To facilitate starting many drivers make practice of stopping their engine by
pulling gut on the pe full © which has the effect of shutting off the air suctio
Sling the cylinders full of a very rich gasoline vapor. This should not.
Gone unless the car is going to stand over night or long enough to cool off. Tf th
thotor is stopped in this way and then started when hot, starting is apt to be dif
ficult on account of the surplus gasoline in the carburetor.

What function does the a
Hand Lever perform? Answer No. $
Tes chief purpose is to hold the clutch in neutral position. If it were not for thi
Jever the driver would have to stop the engine whenever he left the driver's seats’
He would also be unable to crank the engine without the car. starting forward
with the first explosion. When pulled back as far as it will go, the hand } y
acts as an emergency brake on the rear wheels, by expanding the brake shoes i¥
the rear: wheel drums. Therefore the hand lever should be back as far as it will
go when cranking the engine or when the car is at rest. It should be only in aj
vestical position, and not far enough backward to act as a brake on the rear wheelsy
when the car ia to be reversed. When the car is operating in high or low speed
the hand Jéver should be all the way forward. . :
How do the Foot Loe
Pedals operate? Answer Ng. 1 i
The first one toward the left operates the clutch. When pressed forward. tht
clutch pedel engages the low speed. When half-way forward’ the clutch is
neutral (i. e., discorihected from the driving mechanism of the rear wheels),
operates the reverse. The right-hand pedal operates the transmission
How is the Car : - 7 so
started? eel . Answer No.
* half way forward, theteb: » dinkdieg: the efetch in a neutral position

Bre



throwing the hand lever forward; then press the pedal forward into slow speed
and when under sufficient headway (20 to 30 fect), allow the pedal tp drop
back slowly into high speed, at the same time partially closing the throttle, which .
- will allow the engine to pick up its load easily. With o Uttle practice.
change of speeds will be easily accomplished, and without any eciatte’
effect on the emooth ruining of the machine. ve
a
How is the Car -
stopped? ‘ Answer No. 12

Partially close the throtte; felease the high speed by pressing the clutch petal
forward into neutral; apply the foot Brake slowly but firmly until the car |

to a dead stop. Do not remove foot from the clutch pedal without first

the hand lever back to niystral position, or the engine will stall. To stop the
motor, open the throttle a trifle to accelerate the motor and then throw off the
switch. The engine will then. stop with the cylinders full of explosive gas, which
will naturally facilitate starting.

Endeavor to so familiarize yourself with the operation of the dar that to disengage
the clutch and apply the brake becomes practically automatic—the natural thing
to do in case of emergency

How is the Car
reversed? . Answer No. 13

It must be brought to a dead stop. With the engine running, disengage the clutch
with the hand lever and press the reverse pedal forward with the left foof} the |
tight foot being free to use on the brake pedal ifneeded. Do not bring the hand “4
lever back too far or you will set the brakes on rear wheels. Experienced drivers :
ordinarity reverse the car by simply holding the clutch pedal in neutral with the

| left foot, and operating the reverse pedal with the right.

Bow ia the Spark
controlled? per Answer No. 14

By the left-hand lever under the steering wheel. Good operators drive with ;
the spark lever advanced just as far as the engine will permit, However, ad- .
vancing the spark too far will case a dull knock in the motor, due to the feet that -4
b the explosion occurs too early. The spark should only be retarded when the
| engine slows down on a hzavy road or steep grade, but care should be ‘exercised’
not to retard the spark too far as this will result in late ignition, which causes '
' loss of power and overheating of the motor and may also reaulf in warped,
burned or cracked valves, Learn to operate the spark as the occasion
The greatest economy in gasoline consumption is obtained by driving orien the the

spark advanced sufficiently to obtain the maximum speed. a. ‘
How is speed of : ’
Gar controlled? | btiswer No. 15°

The diferent spends required to mest road conditions ere obtained by opening
or cloging the throttle. Practically all the running speeds needed! for drdinery.
Ce ee eee ee ee tine ce wae erties Daye eae
File the cutk he Denali the: ‘ ng one



oo *

- sit + advieable for owners to.

; inst aatisfactory service in the end. Never start out with your car until you aré-

make their own + Adjustments? ‘

the cor—and who will have no motive fon inving up useless repair bills.
entire Ford orgenization is interested in keeping every individual Ford. car
constant operation, at the lowest possible cost. We have known of much dé

done to miany cars by unskilled repair men.

What attention. Z
does the Car need? Answer No. vA

mer that a new machine requires more careful attention during the fiz
few é itis being driven than efter the parts have become thoroughly “worked!
‘he car which is driven slowly and carefully when new usually gives thei

aure that is has plenty of oil and water. Frequently inspect the running gear;
Se that no unnecessary play exists in either front or rear wheels, and that
bolts 'gnd nuts are. tight. Make a practice of taking care of every repair '
adjustment as soon as its necessity is discovered. This attention requires but

little time and may. avoid delay or possible accident on the road. We aim 19°.
deli t f e r mechanical adjustment. Afterwards it is plainly the j
peep it in that condition.

7”

: to _ es
Pa toy a oa a of


_ The Ford Engine

What ts the principle of the

gasoline-driven Engine?

Gasoline when mixed with air and compressed is highly explo: fm explosion
ia @ violent expansion caused by instantaneous combustio afined. gases.
In the gasoline engine the mixture is drawn into a cylinder, where itis compress

by an advancing piston and then exploded by: an electric spark, which send#-the

piston downward, and through the connecting red iniparts a rotary motion: tothe

crankshaft. (See Cut No. 2.)

What are functions ; ;
of the Pistons? Answer No. 19

On-the downward stroke the suction of the piston draws thi fresh gag.
carburetor, through the inlet pipe and valve, inte the cylinder. The
movement of the piston compresses the'gas into. # very small apace, bi
top of the piston and the depression in the cylinder head, known as the
tion chamber.” (The compressed gases exert a pressure of approxi
pounds per square iach.) At this point the electric spark, gene

drives the exploded gas
(See Cut No. 3.)

tt le a steel rod, connecting piston and crank shaft. Should the babbitt beating
become worn, or burned out through lack of oil, a knocking in the engine
reault—in which case the entire connecting rod should be replaced. To make this
ent, (1) drain oil from crank case; (2) take off cylinder head: (3) i
detachable plate on bottom of crank case; (4) disconnect connecting red from ergnk
shaft; (8) tale piston and rod out through top of cylinder.

Whas is the Valve .
Arvangomen iP _ Answer No, 221

One intake and one exhaust valve are located in each cylinder. The former ad-
mits the fresh gas drawn from the carburetor through the inlet pipe—the latter
permits the exploded gas to be driven out through the exhaust pipe. ‘Phe valves
are alternately opened and closed (see Cut No. 3) by the cams on the ‘cpm shaft
striking against push rods which in turn lift the yalves from their seat,

What about oe ie

Falee timing? Answer Ng, 22
In timing theengine the points of opening and closing of the valves ate, 96 0 afse,
when thefengine is built the necessity for retiming would occur only when sich

patts‘ax ‘the cami shaft, time gears or valves were removed in overhauling. -the
e te; +8 ‘ . : .
In Atting the large time gear to the cam shaft it is important to.see that the h

ipsints ing direction opposite to the zero marie (eee Cut No, 3). ‘The’

r must also mesh a0 that the tooth marked zero (0) on the amall time gtar  ayvill
| oad

between the two teeth on the large gear at the zero point.
: . 7 cm PI


»
ie

Chich Spemg.

” Chich Retenve Fort

G

Chath Retesre Rang
Choch Sti

Chuch Fieaget

Os Lew!

Ne Shafi Contes Berson,
. Crank Shaft

Connecting Rad
Cam Shaft Rear Bearing
Crank Salt Rear Bearing

Sectional View of the Model T Motor.

(Cut No. 2)

.
;

Terminal

ie

| Sree Cm Rit
: Staring Crank Spring
Searing Crank Steeve

Camm Stadt Fron Bearing
Sina Tre Gear

Crank Shaft Front Bearing
Cain Shaft

Crank Case OM Take
Prot Pad

