cee eee . epg hee mre am ey ~

The Ford Tranemission

What is the function af:

the Transmission? _Anever No, 69
Te is that part of the methuniem.of an sutomdbile w: Hes between the crank
shaft and Bi ar ator end by whic con aed fo moves

different speeds
from the other I it is thapeed gear of the car. Tt sends the ear formats) ah low aid
high epeeds and by ie thc car la reversed.

Whatis meant by the term 4
“Planetary Transmission?” Answer No, 70
in which the groups of gears always remain in mesh and revalve around. main

one - ‘Phe different seta of gears are brought into action by y stopping the revolution
of the parts which support the gears. By means of bands (sintilar to brake bands)
the sotation of the different parts is stopped. The planetary transmission is
Sit cnt mot dec meu of psd contra a dae advantage
the car,

What is the |
on the Clutch? Answer No. 71

If tie crank shaft of the engine ran without break straight through to the differen-
and through it applied its power direct to the rear wheels—the car would
start forward immediately upon the starting of the engine (were it possible to. get
it skarted under such conditions). To overcome this difficulty the

divided and by means of the clutch the part of the shaft to ee -
is delivering its power is enabled to take hold of the unmo if
and start the car without jolt or jar. The forward part of the sha tered

to ap te crank shat, the rear part as the drive

F; the : ae
soln ts ‘eontrolled? Answer No. #2

By the eft petal at the driver's feet (see Answer No. 10), tfttie clutch pedal, when
pushed forward into slow speed, has a tendency to sticie and not come bai
Pte high, dghiten up the slow speed band as directed in Answer ‘No. "4
the'machine- an inclination to creep forward when cranking, it it indicates ‘that
the élutch levet ecrew which bears on the clutch leve¢ cam has worn, adh sequil
an extfa tum to hold the clutch in neutral position. When the clutch is released by
ng backs tie hand lever the pedal should move forward a diatance of I 14" in
ic from high speed to neutral. See thaf th lub brake shor. ene connec ors
order so that the brake will act sufficiently to tthe car creeping
Also be sure the slow speed band does not bi d on account of being
dee Boat use ato hese rate fon col went a wl
f fo cingeal between the n chateh dace and prevent Pooper abtion of

. Answer No. 45
‘floor boards at tie driver's *


Magneto Coniact
—— Transmission Core:
Reverse Pedal Shatt

‘Transmission Band Specs
Reverse Adpstinigy Nu:

fo stow Speed Adjusting Nut“
Stow Spees Adnenns Screw

¥ wing Place Screw .
~ Driving Plate Screws Loca Wire:
Ctuich Finger
— Clash Finger Adjatmy Screw
~ Clich Release Fork .
Chueh

+ Church Lever Screw Nut
Church L

oN . i moe . - — ot
va we te _ : - ent .
i ia - “

The above drawing of Transmission shows clearly the operation of Clutch, Reverse and Brake Pedals. (Cut Ne. 12)



. How are the

‘How are the

THE FORD TRANSMISSION

the wear in the clitch may be taken up by installing another pair of clutch dis,
rather than by turning the adjusting screws in too far. ;

CAUTION: Let us warn you against placing any small! toala or objects over or'ip
the transmission case without a good wire or cord attached to them. Otherwise if
they are dropped into the transmission case it is almost impossible to recover them

‘ée

Bands adjusted? Answer No. TH

The slow.speed band.may be tightened by loosening the lock nut at the tight side
of the transmission cover, and turning the adjusting screw (see Cut No. 12)'té tf

right. To tighten the brake and reverse bands remove the transmission cover

doof and turn the adjusting nuts on the shafts to the right. See that the bands do :
not dragon the drums when disengaged, as they exert 2 brake effect, and tend to
overheat the motor. However, the foot brake should be adjusted so that a suddén
preasure will stop the car immediately, or slide the rear wheels in case of emergency,
The bands, when worn to such an extent that they will not take hold properly,
ahould be relined, so that they will engage smoothly without causing a jerky move-
ment-of the car. The lining is inexpensive and may be had at any Ford.service
station at small cost. ‘

a
aw
“ad

Bards removed? Answer No. %

Remove the starting motor (see Answer No, 128). Take off the door on: top of
enission cover. Turn the reverse adjustment nut and the brake adjustment
nut to the extreme end of the pedal shafts, then remove the slow speed’ adjusting
screw, ‘Remove the bolts holding the transmission cover to crank case ahd liftoff
the cover assembly. Slip the band nearest the flywheel over the first of the triple
gear, then turn the band around so that the opening-is downward: The:
can now beremoved by lifting upward. Theoperatioi is more easily actomplishid
if the threesetsof triple gears are soplaced that one set is about ten degrees to’

sufficient. cleararice in the crank case to allow the cars of the transmission bands ;
to be turned downward. By reversing this operation the bands may be installed.
After being placed in their upright position on the drums pass a cord around the
ears of the three bands, holding them in the center so that when put@ilg: the
transmission cover in place no trouble will be experienced in getting the. pedal
shafts to rest in the notches in the band ears. The clutch release ring must Be
placed in the rear groove of the clutch shift, With the cover in-place remove
the cond which held the bands in place while the cover was being installed... ;

How is the Transmission , a
assembled? Answer N6,,.76
Cut No. 13-shows the transmission parts in their relative assembling povitiiggnd ,
grouped in their different operations of assembling. eee, aX)
‘The firat operation is the assembling of group No. 2, which is as follows: . =
the brite ‘drum-on table with the hub-in.a vertical position, place the Se ‘

platwayer the hub with gear uppermost. Then place reverse

pei so that the revecse gear surrounds the ns. RC bh

the teeth downward so that they will come next to theslow speed geat:. ‘Dik .



Transmission parts in their relative assembling positions. (Cut No. 13)



THE FORD TRANSMISSION

downward. After making sufe that the triple gears are properly meshed 34! ar
in place by passing a cord around the outside of the three gears. Take.the
wheel and it on the table with the face downward api the t ao

drum, then a amall disc, alternating with large and small dieca until the eee
set of diecs dre.in position, ending up with a large disc on top. ; re hQ
If aemall discis on top itis liable to fall over the clutch drum in changing the apg
from high to low and as a result you would be unable to change the speed back ig
high. Next put the clutch push ring over the clutch drum, and on top ot ee {
with the three pins projecting upward (see Group No. 4, Cut No. 13). ¥6
note the remaining parts are placed as they will be assembled. Next bolt the-dg
ing plate in position so that the adjusting screws of the clutch fingers will b
against the clutch push ring pina, Before proceeding further it would be a gad
plan to test the transmission by moving the plates with the hands.. If che trapis-
mission is properly assembled they will revolve freely. The clutch parté.m
be assembled on the driving plate hub asfollows: Slip the clutch shift over %
hub)so that the small end rests on the endsoftheclutch fingers. Next put.ofth
cuteh . apring, placing the clutch su; inside so that the flange trond
upper coll of the spring and press into place, inserting the pin in the driving
plate hub through the holes in the side of the spring support. Then turn fhe
clutch spring sup until the pin fits into the lugs on the bottom of the euppg
The easiest m: of compressing the spring sufficiently to insert the pir
to igosen the tension of the clutch finger by means of the adjusting sttews.
within aspace of two or two and one-sixteenth inches to insure against the clafch
slipping. Care should be exercised to see that the screws in the fingers areigd-
justed so the apring is compressed evenly all around.

'
{
H

_t .
ee on See er iad

“~«~
te we en
Ve

wel — fee a _ in on 1 |





TO

How is the Rear

ing.

cotter-pinned wonatle” nut, "Remove the castle nttt, and ative the pinion off

How are the Differential .
Gears removed? -Answer No. 81“

The differential gears are attached to the inner ends of the rear gigs shaft. They
work upon the. ferential pinions when turning a corner, s0-that the axle shafts
. tevalve: erisreadention but when the car is moving in a ‘straight dine the differen;’ ~
tial pinions and differential gears and axle shafts move as an integral part, | if you a]
will examine the rear: axle shafts you will notice that the gears are keyed. on, and ‘
held in. position by a ring which is in two halves and fits in a groove in the rear
axle shaft... To remove the differential gears, force them down on the shaft, thatis,
away from the end to w hich they are secured, drive out the two halves of ring in the
ow in shaft with acrew-driver or chisel, then force the gears off the end of the fi
$i !

‘The Rear Axle Systera. (Cut No. 14)

How is the Rear Axle 7 ‘
Shaft removed? . . Answer No. 87 ;
Disconnect sear axle as directed in Answer No. 77, then unbélt the drive shift‘as-

sembly where it joins the rear axle housing at the differentialy Disconnect | jas
rods and brake rods ut the cuter ends of the hausing. Take out the bal "7
hold the two halves of the reer sxle housing together at the center and
housing. ‘Take the inter differential casing apart and ‘dpaw the axle'shaft
After replacing the adie shaft shaft be sure that the rear wheels are fitmly

the outer end of the ha ale ahaft and the key in proper . Wi
Se yo ee

le



3B THE FORD MANUAL

Sato mightchee . It is extremely
important that the are’ At, ©

wise the constant rocking back
and forth against the keyway may in time cause serious trouble.

The Ford Bmergency Brake. (Cut No. 15)

Tf the rear axle or wheel is sprung by skidding against a curb, or other accident, it is
false economy to drive the car without correcting the trouble, as tires, geara and
all other parts will suffer. If the axle shaft is bent, it can, with proper facilities,
be straightened, but it is best to replace it.



Answer No. 83

diecohnpeted? - Answer No. 8&4
remove the bolts which hold the muffler to the frame. ‘After the muflet hee been

bal
]
‘ .
. °*



What care should the
Ruzning Gear hove? Answer No. 85

In the first place it at all times should have proper lubrication (eee chapter on
Lubrication). Once in every thirty days the front arid rear axles should be care-
fully gone over to see that every moving part, such as the bushings in spring con:
nections, spring hangers, steering knuckles and hub_ bearings, are thoroughly tu-
bricated, and that all nuts and connections are secured with cotter pins in place.
The spuing clips, which attach the front epring to the frame, should be inspected
frequently to see that everything isin perfect order.

How is the Front Axle
removed? a Answer No. 86

Jack up front of car so wheels can be removed (see Answer No. 89), disconnect
steering gear ball arm from the spindle connecting rod, disconnect radius rod at
ball joint, and remove two cotter pin bolts from spring shackle on each side, so
detaching front spring.

To disconnect radiua rod from axle, remove cotter-pinned nuts. To remove radius
rod entirely, take the two bolts out of the ball joint and remove lower half of cap.

In case of accident, how is the
Front Axle straightened? Answer No. 87

Should the axle or spindle become bent extreme care must be used to straighten
the parts accurately. Do not heat the forgings, as this will untemper the steel, but
straighten them cold. If convenient it would be better to return such parts to the
dealer, where they may be properly straightened in jigs designed for that purpose.
It is very essential that the wheels line up properly (see Answer No. 90).

- "the Ford Spindle and Front Hub Assembly. (Cut No. 161

eye ia not sufficiently accurate to determine whether the parts have been
ei traightened, and excessive wear of the front tires will occur if every-

