fon
7s,
aoe
=,

~ . . - ‘eg - ‘ant i ve -
—_a ae . on a ee
= 8 —.-_ 2 a oe

" Cylinder Assembly, the correct position of the valves with time gears properly set according to punch marks on the
gears, also the relative p ion of the pistons in their sores as indice ted above. The firing order of the cylinders is 1, 2, 4, 3.
ut No.



12 THE FORD MANUAL

now being properly set, the exhaust valve on No. 1 cylinder is open and the in-
take valye closed, the other valves being in the position indicated in Cut No. 3.

The opening and clositig of the valves being as follows: The exhaust valve opens ©

when the piston.reaches 5-16” of bottom center, the distance from the top of the
piston head fo the top of cylinder casting measuring 3 3-8’. The exhaust valve
will close on top centre, the piston being 5-16” above the cylinder casting. The
intake valve opens 1-16" after top center, and closes 9-16" after bottom center,
ine Giatance from the top of the piston to the top of the cylinder casting measur-

glk mee -t a ft tay 2d

How the valve lifting tool should be used. (Cut No. 4)

The clearance between the push red and valve stem should never be greater than
1-32" nor less than 1-64", The correct clearance is naturally half way between
these two measurements. The gap should be measured when the push rod is on
the heel of the cam.

What about the
care of the Valves? ! Answer No. 23

They-seldom get out of order—but they do get dirty, as a result of carbon collect-
ing on the valve. seats. These carbon deposits by preventing proper closing of the
valves, permit the gases under compression to escape, resulting in loss of power
and gneven sinning of the motor. If, when turning the engine over slowly, there is
a ack of resistance in one or more cylinders, it is probable that the valvea need
re-grinding. As the “life” of the engine depends largely upon the proper seating
of the vaives, it is necessary that they be ground occasionally.

How are Valves remored
for grinding? . ._ Answer No. 24

(1) Drain radiator; (2) remove cylinder head; (3) remove the two valve coverson ,

the right side of engine; (4) raise the valve spring with lifting tool (see Cut No. 4) °

and puil out the little pin under the valve seat. The valve may then be li
out by the head, . * . lifted

'

ah.

t-

\



— = — = -_ ca
How are Valves

| ground? . Answer No. 25

For this work use a good grinding paste of ground giaes and oil—procurable from

_ auto supply houses. A convenient way is to put a small amount in a suitable

o

dish, adding a spoonful or two of kerosense and a few drops of lubricating:oil to
make a thin paste.

Place the mixture sparingly on the
bevel face of the valve. Put the
vaive in position on the valve seat,
and rotate it back and forth (about

@ quarter turn) a few times, with a
Ford grinding tool. Then lift slight-
ly from the seat, change the position
and continue the rotation, and keep
on repeating this operation until the -
bearing surface is smooth and bright.
The valve should not be turned
through a complete revolution, as this

is apt to cause scratches running
around the entire circumference of the
valve and seat. When the grinding
is completed the valve should be re-
moved from the cylinder, thoroughly
washed with kerosene, and the valve
care sho taken that no abrasive indi

substance gets into the cytinders or Method of grinding valve. (Cut No. 5)
valve guides. This can be avoided

if the grinding paste is applied sparingly to the bevel face of the valve.
If the valve seat is worn badly or seamed, it is best to have it reseated with a valve
seating tool. This operation requires considerable skill, and perhaps had better be
done by an expert mechanic. Care should be exercised against making too deep a
cut, necessitating the retiming of the valve.

When the Valves and Push
Rods are worn—what?. Answer No. 26

When the valves or push rods become worn, 80 as to leave too much play between
them, thus reducing the lift of the valves and diminishing the power of the motor’,
it is best to replace the push rods with new ones. The clearance between the push
rods and the valve stem should never be greater than #,” nor leas than ¥4”. Ifthe
clearance is greater, the valve will open late and close early, resulting in uneven
running of the motor. If the clearancé is less than 4,” there is danger of the valve
remaining partially open all the time. If replacing the push rod does not give the
proper clearance, the valve should also be replaced. We do.not recommend draw-

ing out the valve stem, as the operation requires experience and the price of the
new part docs not warrant the time and expense necessary to properly do the work,

What about the
PaiugSiprings? ; Answer No. 27

Whees-ttie valves fail to seat themselves properly, there is a possibility that the
springgeney be weak or broken. A weak inlet spring would probably not affect
the rimming of the engine; but weakness in the exhaust valve spring causes a very «
uneven.action, which isdifficult tolocate. The symptoms area lag in the engine die
to the exhaust valve not closing inetantancously, and as a resulta certain percent-
s@° of the charge under compression escapes, greatly diminishing the force of the

THE FORD ENGINE  B



14 : TRE FORD MANUAL
explosion. Weeksiess in a valve spring can usually be detected by the following
method: Remove the plate which encloses them at the side of the cylinder and
jnsect 4 screw-driver between the coils of the spring while the engine is running,
If the extra tensiow thus produced causes the engine to pick up speed, the spring is
obviously wegk and should be replaced with a new one.

What cause “Knocking” Answer. No. 28
SWer- *

‘Flere are several causes, which may be enumerated as follows: (1) carbon kmock
which ia by far the most comman—resulting from carbonizing of cylinders; (2)
Knock caused by a too.advanced:spark; (8) connecting rod knock; (4) crank shaft
tain bearing Imock; (5) knock.duetoJoose-fitting piston or broken ring; (6) knock
aused by the piston striking the cylinder head gasket. When the engine knocks.
from any cavse whatsoever, the. matter should be promptly investigated by an
How inay the different _
Knocks be distinguished? . Answer No. 29
(t) ‘Phe carbon knock is a clear, hollow sound, most noticeable in climbing sharp
gvedes,-particularly when the engine is heated. It is also indicated by a sharp
rap immediately on advancing the throttle. (2) Too advanced spark will be
incinated by adult Imnock in the motor. (3) The connecting red knock sounds like
the distant tapping of steel wi a small hammer, and isreadily distinguished when
the car is. allowed to run idly down grade—or upon speeding the car to twenty-five
miles an hour, then suddenly closing the throttle, the tapping will be very distinct.
(4) The crank shaft main bearing knock ¢an be distinguished, when the car ig

going uphill, asadullthud. (5) ‘The loose piston knock is heard only upon suddenly’

e throttle, when the sound produced might be likened to a rattle. The
remedies for these knocks are treated under their proper division.

How is carbon removed from
Combustion Chamber? Answer No. 30

First, drain the.water off by opening the pet cock at the bottom of the radiator;
then disconnect the wires at the top of the motor and also the radiator connection
attached to the radiator. Remove the 15 cap screws which hold the cylinder head
in place. Take off the cylinder head and, with a putty knife or acrew-driver, scrape,
the carbonized matter from the cylinder head and top of pistons, being careful to
prevent the specks of carbon from getting into the cylinders or bolt holes. In re-
’ placing the cylinder head gasket turn the motor over 30 that No. 1 and No. 4
pistons are at top center; place the gasket in position over the pistons and then put
the cylinder head in place. Be sure and draw the cylinder head bolts down
evenly (i.-e., give each bolt a few turns at a time); do not tighten them on one end
“before drawing them up at the other. ,

How are Spark .
Plugs cleaned? Answer No. 31

After removing the plug from the engine the points may be cleaned with an old

tooth-brush dipped in gasoline. However, in order to do the work thoroughly, - |

the plug should be taken apart by securing the large hexagon steel shell in a vise
and loosening the pack nut which holds the porcelain in place. The car
deposits can then be easily removed from the porcelain and shell with 4.
imife.” Gare should be exercised not to scrape off the glazed surface of the porcelain, |
otlierwise it will be apt to carbonize quickly. The porcelain and other parts should
finally be washed in gasoline and wiped dry with a cloth. oe

~ . _—_



THE FORD ENGINE is

In assembling the plug care should be taken to see that the pack nut ia net tight-
ened too much so as to crack the porcelain, and the distance between’ the sparking
points should be 74", about the thickness of a smooth dime.

Dirty plugs usually result from an excess of oil being carried in the crank case—
or from using oil of poor quality.

How is the Power Plant ;
Femoved from Car? Answer No. 32.
(1) Drain the water out of the radiator and disconnect the radiator hose; *
(2) disconnect the radiator stay rod which holds it to the dash; ; _—
(3) take out the two bolts which fasten the radiator to the frame and take radiator

(4) disconnect the dash at the two supporting brackets which rest on the frame;
(5) loosen the steering post bracket, fastened to the frame, when the dash and
steering gear may be removed as one assembly—the wires first. having: been

(6) take out the bolts helding the font rad’us rods.in the gocket underneath the
crank case; ‘
(7) remove the four bolts at the universal joint; -

+

{8) remove pana on either side of cylinder casting and turn off gasoline, disconnect
feed pipe from carburetor; ‘

(9) disconnect exhaust manifold from exhaust pipe by unscrewing large brass
pack nut;

(10) take out the two cap screws which hold the crank case to the front frame;
(11) remove the bolte which hold the crank case arma to the frame at the side.
‘Then pass a rope through the opening between the two middie cylinders‘and tiein
a loose knot. Through the rope pass a “2x4,” or a stout iron pipe about ten feet
tong, and let a man hold exch end; ict a third man take hold of the starting crank
handle, when the whole power plant can be lifted from the car to the work bench
for adjustment. - ° . :

Connecting Rod Bearings
—how adjusted? Answer No. 33

Connecting rod bearings may be adjusted, without taking out the engine, by. the
following method: (1) drain off the oil; (2) remove plate on bottom of crank case—
exposing connecting rods; (3) take off first connecting rod cap, and draw-file the
endg—a very little at a time; (4) replace cap, being careful to see that file marks
correspond, and tighten bolts until it fits shaft snugly; (5) test tightness 6f bearing
by turning engine over by the starting handle. Experienced mechanics tisually
determine when the bearing is properly fitted by lightly tapping each side of the
cap with a hammer; (6) then loosen the bearing and proceed to fit the other
bearings in the same manner; (7) after each bearing has been properly fitted and
tested—then tighten the cap bolts and the work is fished. ;

Remember, there is a possibility of getting the bearings too tight, and under such
conditions the babbitt is apt to cut out quickly, unless precaution is taken to run
the motor slowly at the start. It is a good plan after adjusting the bearings to
jack,up the rear ‘wheels and let the motor run slowly for about two hours. (keeping
it well supplied with water aud oil) before taking it out‘on the road. Whenever
possible these bearings shonid be fitted by an expert Ford mechanic,

‘Worti connecting roda-snay be returned, prepaid, to the nearest dealer or branch
house for exchange at a price of $1.00 each to cover the cost of rebabbitting. Itis
not advisable for any owner or repair shop to attempt the rebabbitting of connect.
ing rods or main bearings, for without a.special jig in which to form the be



THE FORD MANUAL
satisfactory results will not be obtained. The constant tapping of a loose connect-
ing rod on the crank shaft will.eventually produce crystallization of the stecl—
result, broken crank shaft and possibly other parts of the engine damaged.

Crank Shaft Moin Beari
—how adjusted? earns Answer No. 34

Should the stationary bearings in which the crank shaft revolves become worm
‘(evidenced by a pounding in the motor) and need replacing or adjusting, proceed

Q) After the engine has been telen out of the car, semove crank case, trans-
mission cover, cylinder head, pistons, connecting rods, transmission and magneto

coils, Take off the three babbitted caps and clean the bearing surfaces with gaso-

line. Apply Prussian blue or red lead to the crank shaft bearing surfaces, which will
enable you, in fitting the caps, to determine whether a perfect bearing surface is
obtained, :

(2) Place the rear cap in pogition and tighten it wp as much as possible without
stripping the bolt threads. When the bearing has been properly fitted, the crank
shaft can be turned with one hand. If the crank shaft cannot be turned with one
hand, the contact between the bearing surfaces is evidently too close, and the cap
requires shimming up, one or two brass liners usually being sufficient. In case

. the crank shaft moves too easily with one hand, the shims should be removed and,
the steel surface of the cap filed off, permitting it to set closer.

(3) After removing the cap, observe whether the blue or red “spottings” indicate a
full bearing the length ofthe cap. If “‘spottings” do not show a true bearing, the
babbitt should be scraped and the cap refitted until the proper results are obtained.

(4) Lay the rear cap aside and proceed to adjust the center bearing in the same
mann a Repeat the operation with the front bearing, with the other two bearings.
d aside.

(5) When the proper adjustment of each bearing has been obtained, clean the
babbitt surface éarefully and place a little lubricating oil on the bearings, also.on
the crank shaft; then draw the caps up as closely as possible—the necessary shims,
of course, being in place. Do not be afraid of getting the cap bolts too tight, as
the shim under the cap and the oil between the bearing surfaces will prevent the
metal being drawn into too close contact. If oil is not put on the bearing surfaces,
the babbitt is apt to cut out when the motor is started up before the oil in the crank
cade can get into the bearing. In replacing the crank case and transmission cover
on the motor, it is advisable to use a new set of gaskets to prevent oil leaks,

,



The Ford Cooling System

Haw ia che - yy

Engine cooled? Answer No. 35
The heat generated by the constant giond in the engine would soc -overlgeat
is cooled by the circulation of water in jackets around the cylindera, ‘The hog i

extracted from the water by its passing through the thin metal tubing of the radia-
tor—to which are attached scientifically worked out fins, which assist in the rapid
radiation of the heat. The fan, just back of the radigtor, sucks the air aroundsthe
tubing—around which the air is also driven by: the forward movement of the car.
The belt should be inspected frequently and tightened when necessary—not ‘too
tight, however—by means of the adjusting screw in the fan bracket, Take upthe
slack till the fan starts to bind when turned by hand. ‘

Hon does the :
Water circulate? ; Answer No. '36

The cooling apparatus of the Ford car is known as the Thermo-syphon syatem.
It acts on the principle that hot water seeks a higher Jevel than cold watgr—
consequently when the water reaches a certain heat, approsimately 180
Fahrenheit, circulation commences and the. water flows ‘frgoa the lower radttij!
outlet pipe up through the water jackets, into the upper radiator water tank, And
down through the tubes to the lower tank, to repeat the process,

What are the causes of . ;
Overheating? Answer No.*37
(1) Carboniged cylinders; (2) too much driving on low spéeds.(3) spat a
too far; (4) poor ignition; (5) not enough or poor grade oil; (6} rading
clogged muffler; (8) improper carburetor adjustment; (9) fan not work

on account of broken or slipping belt; (10) improper circulation of +
clogged or jammed radiator tubes, leaky connections or low water. os

What should be done when the _ _
Radiator overheats? Answer No.

Keep the radiator full. Don’t get alarmed if it boils occasicnally—especial
driving through mud and deep sand or up long hills‘in extremely warm weath
Remember that the engine develops the greatest efficiency when the wateris hea
nearly to the boiling point. But if there is persistent overheating when the ff
is working under ordinary conditions—find the cause of the trouble and'ren
it. The chances are that the difficulty lies.in improper driving or car 2
cylinders, Perhaps twisting the fan blades at a greater angle to produce ghore
suction may bring desired results, By reference to the proper division of this'ook
each of the causes which contribute to an overheated radiator is
remedies suggested, No trouble can result from the filling of a
with waters

roviding the water system is not entirely empey—i Wh

the motor should ¢ allowed to cool before the cold water is in’

‘


The Thermo-Syphon Cooling System, showing course of water through water passages. (Cut No. 6)


allow the Neo enter into linider head connection and to How through the
waver jacket and pos phicc phy Arocha

Will the Radiator oo
Sreene in winter? Answer No. #0

Yes, unless an-anti-freezing solution is uséd.in the circulating sxstety
bound to experience trouble. ‘Aa the ciréulation doce not commence itl the
water becomes heated, it is apt to freeze at low temperature before it coninierives
to'circulate. In case any of the radiator tubes happen to be plugged or jammed
they are bound to frceze and burst open if the driver undertakes to get aleng
without rang non- freezing solution. Wood he denatured alcohol can be tiped
to good vantage. otlowing le gives freezing points o' tutions Gon-
taining different percentages of alcohol:
20% solution freezes at 15 degrees above zero.
30 ‘solution freezes at 8 degrees below zero.
p-solution freezes at 34 degrees below zero.
Awoluticn composed of 60% water, 110% glycerine and 30% alcohol is comm
used, its freezing point being abo & degrees below zero. ot
Ox account of evaporation fresh aeohal must be added frequently in. of:

*

How are leaks and jams in the - es
pperethsaninad Answer No. 441
A small be temporarily repaired by applying brown soap or white leal—
but the repair el Sn Uo ah ile ee cen Oa ag
ied ee ta ewith th Siecle, ts bom ca peicmpctoskned aaa

ie to

ond below the jam and invert the beavetinee
Say an bd Samed cr bos ers be a
install a new one.



iin Ta i Se

nt i

This cut illustrates the principle of Ford Carburetion.

»

(Cut No. 7)
