- . aa - ' a

The Gasoline System
The Carburetor—how

does it work? Answer No. 42
The carburetor is of the automatic float feed type, having but one adjustment:
shows how the gasoline enters the carburetor, is vaporized by a current Of aif and
passes through the inlet pipe to the engine in the form of an explosive mixture.
The gasoline, entering the bow! of the carburetor, gradually raises the float to.a
point where the inlet needle is forced upwards into its seat, thus cutting off the
flow of gasoline. As the gasoline in the bowl recedes, the float lowers, allowing
the needie to drop from ita seat and the flow of gasoline is resumed. It is plaia to
see that a constant level of gasoline is maintained in the carburetor by the auto-

matic action of float and needle. The quantity of gagoline entering into the mixture
is governed by the needle valve (see Answer No. 45). The volume of gas mixture
entering the intake pipe is controlled by opening and closing the throttle, accord-
ing to the speed desired by the driver.

Why is Carburetor adjustment
placed on dash? Answer No. 43

For the convenience of the driver in adjusting the carburetor. After the new car
has become thoroughly worked in, the driver should observe the angle ofthe car-
buretor adjusting rod at which the engine runa most satisfactorily. In cold
weather it will probably be found necessary to turn the dash adjustment one-
quarter turn to the left, particularly in starting a cold engine. As gasoline vapor-
izes readily in warm weather, the driver will find it economical to reduce the quan-
tity of gasoline in the mixture by turning the carburetor adjustment to the righ t
as far as possible without reducing speed. This is particularly true when 4
long drives where conditions permit a fair rate of speed being maintained, ahd

accounts for the excellent gasoline mileage obtained by.good drivers.

What is meant by a “lean”
and a “rich” Mixture? Answer. No. 44

A lean mixture has too much air and not enough gasoline. A rich mixture has go:
much gasoline and not enough air. A rich mixture will not only quickly coved
cylinders, pistons and valves with carbon, but will tend to overheat the cyli
and is likewise wasteful of the fuel. It will often choke the engine and cans s-
firing at slow speeds, although at high speeds the machine will run perfectly. The
mixture should be kept as lean as possible without the sacrifice of any of the power
of the motor. A lean mixture will often result in backfiring through thé carburetor.
for the reason that the gas burns slowly in the cylinder, and is still biteting when
the.inlet valve opens again, which causes the gas in the intake to ignite. A rich
mixture is shown by heavy, black exhaust smoke with a disagreeable smell.
Proper mixture will cause very little smoke or odor.

How is. the Carburetor gt

adjusted? , Answer No. 45
The yéual method of regulating the carburetor is to start the motor, advancing
the thivttle lever to ubotit the sixth notch, with the spark retarded fo-ahout the
fourth notch. The flow of gasoline should now be cut off by acrewing the needle

valve down to the right until the engine begins to misfire, then gradually. inere
the gasoline feed by opening the needle valve until the motor pickup and féathes
its highest speed and no trace of black amoke comes from the exhaust. Whenever
it is neceseary to turn, the adjusting needle down more thatia quarter turn ‘below
_ 7 ‘Pend

,


eee ————

92 _ THE FORD MANUAL

its normal position, the loti nut on. topvof the carburétac at the point through
which needle pesses should first be loosened, as otherwise it is impossible to tell
when the needle is turned down in its seat too far. Turning the needle down too
tightly will result in its becoming grooved and the seat enlarged. When these parts
are damaged it is difficult to maintain proper adjustment of the carburetor. Hav-

y determined the point where the motor runs at ite maximum speed, the needle
valve lock nut should be tightened to prevent the adjustment being disturbed. For
average running, a lean mixture will give better results than a rich one.

Why does water
clog the Carburetor? Answer No. 46

The presence of water in the carburetor or gasoline tank, even in small amounts,
will prevent easy starting and the motor will misfire and stop. As water is heavier
than gasoline it settles to the bottom of the tank and.into the sediment bulb along
with other foreign matter. As it is difficult nowadays to get gasoline absolutely
free from impurities, especially water, it is advisable to frequently drain the sedi-
ment bulb under the gasoline tank. During cold weather the water which accumu-
lates in the sediment bulb is likely to freeze and prevent the flow of gasoline
through the pipe leading to the carburetor. Should anything of this kind happen
itis possible to open the gasoline line by wrapping a cloth around the sediment
bulb and keeping it saturated with hot water for a short time. Then the water
should be drained off. In event the water gets down into the carburetor and
freezes, the same treatment may be applied.

What makes the
Carburetor leak? Answer No. 47

The flow.of gasoline entering the carburetor through the feed pipe is automati

regulated by the float needle raising and lowering in its scat. Should any particle
of dirt become lodged in the seat, which prevents the needle from closing, the
gasoline will overflow in the bowl of the carburetor and leak out upon the ground.

When there is dirt :
in the Carburetor—what? Answer No. 48

. The | nozzle of the carburetor having a very small opening, a minute
paticle of grit or other foreign matter will clog up the orifice, and result: motor will
béidn to misfire and slow down as soon as it has attained any considerable speed.
This is accounted for by the fact that at high speeds the increased suction will
draw the particles of dust, etc., into the nozzle. By opening the valve needle half a
turn and giving the throttle lever two or three quick pulls the dirt or sediment
will often be drawn through, when the needle may be turned back to its original
place. If this does not accomplish the purpose, the carburetor should be drained.

If Engine runs too fast or chokes

with throttle retarded—what? Answer No. 49

If the engine runs too fast with throttle fully retarded unacrew the carburetor
throttle lever adjusting screw until the engine idles at suitable speed. Uf the motor
chokes and when throttle is fully retarded the adjusting screw should be

screwed in un’ it strikes the bose, preventing the throttle from closing too far.

When proper adjustment has been made, tighten lock-screw so that adjustment
will not be disturbed.

What is the
the Hot dir Pipa? a Answer No. §0

It takes the hot air from around the exhaust pipe and conducts it to the catbure-

tor—where the heat facilitates the yaporiging:of the gasoline. It is usually advis- ‘

.-

te 8 Pel - uJ

‘
4
d
‘
&

t
é


Shiguild Priming Rod be used in
starting whan Motor is warm?

Teedle down (to the right) Snes

t inonder to exhaust the cee : ‘As sped aa the motor
She ale ete ee ae he soo

of




+ —---.

- - eee —— i pe

Phat ia the purpose o ;
the Ignition System? . Answer No. 53

It furnishes the electric spark which explodes the charge in the combustion cham-
ber, thus producing the power which runs the engine. It is important that the
charge be correctly ignited at the proper time, in order to obtain satisfactory .
results in running the cer. In the Ford car the ignition ayetem is as aimple.ag it is ‘N
possible for human invention to make it, |

How does the Magneto
generate the current? Answer No. 54

In revolving at the same rate of speed as the motor, the magnets on the flywheel
passing the stationary coil spools create an alternating low tension electri¢ current
in coils of wire which are wound around spools fastened to the stationary part of
the magneto, and is carried from these coils to the magneto connection (wire)

mane «

leading to the coil box of the dash. vot ae
Adjustment be diaturbed? _ Amawer . vo. 55
The present atyle of coil_unit is properly adjusted when it Iesves the factory and '

this dajust ‘be disturbed unless to install new points or:
the gap between the points which may have increased fragi-wear. Wherijadjust- |
mentyare necessiry they should, whenever possible, be mais by"
statignes, who have special equipment for testing and aejtist

a fing dawble-faced file and the adjusting thumb nut turned down 20 # h the
spring held down the gap between the points will be a trifle Jess than. inch.

Then: set the lock nut so that the adjustment can not be disturbed:(Do not

bendior hammer on the vibrators, as this would affect the operafian’ ahion |
Howzis a Weak Mt
Unit'detected?!- hos - wariswersid, 56

With the vibrators properly adjusted, if any particular cylinder fails or seems to
develop only a weak action, change the position of the unit to determine if the
fault ig actually in the unit. The first symptom of'a defective unit is the buzzing of }
the vibrator with no spark at the plug. Remember that a loose wire connection, .
faulty spask plug, or worn commutator may catme irregularity in the running
of the motor. These are points that should be considered before laying the blame
on :

How may short circuit in . 4
Commutator Wiring be detected? Answer Ne, 57 ,
Should the insulation of the primary wires (running from coil to commititator)

become worn to stich an.eéxtent that the copper wire is exposed—the current will
leak. out (i. e. short circuit) whenever contact with the engine pan or other metal
parte is made. A steady buzzing of one of the coil units will indicate a “éhért’’ in
the wiring. When driving-the car the engine. will suddeniy lag end pound on
aceount of the premature explosion. Be careful not to crank the engine downward
against compression when the car is inthis condition, es the “short” is apt to. :
cause a vigorous kick back.

{284

ety Ci


26 THE FORD MANUAL

Does Coil Adjustment. oa a
affect starting? Answer No, 58

Yes. When the vibrators are not properly adjusted more current is required to
make and break the contact between the points, and, as a result, at cranking
speeds you would not get a spark between the spark plug points. Do not allow
the contact points to become “ragged,” otherwise they are apt to stick and cause
unnecessary difficulty in starting, and when running they are apt to produce an
occasional “miss” in the engine.

What is the purpose of
the Commutator? Answer No. 59

The commutator (or timer) determines the instant at which the spark plugs must
fire. It effects the “make and break” in the primary circuit. The grounded wire
in the magneto allows the current to flow through the metal parts to the metal
roller in the commutator. Therefore, when the commutator roller in revolving

The Ford Commutator. (Cut No. 9)
connected with a coil unit, an electrical circuit is passed through the entire system
of primary wires. This circuit is only momentary, however, as the roller passes
over the contact point very rapidly and sets up the circuit in each unit as the roller
touches the contact point connected with that unit. The commutator should be
kept clean and well oiled at all times.

What about
the Spark Plugs? Answer No. 60

One is located at the top of each cylinder and can easily be taken out with the
spark. plug wrench included with every car, after the wire connection is removed.
The high voltage current flows out of the secondary coils in the coil box and on
reaching the contact points in each spark plug it is forced to jump a ¥;" gap,
thereby forming a spark which ignites the gasoline charge in the cylinders.

The spark plugs sliould be kept clean (i. ¢., free from carbon) and should be re-
placed if they peréist in not working properly. There is nothing to be gained by
experimenting with different makes of plugs.. The make of plugs with which Ford
engines are.equipped when they leave the factory are best adapted to the require-
ments of our motor, notwithstanding the opinion of various garage men to the


THE FORD IGNITION 8YSTEM | 27

contrary. All wire connections to spark plugs, coil box and commutator should,
of course, at all times be kept in perfect contact.

What are the indications of
Ignition trouble? : Answer No. 61

The uneven sputter and bang of the exhaust means that one or more cylindera are
exploding irregularly or not at all, and that the trouble should be promptly located
and overcome. Misfiring, if allowed to continue, will in time injure the engine and
the entire mechanism. If you would be known as a good driver you will be satis-
fied only with a soft, steady purr from the exhaust. If anything goes wrong, stop
and fix it if possible—don’t wait until you get home.

How can one tell which
Cylinder is missing? ‘ - Answer No. 62

This is done by manipulating the vibrators on the sperk coils. Open the throttle
until the engine is running at a good speed and then bold down the two outside
vibratora,.No. 1 and No. 4, with the fingers, so they cannot buzz. This cuts out
the two corresponding cylinders, No. 1 and No. 4, leaving only No. 2 and No. 3
running. If they explode regularly it is obvious the trouble is in either No. lor No.
4. Relieve No. 4 and hold:down No. 2 and No. 3 and also No. 1; if No. 4 cylinder
explodes evenly it is evident the misfiring is in No. 1. In this manner all of the
cylinders in turn can be tested until the trouble is located. Examine both the spark
plug and the vibrator of the missing cylinder.

The § ‘probably due to an iniproperly eépted

eee ty et ty Jor

e commutator wiring.

sho

dete: ‘by lifting the starting crank

cylin turn, a strong or com, in any pur

detecfeq.. 1¢ sometimes happens that the cylindet hesd

les ng the gat under compressiofi to egvape, a ‘cog

deteckey by running a littielubricating oil around the edge of the gateteny

ing whether bubbles appear. or not, - re a “Fy
Does'g worn Commutator Te 7 a

ever cause misfiring? . Answer No. 64

nilafiring occurs when running at high speed, inspect the coftimptator.
Mittace of the circle around which roller (see Cut No. 9) travelg should be
clean anid smooth, so that the roller makes a perfect contact at all points, If the
§ falle to raake a good contact on any one of the four contact points, ites
‘cylinder will not fire. Clean these surfaces, if dirty. In case the ffbze, con-

tact pe nd roller of the ¢ommutator are badly worn the most satisfactory
remeiy ia to replace them with new parts. The spring should be strong enough to
make ¢firm contact between the roller points if they are worn or dirty. {

Com : 65
cap sete whith i 2 pe-on top of time. gi will

readily removed. Unscrew lock nut; withdraw steel brush cap and drive out the
retaining pin. The brush can then be remnoved from the carn shaft,



a8 THE FORD MANUAL
ye Pr SPSS

| Tn replacing the brush, care must be exercised to see that it is replaced so that the
exhaust valve on the first cylinder is closed when the brush points upward. This

| may be ascertained by removing the valve door and observing the operation of No.
1 valve.

|

|

Does. cold weather affect
the Commutator? Answer No. 66

It is a well-known fact that in cold weather even the best grades of lubricating oil
are apt to congeal to some extent. If this occurs in the commutator it is very apt
to prevent the roller from making perfect contact with the contact points imbedded
in the fibre. This, of course, makes difficult starting as the roller arm spring is not
stiff enough to brush away the film of oil which naturally forms over the contact ‘
points. To overcome this, as well as any liability of the contact points to rust, we a
recommend a mixture of 25% kerosene with commutator lubricating oil, which will ¢
thin it sufficiently to prevent congealing, or freezing, as it is commonly called. You

have probably noticed in starting your car in cold weather that perhaps only one

or two cylinders will fire for the first minute or so, which indicates that the timer

is in the condition described above and as a consequence a perfect contact is not

being made on each of the four terminals,

How is the
| Magneto removed? Answer No. 67

| It is necessary to take the power plant out of the car (see Answer No. 32) in order
| to remove the magneto. Then remove crank case and transmission cover—take
out the four cap screws that hold the flywheel to the crank shaft. You will then

. .

a wy i, 4,
ao ms a. Li oa

The Ford Magneto. The flywheel, with magnets revolves while
magneto coils remain stationary. (Cut No. 10)

og |



When the the Magneto
gets out of eee

iy secre f th

80 ¢ faces'o' ¢ magnets are ag

just gy of aninch. Totake out the old misigne
{' bronte screw which holds each in oaete 6 '

the trouble tea week current catiecd by w v

crank case cover.
Co eae nee eaee after f
regnoved.



Stow Speed Or
7 uch. Bases,
Flywheel — ee x . . Clutch Dise Drum
Fly Wheel | | a
Ring Gear

Transmission showing all gears in mesh. (Cut No. 11)
