ih

Aale Housing Bolt

Diferensial Gear Cave Boh Nut
Ditforensal Gear Case Bolt Cont
Differential Gear Case Bolt
Differernst:Geat Care
Axte'Shat Bearing Cone
A” Rea Se heee Axle Stats Bearing Balt
‘Axle Sah Dus Axle Shalt Ball Bearing Cup \
= Rear Hub Ale Shaty Felt Rerawer Plne\,
Anke ‘Shot: TB evig ‘Axe Shale t Eel Retuner Cup

Aste Hersing Tube yen Howung tlefp..
Ante Shaft .

be tas > a ee 3 ee

Axle Shalt Bearing Retaner
‘Axle Shati Beanng Felt
= fst Shaft Bearing Re lamer Wanker
aig oe ee Lever
Beate ec a

pander Nia
Bate pander Ba Caner
eae E oak Aa Ad Collar
‘Bre Aa or: Adasstinernn
Bone xparuder’ kn Fie

pander
Brake Expareder

Hous Plate-tLefiy

Truck Rear Axle—Longitudinal View. (Cut No. 20)

‘

ee

a

Aale Fouvwng. Gasker ¢
Ade Houng Bol eee ‘
= Anie Mousey Bolt "Cottee:

Ez,

Daterena fen inven Shaft
ale Houser

_ Differerina ‘on

- Differennel Gear



a - : '

[a . Dine Sha Tube Pl Sc

\ Owe Shafi
_ Drove Shaft Tube

-Drive Shaft Tube Flange
\- Dre Shafi Tube Flange Rwvet ;
ave Shaft 1. Worn Coupling oe
‘Shaft so Weer Coupling Fin on a

WN Wear
. Pier t ar-sey sel

Differential. Gear Case -
Wore Ger vo
meal t
% . = ar a 1
; : * “tes '

Truck Rear Axle—Cross Section showing Worm and Worm Gear. (Cut No. 21)



Starter and Generator Units.

(Cut No. 22)

Armature Shaft

Generator Driving
Pinion

__ ee ol


Of what does the Starting anal ,
Lighting System consist? Answer No. 1 Dp
motor, generator, » anmeter, and » together with the neces,
sary wiring and connections, ey ‘
Where is the 7
Starter located? . Answer No. 118
The starting motor is mounted on the left-hand side of the engine and bolted to
the transmission cover. When in operation the phtion oti the Bendix drive shaft
engages with the teeth on the flywheel.

What if the Engine ;

Sails to, start? Answer No. 119

If the: starting motor is turning the crank shaft over and the engine fails to start,

the trouble is not in the starting system. In this event release the button at once

sO as Not to unnecessarily discharge the battery and inspect the carburetor and:

ignitién system to determine the trouble. . .

What ¥ the Starting _ 7

Motor fails to act? Answer No. 120

If the! starting motor fails to act, after pushing the button, firet inspect the tere

minal‘on the starting motor, the twe terminals on the battery and the two. ter-

minalg on starting switch, making sure all of the connections are tight; thew ‘
cxamine the wiring for a break in the insulation that would cause a short circuit,
If the wiring and connections are O. K. and the starting motor fails to act, test t
the battery with a hydrometer. If the hydrometer reading is less than 1.225) ’
the trouble is no doubt due to a weak or discharged battery. . *

What if the driver steps on Starting ,
Button when engine is running? Answer No. 1h :

Should, the driver accidentally step on the starting button while the engine oY “x

running, no harm will result, The pinion, merely touches the revolving Sywheel .- *
* pear once and immediately rotates with the threaded shaft out of contact withthe ,

flywheel, inthe same manner as when it has been disengaged by the engine’s

starting. : : .

’
{
How is the Ganerator ee og oot *
The generator is mounted on the right-hand side of the engine and bolted ta
cylinder front end cover. It.is operated by the pinion ost © sématre

operation of cutting 2 in-and cutting cut at suitable speeds is accomifiished by the __
cut-out, which is mounted on the generator. This cat-out is, property st the, ‘

. : , , S87

t a .
* _ 3 alder é ‘ .
ae” ae, a oe ee . eg a an





THE FORD STARTING AND LIGHTING
What about
Oiling? Answer No. 123

The starting motor is lubricated by the Ford splash system, the same aa the
engine and transmission. The generator ie lubricated by a splash of oil from the
time gears. In addition an oil cup is located at the end of the generator housing
and a few drope of oil should be applied occasionally.

What should be done when
repairing the Ignition? Answer No. 124

The introduction of a battery current into the magneto will discharge the magnets
and whenever working on the ignition system or wiring do not fail to discontiect
the positive wire from the battery. The end of this wire should be wound with
tape to prevent its coming in contact with the terminal again.

How does the
Ammeter operate? Answer No. 125

The ammeter is located on the instrument board. This indicator registers
“‘charge”’ when the generator is charging the battery and ‘‘discharge” when the
lights are burning and the engine not running above 10 miles per hour. At an
engine speed of 15 miles per hour or more the ammeter should show a reading
of from 10 to 12. If the engine is running above 15 miles per hour and the
ammeter does not show a proper reading, first inspect the terminal posts on the
ammeter, making sure that the connections are tight, then disconnect the wire
from the terminal on generator, and with the engine running at a moderate
speed, take a pair of pliers or a screw-driver and short-circuit the terminal stud
on the generator to the generator housing. If the generator is O. K., a good live
spark will:be noted. (Do not run the engine any longer than is necessary
with the terminal wire disconnected.) Next inspect the wiring from the generator

; through the ammeter, to the battery for a break in the insulation that would
. result in a short-circuit. If the trouble is not located, then remove the dust’

cap from the end of generator and thoroughly clean the generator commutator,
using for this work a fine grade of sandpaper which has been slightly oiled.
With the motor running hold the sandpa; against the commutator with
the fingera until all dirt h&s been removed a bright surface attained.

How are the Lights |
operated? . Answer No. 126

The lighting system consists of two headlights and a tail light operated by a
combination lighting and ignition switch located on the instrument board:
headlamp bulbs are of 6-8 volt, double filament type. The major filament is
18 candle-power, and the minor filament is 234 candle-power. The small bulb
used in the-tail light is of 6-8 volt, single contact, two candle-power type. All
of the lamps are connected in parallel so that the burning out or removal of any
one of them will not affect the other. Current for the lamps is supplied by the
battery. Do not connect the lights to the magneto as it will reault in burning
out the bulBs and might discharge the magnets, Cut No, 23 shows the different
circuita and the course of the current.

What about repairing '
Starter and Generator Answer No. 127

If either the starter or generator fails to give proper service, the owner should at
once consult an authorized Ford dealer. Owners should not attempt to
repair or adjust the mechanism of the starter and generator. :

¥

a | a ~_ ae : i



5 _ _— 3
2 _ . THE FORD MANUAL oo, {
How is the Starter
. removed? Answer No. 128
+ ‘When removing the starter to transmission bands, or for any other reason,
y first remove the engine pan on left-hand side of the engine and with a screw- ~
. deiver remove the four emall screws holding the shaft cover to the transmission
edver. Upon removing cover and gasket, turn the Bendix drive shaft around
+ +0 that the eet screw ori the’end of the shaft is at the top. Immediately gy
. the set screw is placed a lock washtr, designed with lips or
2 _Ofiposite each other. One of these is turned against the collar a
“other ‘fs turned up against the side of the screw head. Bend back
- 5 which has been forced against the screw and remove the set-screw. As
washer will no doubt be broken or weakened in removing the starter, an

housing to the transmission cover, and/pull out the

same down through the chassis this ie why it was necessary to

the engine pan. Extreme care should be used in removing the Bendix

misplaced nor lost and that they aré replaced

fn thelr forms former position. In replacing the starter, be sure that the terminal

connection is placed at the top. If the car is to be operated with the starter

.. removed, be sure to put the transmission cover plates in position. These plates
may be obtained from the nearest dealer.

atl
ik
i
ap
4

How is the Bendix sprive
assembled to the Start-
* ing Motor? Answer No. 129

too tight; also chat the Dosing ie be rene, atten
- -with the bracket. The bearing itiahd be cles end then Sted so that it can be 4
. tgrned readily with the fingers. If the bearing is too tight, it should be dressed
doen with an oil stone. Too tight 2 fit will cause the bearing to freeze to the |
bracket, resulting in serious damage to the starter. ' :

-i{6w is the Generator ;
eel - Answer No. 130
‘ahit is found necemary to remove the-eenerator, Sat 'take ont the ches cap
Genes! thal generator and feent end cover, Sos toontotor maybe forced of te
poiand snerator and front end cover, the generator may be forced off the
: ‘Alwaya start at the top of the generator and force it backward

‘at tie-same time. Plates maybe obtained from the negrest dealer
be time gear if the car is to be operated with the generator removed.

' i sl oe te Answer No. 131

When installing the, generator, the drive pinién must be properly meshed with

the large time gear. The generator Peder Uletk ead the rashine at the

generator is bolted is separate from the block and the meshing of the

generator driving pinion with the large.time gear can be regulated by the use of h

one or more paper gaskets between the bracket ard the cylinder block. The ;
bracket should rest tightly on the crankcase gasket add line up with the fate of

J

_

a +} 1 : cy Lee gh . _ 7 an? ae -d


Can pEngine be run with the n
Genergtor disconnected from ,
the battery? Answer No. .132

“If for aty. reason the engine is run with the generator disconnected from from the bet-

tery, as or. a block test, or when battery been removed for repair or retharging,
be sure that generator is grounded bg running-a wire from the terminal on.
generator to one of-the dust cover the yoke. Two strands of shipping
tag wire be ufled for this p sure that the cannections at ‘beth
ends of the wire are tight. Fal oho nag ct th
generator disconnected from the -battiry will result in serious injury to the

ator. Never ground the genevator through the cut-out.

Whai ¢: Botte ‘’
is used? a ~ y. . Answer No. 133

The Ford, ing System pses a six-volt, three-cell battery.

Answer No. 134

%, gee
ai

gee

ae ae

Raysere

?)
5
$

indicate “complete

hydrometer shows the lesa
than one-half , it should be taken
to the nearest authorized Battery Service
Station for opera-
half-charged condition is injurious to the Beles ty somewhat
or deflated tire is injurious to the tire, Before. replacing the

of the discharged condition should be removed. "Tt may may be"

nds in the car wiring or to the electri having gotten
that the battery is ot keene ied with the proper
the generator. If the reading ix ceil is mote than

ae gy" ee
—" ‘e/ tam. om a an

beter
*



THE FORD MANUAL

50 points different from the others, it indicates that the cell is not in good ofiter
and the tyatiery should be taken to a skilled service man for attention.

ms stat water be an Answer No. 135.

Aa nething but pure wate othe ces and doit often enough to keep the plates
covered at all times. The solution (electrolyte) should be maintained
level with the bottom of the filling tube. Distilled water, melted arti
(but not natural) ice and rain water, if obtained in the open country from.
clean slate or shingle-covered roof, are generally satisfactory. All water
battery use should be kept in clean, covered vessels of glass, china, earthenw@
rubber or lead. In cold weather add water only immediately before
engine so that the charging will mix the water and electrolyte, and avoid
ing. Hf, for any reason, it is necessary to add acid, the battery should. be t
to an authorized Servi ice Station.

He

What care should be given the . - gas
Filling Plugs and Connections? Answer No. 136

Keep the filling plugs and connections tight and the top of the battery
Wiping the battery with a rag moistened with ammonia will counteract the effe
of. any of the sohution which may be on the dw of the’ A

of heavy oil or vaseline will protect the cofinectors from

battery firmly secured in position. If clanipe. aré-loose, the
about in the compartment and résult in loos¢ connections, broken cells and o

tranble. If repairs are necessary or if the & fo be laid up for the
take the battery to a skilled : man for. attention and. storage.
‘net entrust the battery to in or willed band ;



THE FORD MANUAL

Summary of Engine Troubles and Their Counta

ENGINE FAILS TO START

-2, Water in gasoline.

3.° Vibrators adjusted too close.

4.. ‘Water or congealed oil in commu-
| tator.

'§, Magneto contact point (in trans.
Meee obstructed with foreign
matter.

6. Gasoline supply shut off.
7. Carburetor frozen (in zero weather).

‘8. Water frozen in gasoline tank
sediment bulb.

oo Coil switch off.

ENGINE LACKS | POWER—RUNS
-IRREGULARL

; At Low Speeds.

1. Poor compression—account leaky
‘valves.

2. Gas mixture too rich or too lean.
3. Spark plugs dirty.
4. Cbdil vibrator improperly adjusted.
| S Air leak in intake manifold.
6. Weak exhaust valve spring.

, 7. Too great clearance between valve
, eter and push rod.

| 8. Too close gap between spark plug

‘At High Speeds.
1. ‘Commutator contact imperfect.
3. Too much gap in spark plug.
4, Imperfect gas mixture,

ENGINE STOPS SUDDENLY ~, |

1. Gasoline tank empty...
Water in gasoline.
3. Flooded carburetor.
4. Dirt in carburetor or feed pips:
5. Magneto wire foose at either
terminal.

6. Magneto contact point obstructed.
Overheated—account lack of oil

or water.
8 Gas mixture too lean. ta
@ @
ENGINE OVERHEATS
1. Lack of water.
2. yack of oil.

3. Fan belt torn, loose or slipping.

4. Carbon deposit in combustion
chamber.

5. Spark retarded too far.
6. Gas mixture too rich.

7. Water circulation retarded ‘by
sediment in radiator. .

8 Dirty spark plugs.

ENGINE KNOCKS

1. Carbon deposit on piston heads.
2. Loose connecting rod bearing.
3. Loose crank shaft bearing.

4. Spark advanced too far.

