What about the * ‘+ ‘
Wheels?

. pijabvloniie should, after packer i come to rest with the tire valve ety: be
the hub. Undue wear of the hub bearings is usually caused by eee oft 28 -
cation and excessive friction, due to the adjusting cone being screwed up ea
tight. It is a good plan to clean the bearings frequently and keep the -

; filled with grease.

How are'the
I heels removed? Answer Ne. 8

Front wheels: Take off hub remove cotter pin

wheel removed. Care should a ie taken to oct that the Kk ROB
replaced on the same spindle from which they. were removed, otherwise. thd
a liability of stripping the threads which are feft on the left spindle end rightop'

opposite as you stand facing the car. Rear wheels: They should not be remg
unless: absolutely necessary—in which case proceed as abdve, then wi hal woe
puller remove the wheel from the tapered shaft to which & ig lacked

In replacing rear wheels be sure that nut on axle shaft Sight as as ite ete
cotter pin in place. The hub caps of the rear wheels ble 8
ally and the lock nuts which hold the hub in place mote f'these mits

are allowed to work loose, the resulting play on the hub key may eventuny
_ twist off the axle shaft.

How does the setting of the Front Wheels $o

differ from. that of the Rear Wheels? Answer No.

It will be observed that the front wheels are ‘“‘dished;"’ that. is,, the’
given a slight outward flare to enable them to meet: ‘with!
resistance—while the spokes of the rear wheels are
are also placed at an engle—that is to say, the di:
front wheels i is about three inches greater than be
give ¢ perfect steering qualities and.to save wear on tk
t wheels should not, however, “toe-in” at :
than & quarter of en inch, Lines drawn along the outsidt of:
latter are ‘straight in a forward position should be: Peraliel.
always’ be kent i in proper alignment, otherwise steering will-
wear gréatly increased. Adjustment can be made by tutning,
left end of the spindle connecting rod, to draw the wheels into @'p

What. obbout ingtalling
g Cups?



—EEE—E——M—_—X -

Sectional view of Hub showing Roller Bearings.

(Cut No. 17)



THE RUNNING GEAR _ «3

He the Roller Beari “
installed? renee Answer No. 92

First, pack the hub full of clean good quality cup grease. Take the inner cone
with its rollers and pack it with grease, filling all of the space around and between
the rollers. Then place the inner cone in the larger cup. Next, drive the dudt
ring with felt washer into the inner end of the hub eo that it is flush with the end
of the hub,

Place the whee! carrying the inner bearings with dust ring on the epindle.’ The
inner cone ie a one-thousandth fit, or, in other words, a slip fit on the spindle.
(See Cut No. 17.) It is never necessary to force the cone onto the epindie as the
cups are forced into the hub. Pack the outer or threaded conc rollera with
cup grease, filling all the space between the rollers, as was done with the inner cone.
The cones are made up in right- and left-hand threads to correspond to the threads
on the spindles. Cave should be taken that a right-hand threaded cone is not
forced onto a left-hand threaded spindle. The right-hand thread is on the left-
hand side of the car, while the left-hand thread is on the right-hand side of the
car. Place the cone on the spindle, running it up tight enough eo that the wheel ©
seema to bind; give the wheel a few turns to te Sure that all the working parte
are in perfect contact; then back off the cone 14 to }4 a turn which will be suf-
ficient to allow the wheel to revolve freely without end play: To determine if

spindle to take up any play while testing the bearings. Next, put on the spindle
washer and nut, drawing the nut to a firm bearing. Make sure that the cone
has not been forced out of adjustment. This can be determines PY eae, ail
wheel a few turns. Insert the cotter pin which locks the nut on the spiridie, fill
the hub cap with grease and screw it in place on the hub.

Hi ‘ten should the ,
Booties be labricuted? ' Answer No. 93

Every three or four months the wheels should be removed, the old grease taken
out and the hubs and bearings thoroughly cleansed with kerosene. Then repack
the hub and bearings with clean grease and readjust the bearings.

What care do
the Springs need? Answer No. 94

The springs should be lubricated frequently with oll or graphite. To do this,
pry the leaves apart near the enda arid insert the lubricant between them. When-
ever a cat is given a general overhauling, the springs should be disassembled and
the leaves polished with emery cloth, afterwards packing them with graphite
when reassembling. Rust can be prevented from accumulating on the spri

by painting them when necessary with a quick drying black paint. You will,
find that these suggestions if carried out will not only improve the riding qualities |

of the cat but prolong the life of the parts as well. 2
Should Spring Clips
be kept tight? Answer No, 95
Yea, If the spring clipe are allowed to work loose the entire strain is put on the. .

to be sheared off and allow the frame and body to shift a trifle to one side, ft
t heared | and body. trifle t0 one sie ae



eo as oe - ' inde os ~~ ~ ee
Fr THE FORD MANUAL ,
snenethegemaneemn : ithe .

Wheat about the Stgering Se ar a
Apparatus? Answer No. 96

It is exceedingly gipple and will need little care—except, of course, proper lubri-
. cation. The post’ gears which are arranged in the “sun and planet” form are
By lneotion” ae. of the Post just below Ube bub of the wheel (see Cut No. 1).
steering wheel—they may readily be inspected and replenished with grease. To
remove the steering wheel, unecrew the nut on top of the post and drive the wheel
off the shaft with a block of wood and hammer.

How is Steerin, . .
Gear tightened? _ Answer No. 97

Should the steering gear become loose, that ia, so that a slight movement of the
- wheel does not produce immediate results, it may be tightened in the following
manner: Disconnect the two halves.of the ball socketa which surround the bali

arm at the lower end of the steering post and file off the surface until they fit.
anugly around the ball, If the ball is badly worn it is best to replace it with a new
“one. Also tighten the ball caps.at the other end of the steering gear connecting
3 rod in the same manner. If the bolts in the steering spindle arms appear to be
é loost, the brass biishings should be replaced with new ones (see Cut No. 16).
i Excessive play in the front axle may be detected by grasping one of the front
J wheels by the spokes and jerking the front.axle back and forth, After the car
wy haa. been in service two or three years excessive play in the steering gear may
‘ - * make necessary the renewal of the little pinions, as well as the brass internal.gear

a just underneath the steering wheel spider.
It is. aleo acivisable to inspect the front spring and front spring perches occasionally
to determine whether or not new bushings are necessary to overcome any exces-
ve. vibration,



' .
ta al Pc

Lubrication Chart. (Cut No. 18)

a


THE FORD LUBRICATING SYSTEM a7

Don’t be afraid to put a little oil into the commutator every other day—at least
every 200 miles, Remember that the commutator roller revolves very rapidly,
and without sufficient lubrication the parts soon become badly worn. When
in this condition perfect contact between the roller and the four contact points is
impossible, as a result the engine is apt to misfire when running at a good rate

of speed.

Oiling the Ford Commutator. (Cut No. 19)

What about Lubricating
the Differential? Answer No. 103

Do not make the mistake of putting too much grease in the differential housing.
The housing should not be more than one-third full. The differential is supplied
with the required amount of lubricant when the car leaves the factory. The
oil plug should be removed about every 1000 miles and more grease added if
necessary. If a fluid grease is used the level should be approximately one and
one-half inches below the oil hole.


Care of the Tires
How are Ford

Tires removed? Answer No. 104

rts jack up the ri clear of ave road. The Naive cap should be unscrewed,
nut aa Vien ve stem into tire until its bead is
a : tra dee up te ad of th se the stn of

rie of the driver
shoe fa handy ins cae of ones bs the other two ar

sti handy ina'caae ofa “one-man j

@anipuiated in working the shoe clear of the rim. Aftet fre recing & |

Fe ee ae ce ae ete eaee ot eeceoncd ont “patehed Teadily
' detachig- the hands, and the damaged inner tube removed
or

S tube-inserted. Always use plenty of sodpstone in replacing Maal inner

+ - 1 *
How a Distnes |
repaitgd? Answer No. 105
Sho ; casing be cut so there ig danger of the inner tube being Bic through
it, a te ry tepair c can. be mae be cementing a canvas patch on ‘inside
of the j i: plying. the pa ich the part of the casing affe | should

a ssement applied i bo both and

To prolong the life of the tire casings, any small cuts in the tread should be filled
with patching cement and a specially prepared “plastic” sold by the tire com-
panies.

How may Tire Expense .
be reduced? Answer No. 106

Tire cost constitutes one of the most important items in the running expenses of
an automobile. To get the most service at the least expense, the tires should be-
inspected frequently and. all small cuts or holes properly sealed or repaired—
thus preventing dirt and water working in between the rubber tread and the fabric,
causing blisters or sand boils.
Tires should never be run partially deflated, as the side walls are unduly bent
and the fabric is subject to stresses which cause what is known as rim cutting.
The chances of getting a puncture will be greatly reduced by keeping your tires
properly inflated, as a hard tire exposes much less surface to the road than a soft
tire, and also deflects sharp objects that would penetrate a soft tire. .
Running a tire flat, even for a short distance, is sure to be costly. Better run
on the rim, very slowly and carefully, rather than on a flat tire.
Remember that fast driving and skidding shorten the life of the tires. Avoid
locking the wheels with the brakes—-no tire will stand the strain of being dragged
over the pavement in this fashion.
Avoid running in street car tracks, in ruts, or bumping the sides of the tire against
= curbing.

_ The wheel rims should be painted each season and kept free from rust.

tay

va ae . me ra “* > ~e 2 - La a > a



dnedigMpould be jacked up to
Af the car is ISG up for aaeny months it is best to
store them in a dark room not exposed to extreme temperatures. Remove. oil

Inner Tube repaired? Answer No. 107

A cement patch is not usually perianent and the tube should be vulcanized as .

soon as possible. Ia replacing the tire on rith be very careful not to pinch
tul



the running gear may be removed with a gasoline-
nickeled parts may be polished with any good metal

8
‘<
g

Answer No. 109

When putting the top down be careful in folding to see that the fabric is not
pinched between the bow spacers, as they will chafe a hole through the top very
quickly. Applying a good top dressing will greatly ituprove the appearance of
an top.

What should'be done whe .
the Car is stored? ™e Answer) No. 110

Drain thie water from the radiator, and then put in about a quart of denatured
fall the gasoline. Drain the dirty oil from the crank case and cleanse the engine
with kerosene as directed in Answer No. 101. Refill the crank case with fresh
the’tires and store them away. Wash up the car, and if possible cover the body
with a ‘sheet of muslin to-protect the finish.
- What attention do the Electric
Head Lights require? Answer No. 111
“ery little. When the cars leave our factory the lamps are properly focused
‘and unless the bulb burns out there should be no occasion for rémoving the door,
as there is nothing to get out oforder. Should the door be removed for any reason
_ care should be exercised not to touch the silver-plated reflector or the bulb with
“© anything but a soft, clean rag, preferably flannel. To focus the lamps turn the
{ adjusting ecrew in the back of Inimp in either direction until the desired! focus is
| attain



The Ferd Model T Que Tow Fruck

Do the Instructions relative to _
the Car apply to the Truck? Answer No, 112

ee ee Teo nd Bee Oar ate applicable to the trate, with the-cxnsp-
tion of Nos. 79, &0 and 81,

How are the Rear Azle
and Differential disassembled? Answer No. ‘jl 3

With the universal joint disconnected, remove the bolt in front end of rgdlua sods

and the cap screws which hold the drive shaft tube to the rear axle housing.

Then remove the rear axle housing cap; also the bolts which hold the two halves

of the differential housing together. With the differential exposed to, view, the '
manner of disassembling it will be apparent. Care must be exercised to. get ’
every part back in its correct position when reassembling, being-sure fo use new
paper liners.

How is the :

Worm removed? answer No. 114
‘To remove the worm, drive out the pins which hold the éoupting to the ¥ ancl
diye shaft. Then remove the felt washer, pacer age cake yom i
bearing by slipping them over the coupling. — the coupli :
will permit the removal of the retaining washer, thrust bee rear’ |
roller bearing. In reassembling be sure that the pin which Eh re
washer stationary is in place. .

How is the Differential Gear
removed from the Shaft? Answer No. 115

The differentil gear is fastened to the inner end of the rear axle shaft by means
of splines, and is held in position by a ring which is in two halves and fits in a
groove in the rear axle shaft. To remove the gear, force it ddwn on the :

that is, away. from the end to which it is fastened, drive out the two. hia i
ring in groove in shaft with screw-driver or chisel, and force the geay

of the shaft. " ha -

What about Lubricating ‘ " a oe
the Rear Axle? Answer No.. his.
Extreme care must be used in lubricating the differential, An 4-1 heayy

of semifinid cil, such as Mobiloil C or Whittemore’s Wort Gear Brotectit
should be used and carried at a level with the upper oil plug, The aiicrentil 4)

with th uired amount of lubricant hen the truck feaves
: Bethe ae ele cece weer a egraek ae :

tory and

