UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

M

S

United States
of America

Congressional Record
PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, JANUARY 22, 2026

No. 15—Book II

House of Representatives
EXPLANATORY STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY MR. COLE, CHAIR OF
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS,
REGARDING
H.R.
7148, CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026; AND H.R. 7147,
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

The following is an explanation of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026.
This Act includes 4 regular appropriations
bills for fiscal year 2026. The divisions contained in the Act are as follows:
∑ Division A—Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2026
∑ Division B—Departments of Labor,
Health and Human Services, and Education,
and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,
2026
∑ Division C—Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026
∑ Division D—Transportation, Housing and
Urban Development, and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act, 2026
∑ Division E—Authorizing Extenders and
Technical Corrections
∑ Division F—Health Care Extenders
Section 1 of the Act is the short title of the
bill.
Section 2 of the Act displays a table of contents.
Section 3 of the Act states that, unless expressly provided otherwise, any reference to
‘‘this Act’’ contained in any division shall be
treated as referring only to the provisions of
that division.
Section 4 of the Act states that this explanatory statement shall have the same effect with respect to the allocation of funds
and implementation of this legislation as if
it were a joint explanatory statement of a
committee of conference.
Section 5 of the Act provides a statement
of appropriations.
DIVISION A—DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
The following is an explanation of the effects of this Act, which makes appropriations for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 2026. The joint explanatory statement accompanying this division is approved
and indicates congressional intent. Unless
otherwise noted, the language set forth in

House Report 119–162 and Senate Report 119–
52 carry the same weight as language included in this joint explanatory statement
and should be complied with unless specifically addressed to the contrary in this joint
explanatory statement. While some language
is repeated for emphasis, it is not intended
to negate the language referred to above unless expressly provided herein.
DEFINITION OF PROGRAM, PROJECT, AND
ACTIVITY

For the purposes of the Balanced Budget
and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985
(Public Law 99–177), as amended by the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control
Reaffirmation Act of 1987 (Public Law 100–
119), and by the Budget Enforcement Act of
1990 (Public Law 101–508), the terms ‘‘program, project, and activity’’ for appropriations contained in this Act shall be defined
as the most specific level of budget items
identified in the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2026, the related classified
annexes and Committee reports, and the P–1
and R–1 budget justification documents as
subsequently modified by congressional action.
The following exception to the above definition shall apply: the military personnel
and the operation and maintenance accounts, for which the term ‘‘program,
project, and activity’’ is defined as the appropriations accounts contained in the Department of Defense Appropriations Act,
2026.
The agreement notes the transmission of
the budget justification known as the M–1
and O–1 to the congressional defense committees, which identify, at the budget activity, activity group, and sub-activity group
level, the amounts requested by the President to be appropriated to the Department of
Defense for military personnel and operation
and maintenance in any budget request, or
amended budget request, for fiscal year 2026.
The Secretary of Defense is directed to provide such budget justification for any subsequent budget request or amended request.
REPROGRAMMING GUIDANCE

The Secretary of Defense is directed to
continue to follow the reprogramming guidance for acquisition accounts as specified in
the report accompanying the House version
of the Department of Defense Appropriations
Act, 2008 (House Report 110–279). The dollar
threshold for reprogramming funds shall be
$15,000,000 for military personnel; operation

and maintenance; procurement; and research, development, test and evaluation.
Additionally, the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) is directed to continue to
provide the congressional defense committees annual DD Form 1416 reports for titles I
and II and quarterly, spreadsheet-based DD
Form 1416 reports for Service and defensewide accounts in titles III and IV of this Act.
Reports for titles III and IV shall comply
with guidance specified in the joint explanatory statement accompanying the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2006.
The Department shall continue to follow the
limitation that prior approval reprogramming actions are set at either the specified
dollar threshold or 20 percent of the procurement or research, development, test and
evaluation line, whichever is less. These
thresholds are cumulative from the base for
reprogramming value as modified by any adjustments. Therefore, if the combined value
of transfers into or out of a military personnel (M–1); an operation and maintenance
(O–1); a procurement (P–1); or a research, development, test and evaluation (R–1) line exceeds the identified threshold, the Secretary
of Defense must submit a prior approval reprogramming to the congressional defense
committees. In addition, guidelines on the
application of prior approval reprogramming
procedures for congressional special interest
items are established elsewhere in this statement. Section 8005 of this Act directs the
Secretary of Defense to submit multiple reprograming requests no later than June 30,
2026, to ensure timely congressional review
and execution.
FUNDING INCREASES

The funding increases outlined in the tables for each appropriation account shall be
provided only for the specific purposes indicated in the tables. It is directed that funding increases shall be competitively awarded
or provided to programs that have received
competitive awards in the past.
CONGRESSIONAL SPECIAL INTEREST ITEMS

Items for which additional funds have been
provided or items for which funding is specifically reduced as shown in the project
level tables or in paragraphs using the
phrase ‘‘only for’’ or ‘‘only to’’ in this report
are congressional special interest items for
the purpose of the Base for Reprogramming
(DD Form 1414). Each of these items must be
carried on the DD Form 1414 at the stated
amount, as specifically addressed in this

b This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
H1353

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.041

H22JAPT2

H1354

statement. In addition, section 8006 of this
Act provides direction on the treatment of
increases which appear in the tables of the
Project Level Tables, including certain limitations on the use of reprogramming authority in relation to these items.
CLASSIFIED ANNEX

Adjustments to the classified programs are
addressed in the classified annex accompanying this joint explanatory statement.
MANDATORY FUNDING COLUMN

Public Law 119–21 provided a total of
$156,216,000,000 in mandatory funds for the
Department of Defense. The Project Level
Tables (PLT) in this joint explanatory statement, include a column entitled ‘‘Mandatory’’ that reflects the amounts apportioned
to the Department for fiscal year 2026 and
subsequently allocated at the P–1/R–1 level
to an executing department, agency, or activity in the first tranche of the Department’s reconciliation spend plan. The PLTs
reflect amounts in brackets for anticipated
funds not yet notified to Congress in a P–1/R–
1 spend plan.
FUNDING SHORTFALLS

The Department of Defense identified
$26,582,254,000 in total funding shortfalls due
to disjunctions between the fiscal year 2026
President’s budget request and Public Law
119–21. The Department then submitted a request for $2,377,682,000 in additional emergent
requirements, along with the fiscal year 2026
President’s budget request, and the Unfunded Priorities Lists of the Department of
Defense, Service Chiefs, and Combatant
Commanders. Additionally, the Department
requested authorization and funding of up to
$28,800,000,000 in multi-year munitions procurement contracts.
By comparison the overall allocation for
the Department of Defense Appropriations
Act, 2026 is $8,429,202,000 above the President’s budget request, and thus the agreement was unable to fully fund most of these
unfunded requirements and priorities.
The agreement welcomes the Department’s
focus on strengthening our military, modernizing its capabilities, expanding industrial capacity, and replenishing munitions
stockpiles. However, the agreement observes
that solving these real challenges will be difficult without sustained funding through a
predictable, annual appropriations process.
The House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees are encouraged by the
Department’s forecasting for fiscal year 2027
and the future years defense program, as
well as current efforts to make investments
in critical warfighting areas such as shipbuilding, munitions, sixth generation fighter
aircraft, and missile defense. The funding in
this agreement underscores the necessity of
a partnership between the Department of Defense and the Congress in order to deliver the
capabilities our warfighters need. The House
and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees are supportive of a continued
dialogue with the Department of Defense
throughout fiscal year 2026 as we continue to
work to address the noted critical funding
shortfalls that are not resolved in this Act.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

MUNITIONS PRODUCTION CAPACITY

The agreement notes the funding shortfalls
in the fiscal year 2026 President’s budget request, which did not request maximum executable quantities for certain critical munitions.
Therefore, the Secretary of Defense and
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff are directed to jointly submit a report of all expended munitions to the congressional defense committees, concurrent with the submission of the fiscal year 2027 President’s
budget request, and not later than 15 days
after the end of each quarter thereafter. The

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

reports required shall be submitted in a classified format and include the type of munition, quantity expended, the named operation or area of responsibility, the updated
current inventory, and the total munition
requirement.
Further, the Secretary of Defense is directed to submit a report to the congressional defense committees, concurrent with
the submission of the fiscal year 2027 President’s budget request, which compares requested unit quantities for each critical munitions program and maximum annual production rate achievable by the industrial
base. In any case where the requested quantity falls below the maximum rate of production, and the current inventory remains
below the validated total munitions requirement, the Secretary of Defense shall provide
limiting
factors,
such
as
budget
prioritization, production constraints, and
risk assessments related to inventory shortfalls. This report shall be submitted in an
unclassified format with a classified appendix.
The agreement underscores the Department’s obligation to clearly define munitions requirements, both for baseline stockpiles and surge capacity, and to budget accordingly. Absent this, the industrial base
cannot make informed investment decisions
regarding its production capacity, workforce, and supply chain.
This section replaces the directives under
the heading ‘‘Munitions Stock’’ in House Report 119–162 and under the heading ‘‘Munitions Production Capacity’’ in Senate Report
119–52.
MULTI-YEAR PROCUREMENT CONTRACTS FOR

request for those munitions receiving MYP
authority. The agreement includes funding
for the full fiscal year 2026 unfunded requirement for Long Range Anti-Ship Missile;
Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile Extended Range; and Standard Missile–3 Block
1B to meet the objectives of the MAC. Funding included in this Act is in addition to
nearly $2,100,000,000 of mandatory funds currently apportioned from Public Law 119–21.
The agreement also makes significant investments toward solid rocket motor production, a key component of critical munitions.
The MYP authority granted, and associated funding, will provide the Department
with the ability to procure more munitions
at a lower cost through fiscal year 2032 as
compared to single year procurements. The
Secretary of Defense is directed to negotiate
MYP contracts which yield unit cost savings, shortened production timelines, production capacity expansion, or industry commitments in facilitization with a focus on
second and third-tier suppliers. Further, the
Secretary of Defense is directed to provide a
semi-annual report to the congressional defense committees on the status of each munition MYP award granted in fiscal year 2024
and fiscal year 2026 until all munitions covered under such award have been delivered,
to include projected and realized cost savings, the amount and impact of government
and industry investment on capacity and associated supply chains, and an assessment of
the extent to which such award has generated greater stability in the associated
supply chain.

CRITICAL MUNITIONS

The agreement supports investments in
low-cost munitions by new entrants, including the Family of Affordable Mass Munitions
(FAMM), Extended-Range Attack Munitions
(ERAM), Enterprise Test Vehicle (ETV), and
ground-launched low-cost cruise missile systems, and includes additional funds to accelerate the development and procurement of
these systems. The agreement encourages
the Secretary of Defense to make continued
investments in these programs in the fiscal
year 2027 President’s budget request.
The Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff are directed
to jointly submit a report to the congressional defense committees, not later than 60
days after the enactment of this Act, on lowcost munitions. The report shall include: (1)
all munitions that are currently being produced by new entrants; (2) potential sources
of low-cost components manufactured by
new entrants and non-traditional suppliers;
(3) viable paths for system integration for
new entrants; (4) a strategy for accelerating
qualification and certification of new entrants; (5) an analysis of the viability of
multi-year contracts for such low-cost munitions; and (6) an assessment of the extent to
which the fiscal year 2027 President’s budget
request will leverage low-cost munitions to
meet munitions requirements, with estimated procurement costs, quantities, and
projected inventory for such munitions identified for each fiscal year of the future years
defense program. The report shall be submitted in an unclassified form and may include a classified annex.

The Deputy Secretary of Defense’s establishment of the Munitions Acceleration
Council (MAC) offers an opportunity for the
Department of Defense to prioritize longoverdue investments in critical munitions.
The agreement finds merit in this effort, particularly the objectives of addressing key
production challenges, reducing unit costs
through economies of scale, enhancing the
industrial base’s ability to surge production,
and ensuring more timely delivery of munitions to the warfighter.
Over fiscal year 2026, the Department requested multi-year procurement (MYP) authority for 13 critical munitions but has not
demonstrated with necessary documentation
that each munition meets the requirements
for MYP authority as outlined in section 8010
of this Act. The proposal was presented absent an official budget request, and without
adequate funding offsets or additional
topline. Concurrently, the House and Senate
Defense Appropriations Subcommittees had
to address substantial reconciliation funding
incongruencies and other Department priorities with limited discretionary resources.
This resource limitation constrained Congress’ ability to provide the necessary funding to fully support the MYP initiatives as
presented.
Therefore, contingent upon the submission
of a fiscal year 2027 President’s budget request that complies with section 8010, the
agreement provides MYP authority for eight
out of the 13 munitions programs in fiscal
year 2026: PATRIOT Advanced Capability–3
Missile Segment Enhancement; Standard
Missile–6; Terminal High Altitude Area Defense; Advanced Medium Range Air to Air
Missiles; Tomahawk Cruise Missiles Systems; Long Range Anti-Ship Missile; Joint
Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile Extended
Range; and Standard Missile–3 Block 1B.
In total, the agreement includes more than
$6,300,000,000 for the 13 critical MAC munitions, including an increase of $1,875,955,000
above the fiscal year 2026 President’s budget

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

NEW ENTRANTS FOR CRITICAL MUNITIONS
PRODUCTION

SOLID ROCKET MOTORS

Insufficient resiliency in the solid rocket
motor (SRM) industrial base represents a
significant chokepoint in the Department of
Defense’s effort to expand munitions production capacity to meet the growing requirements for munitions. In addition to investments recently made into the traditional
SRM supply base, the Department must continue to promote alternative sources of SRM
production. Competition and innovation are

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.041

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

key to addressing weakness in the SRM industrial
base,
and
increasing
manufacturability and affordability will
prove critical as the Department seeks to aggressively ramp production.
Therefore,
the
agreement
provides
$500,000,000 only for the investment in modernization, expansion, or facilitization of the
solid rocket motor industrial base, of which
$150,000,000 shall be available only for the
qualification and testing of second source
providers. The purposes of the funds include
capital equipment, tooling, and facility upgrades; workforce development, training,
and retention; supplier base expansion and
qualification, including second- and thirdtier vendors; process improvements, automation, and digital manufacturing; and risk reduction and surge capacity initiatives necessary to ensure reliable, affordable, and
timely production of solid rocket motors and
related energetics. The Secretary of Defense
is directed to seek and consider input from
industry stakeholders, including prime contractors, new entrants, subcontractors, and
critical lower-tier suppliers, to inform decision-making regarding the use of funds within the solid rocket motor industrial base.
The Secretary of Defense is directed to
prioritize actions that enhance competition
within the solid rocket motor industrial
base, including the introduction of new entrants, expansion of qualified suppliers, reduction of barriers to entry, and mitigation
of single-point-of-failure risks.
Further, the agreement directs the Deputy
Secretary of Defense, in coordination with
the Service Secretaries, to submit a report
to the congressional defense committees, not
later than 90 days after the enactment of
this Act, providing the following for each of
the Munitions Acceleration Council-identified critical munitions: (1) existing SRM suppliers of critical munitions; (2) potential second sources or plans to onramp a second
source; (3) available SRM production capacity; (4) the quantity and percentage of motors delivered on time; (5) the quantity and
percentage of motors rejected or returned for
failures for the primary source and any secondary sources over the previous five years
of delivery; and (6) a detailed timeline and
associated funding investment required to
increase capacity aligned with the increased
production rates.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

GOLDEN DOME FOR AMERICA

On January 27, 2025, the President directed
the development of a next-generation missile
defense shield, Golden Dome for America.
While the House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees support the operational objectives of Golden Dome for national security, the agreement notes the Department of Defense’s decision to date not to
provide complete budgetary details and justification of the $23,000,000,000 in mandatory
funding as provided by Public Law 119–21, to
include: a comprehensive master deployment
schedule; cost, schedule, and performance
metrics; and a finalized system architecture
and its components. Due to insufficient
budgetary information, the House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees
were unable to effectively assess resources
available to specific program elements and
to conduct oversight of planned programs
and projects for fiscal year 2026 Golden Dome
efforts in consideration of the final agreement.
To that end, the Secretary of Defense is directed, in conjunction with the Director of
Golden Dome, to provide a comprehensive
spend plan for Golden Dome resourcing to
the congressional defense committees, not
later than 60 days after enactment of this
Act. The spend plan shall detail planned obligations and expenditures by program, de-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1355

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

scriptions, justification, and the corresponding system architecture mission
areas at the budget line item level for fiscal
years 2025, 2026, and 2027 to include a detailed
breakout of discretionary and mandatory
funds. The spend plan shall be predicated on
the Golden Dome architecture.
The agreement further directs the Under
Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) to submit
a separate budget justification volume beginning in fiscal year 2028, and annually
thereafter, detailing program descriptions,
justifications, and requested funding associated with Golden Dome activities and requirements, including a crosswalk of funds
requested from Golden Dome-related programs executed across the Department. The
budget justification volume shall also include an integrated master test plan documenting the Golden Dome program office’s
test program, including all test resourcing
and events for flight, ground, and cyber testing capabilities.
The agreement directs the Director of
Golden Dome to provide quarterly updates to
the congressional defense committees, not
later than 30 days after the close of each
quarter, detailing budget execution and the
status of ongoing Golden Dome activities to
achieve initial operational capability by
2028.
The reports required herein shall be submitted in unclassified form and may include
a classified annex.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Golden Dome’’ in House Report
119–162. The agreement retains the language
under the heading ‘‘Air and Missile Defense’’
in Senate Report 119–52.
DEFENSE ACQUISITION REFORM

The agreement strongly supports the Department of Defense’s intent to prioritize
timely and urgent delivery of capabilities to
the warfighter. The House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees have
long worked in concert with the Department
in pursuit of this goal. The agreement sees
the Department’s plan for acquisition reform
as an opportunity to address internal processes that have historically inhibited the
timely and on-cost acquisition of effective
weapon systems.
The rapid adaptation and fielding of new
technologies and concepts occurring on the
modern battlefield, most visibly demonstrated by rapid innovation by both combatants in Russia’s ongoing war against
Ukraine, should be an urgent warning that
the Department, Military Services, and
America’s defense industry must more
quickly innovate and adapt or risk losing
our military advantage. While speed of delivery is critical, the agreement cautions that
speed must be factored alongside cost, performance, lethality, and scalability. Rapid
delivery of ineffective weapon systems at exorbitant cost will not serve the warfighter
well. The agreement also notes the importance of a capable acquisition workforce and
ensuring stable, annual funding for programs
are integral components of successful acquisition reform.
ACQUISITION WORKFORCE

The agreement stresses that the success of
defense acquisition reform will be dependent
on the experience and talent management of
the acquisition corps, including contracting
officers, financial managers, and engineers.
While the intent to institute policies that
better manage the tenure of program managers and program acquisition executives is
laudable, program managers encompass a
small segment of the personnel necessary for
effective defense acquisition. In particular,
experienced and competent financial management and contracting workforces are essential to successfully increasing use of non-

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Federal Acquisition Regulation procurement
methods. The agreement is concerned that
recent reductions to the acquisition workforce, the effects of which have yet to be realized, will negatively affect the Department
of Defense’s ability to achieve the initial
speed and agility sought by this reform effort.
Therefore, the agreement directs the Secretary of Defense in consultation with the
Service Secretaries to submit an acquisition
workforce strategy to the House and Senate
Defense Appropriations Subcommittees not
later than 180 days after the enactment of
this Act. The strategy shall include a comprehensive assessment of the workforce necessary to execute a reformed defense acquisition system; the current and future billets
required by each Service and Defense Agency, functional specialty, and grade across the
future years defense program; current and
future education and training requirements,
to include associated funding requirements
across the future years defense program; and
all changes in policy and management of the
acquisition corps.
BUDGET STRUCTURE

The agreement notes the Department of
Defense’s plan to seek budget flexibility as
outlined in the Secretary of Defense’s memorandum entitled ‘‘Transforming the Defense
Acquisition System into the Warfighting Acquisition System to Accelerate Fielding of
Urgently Needed Capabilities to Our Warriors’’ dated November 7, 2025.
The agreement assesses that the acquisition reforms directed in the memorandum
are internal in nature. The agreement encourages the Department to demonstrate
progress on these internal procedures and administrative measures before seeking additional authorities or changes to its budget
and appropriations framework. For instance,
while the House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees work diligently to
quickly adjudicate above-threshold transfer
and reprogramming requests, a significant
amount of the subcommittees’ time is consumed by waiting for the Department to provide requested additional details and justification for these requests. Providing this
information alongside the submission of the
request would accelerate consideration and
create a nimbler process without altering existing authority or reprogramming thresholds. Therefore, the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) and Assistant Secretaries (Financial Management and Comptroller) for the Air Force, Navy, and Army
are encouraged to consult with the House
and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees, within 60 days of enactment of
this Act, to improve the amount of detail
and justification materials provided with
above-threshold transfer and reprogramming
requests in order to further speed congressional consideration.
Further, the agreement emphasizes the direction provided in the joint explanatory
statement accompanying the Department of
Defense Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law
118–47), which reaffirmed the Department’s
ability to effectively manage its funding
under existing appropriations structures
through the use of internal policies, regulations, and timely communication with Congress.
To date, the agreement observes no new or
compelling justification or quantitative
analysis to support proposals that would
alter the current appropriations framework,
including with respect to reprogramming
thresholds, notification requirements, new
start guidelines, or consolidation into a single color of money. Consideration of legislative changes to the appropriations structure

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.042

H22JAPT2

H1356

is premature until the Department has demonstrated full and effective use of its existing flexibilities and addressed persistent internal delays. As such, the agreement
strongly discourages changes to the current
appropriations structure in the fiscal year
2027 President’s budget request and retains
the directives under the heading ‘‘Planning,
Programming, Budgeting and Execution Reform’’ in Senate Report 119–52.
JOINT REQUIREMENTS PROCESS REFORM

The Department of Defense is significantly
reforming the process used to define joint requirements and set acquisition objectives for
those capabilities across the joint force. The
agreement supports these reforms. Nevertheless, the agreement directs the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Vice Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Service Secretaries
to provide a briefing to the House and Senate
Defense Appropriations Subcommittees, not
later than 60 days after the enactment of
this Act, on how such reforms will address
several potential risks, including that the
Military Services may de-prioritize joint solutions in favor of Service-specific approaches; that top-down solutions to problems identified by the highest echelons of
the process may stifle bottom-up innovation;
and whether and how these reforms influenced the fiscal year 2027 President’s budget
request. Further, the Comptroller General is
directed to submit a report to the House and
Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees, not later than 360 days after the enactment of this Act, with interim update briefings that assesses the efficacy of the joint requirements process reforms implemented by
the Department of Defense. The report shall
compare at least three examples of joint requirements approved through the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System to three examples of joint requirements
approved through the reformed process. This
comparison will include an assessment of the
process steps, decision points, responsible organizations, timelines within each step, and
effectiveness of the legacy and reformed
processes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES

The agreement recognizes the importance
of international initiatives and the Australia, United Kingdom, and United States
(AUKUS) security partnership. The AUKUS
security partnership creates a more lethal
force that further integrates the trilateral
forces, as well as strengthens the domestic
defense industrial base under the regulatory
framework authorized under the National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
2024 (Public Law 118–31).
Given the importance of this partnership,
the agreement includes an additional
$40,000,000 in Research, Development, Test
and Evaluation, Defense-Wide within the
International Innovation Initiatives and Defense Innovation Unit (DIU) Fielding budget
lines to support the further growth of trilateral cooperation. Therefore, the agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to provide the congressional defense committees a
report, not later than 90 days after the enactment of this Act, and quarterly updates
including execution data thereafter, until
September 30, 2027, on the progress of Pillar
2 technology efforts related to undersea capabilities, quantum technologies, artificial
intelligence and autonomy, advanced cyber,
hypersonic and counter-hypersonic capabilities, electronic warfare, innovation, and any
other associated initiatives identified within
the 2025 AUKUS Pillar 2 review. The report
shall include budget profiles, including execution data, schedules, a full list of industry
performers contributing to ongoing efforts,
and a description of any challenges slowing
the delivery of capabilities.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘International Initiatives’’ in
House Report 119–162 as well as the language
under the heading ‘‘International Innovation
Initiatives’’ in Senate Report 119–52.
STRENGTHENING COOPERATION WITH ALLIES
AND PARTNERS

The agreement includes continued investments to secure cooperation with the partners and allies of the United States as a critical deterrence to the growing threats of the
People’s Republic of China, Russia, North
Korea, and Iran. The agreement includes
$1,000,000,000 for the Taiwan Security Cooperation Initiative and $40,000,000 for the
International Security Cooperation Programs, Philippines, to help our partners improve military capacity to deter and resist
aggression in the Indo-Pacific region. The
agreement also includes an additional
$200,000,000 for the Baltic Security Initiative
to bolster the readiness and capacity of Baltic allies Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. In
addition, in support of United States European Command’s (USEUCOM) efforts to expand cooperation with allies and partners,
the agreement includes an additional
$48,471,000 as requested by USEUCOM to enhance collective defense.
Finally, the agreement includes an additional $25,000,000, only for the United States
Africa Command (USAFRICOM) area of operations, as determined by the Commander,
USAFRICOM. The agreement directs that
none of these funds may be obligated or expended until the Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller), in coordination with the Commander, USAFRICOM, presents an execution
plan to the congressional defense committees. Further, the agreement notes that
while some of these activities may be undertaken through title 10 U.S.C. section 333, the
Commander, USAFRICOM, may propose
projects utilizing any existing authorities.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Strengthening Cooperation
with Allies and Partners’’ in Senate Report
119–52.
AGILE FUNDING

The agreement includes all 13 line item
consolidations requested by the Army in the
fiscal year 2026 President’s budget request,
providing the funding flexibility necessary
for effective execution while maintaining appropriate congressional oversight. These
consolidations enable the Army to manage
resources more efficiently within appropriated accounts without increasing reprogramming or transfer authorities.
The House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees also note that section
8007 of this Act establishes the Department
of Defense reprogramming thresholds for fiscal year 2026. The agreement does not support the Secretary of the Army’s request, referred to as Agile Funding, to increase the
congressional notification threshold for reprogramming or transfers from $15,000,000 to
$50,000,000 for a procurement program,
project, or activity, and to $25,000,000 for a
research, development, test and evaluation
program, project, or activity. The agreement
notes that the Department already has sufficient authorities to restructure its internal
programming and budgeting processes, and
many current challenges with execution can
be solved by actions within the Department
and do not require statutory change or congressional intervention. The agreement further notes that increasing reprogramming
thresholds alone is unlikely to improve program execution. Decisions to unilaterally
move funding in the year of execution without sufficient oversight introduce uncertainty to both the programs impacted and
the industrial base, increasing the risk of development and procurement delays.

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees discourage the Secretary of Defense and the Service Secretaries
from submitting future requests of this nature.
The agreement demonstrates the House
and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees’ support for budget line item
consolidation when the Department of Defense provides adequate justification in a
timely manner. Therefore, the agreement directs the Secretary of Defense and Assistant
Secretaries for Financial Management and
Comptroller of the Army, Navy, and Air
Force to brief the House and Senate Defense
Appropriations Subcommittees on any proposals to further consolidate budget line
items in the upcoming President’s budget request, with sufficient time to impact the fiscal year 2027 President’s budget request, and
not later than 90 days prior to future President’s budget requests.
JOINT INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE—401
The agreement supports the establishment
of the Joint Interagency Task Force–401
(JIATF–401) to enhance joint and interagency coordination in support of Department of Defense operational requirements to
counter-small unmanned aerial systems (C–
sUAS). The agreement notes that JIATF–401
is a joint activity requiring enhanced oversight and accountability measures for funds
made available for such purpose. Therefore,
the agreement directs that not later than 30
days after enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall provide to the congressional defense committees copies of all
directives, memoranda, execution guidance,
or other implementing materials issued pursuant to the August 27, 2025 establishment
memorandum, including any subsequent
modifications. Further, the agreement directs that not later than 60 days after the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the
Army shall submit a comprehensive spend
plan for amounts made available for JIATF–
401. The spend plan shall reflect amounts
made available in fiscal years 2025 and 2026,
to include Public Law 119–21, and shall include all funding sources proposed to support
JIATF–401, planned obligations and expenditures by appropriation and line item, and detailed personnel requirements and sourcing
assumptions. A similar document with requested amounts shall be provided to the
House and Senate Defense Appropriations
Subcommittees concurrent with the submission of the fiscal year 2027 President’s budget
request. The Secretary of the Army shall
also provide consolidation plans and spend
plans for all departmental C-sUAS related efforts.
F/A–XX
The agreement supports the Navy’s efforts
to develop the F/A–XX sixth generation
fighter and understands the program’s
unique capability in delivering air superiority to the fleet, including greater operational range, speed, stealth, and enhanced
survivability.
The agreement notes the Full-Year Continuing Appropriations and Extensions Act,
2025 provided $453,828,000 to align to the program’s acquisition schedule which assumed a
March 2025 award for engineering and manufacturing development (EMD). However,
rather than proceeding with a Milestone B
award, the Department expended nearly all
fiscal year 2025 funding on contract extensions with minimal demonstrated value to
the program.
The agreement provides $897,260,000 above
the fiscal year 2026 President’s budget request to continue F/A–XX development and
directs the Secretary of Defense to obligate
these and any prior funds for the purposes of
awarding the EMD contract limited to one

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.043

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

performer in accordance with the acquisition
strategy to achieve an accelerated Initial
Operational Capability (IOC).
Further, the Secretary of the Navy is directed, not later than 45 days after the enactment of this Act, to submit a report to
the congressional defense committees that
details: (1) the current acquisition strategy
and updated schedule for awarding the EMD
contract; (2) a revised development and fielding timeline for the F/A–XX program to meet
IOC; (3) any programmatic, budgetary, or
policy barriers that have delayed execution
of prior-year funds; and (4) a spend plan for
the active year additional funds that have
been appropriated to the Department of Defense for this program.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘F/A–XX’’ in House Report 119–
162.
BUDGET OR APPROPRIATIONS LIAISON SUPPORT
TO THE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEES

Title II of this Act includes a provision
that prohibits the use of funds in this Act to
plan or implement the elimination or consolidation of a budget or appropriations liaison office of the Office of the Secretary of
Defense, the office of the Secretary of a military department, or the Service headquarters of one of the Armed Forces into a
legislative affairs or legislative liaison office. The House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees rely heavily on
these offices to conduct their oversight responsibilities
and
make
funding
recommendations for the Department of Defense.
The separate offices of legislative affairs
within the Office of the Secretary of Defense
and the military departments offer assistance to the authorizing committees and individual members of Congress, and such assistance is provided on a parallel and separate
track from the assistance provided to the
Committees on Appropriations by the budget
or appropriations liaison office of the Office
of the Secretary of Defense, the office of the
Secretary of a military department, or the
Service headquarters of one of the Armed
Forces. As the offices of legislative affairs do
not possess the expertise and direct relationship to the Financial Management and
Comptroller organizations, which are essential to the effective communication between
the Department and the Committees on Appropriations, it is critical that the budget or
appropriations liaison offices remain independent from the legislative liaison offices,
have organizational parity, and retain the
authority to respond directly and promptly
with the information required by the Committees on Appropriations.
Events throughout fiscal year 2025 have reinforced concerns with the ability of budget
and appropriations liaison offices to exercise
their responsibility towards the Committees
on Appropriations. Therefore, the Secretary
of Defense and the Service Secretaries are
directed to provide appropriations liaison offices with organizational parity and proper
resourcing, ensure that these offices have
tasking authority, provide information on a
timely basis to the Committees on Appropriations, and serve as the primary advisors
to senior leaders in the Department of Defense on appropriations and budget related
matters.
DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

CIVIL RESERVE MANUFACTURING NETWORK

The agreement includes $177,400,000 in fiscal year 2026 to establish a Civil Reserve
Manufacturing Network (CRMN) as authorized in the National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2026 (Public Law 119–60).
Given the potential level of transformation
relating to readiness and sustainment, and
ensuing expansion of the defense industrial
base, the agreement provides funding for

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1357

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

CRMN-related activities under the Research,
Development, Test and Evaluation accounts
for the Army, Air Force, and Defense-Wide.
Funding under the Research, Development,
Test and Evaluation, Defense-Wide account
is
in
Industrial
Base
Analysis
and
Sustainment, under the purview of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Industrial Base
Policy). This funding is intended to establish
a CRMN and assist CRMN participants with
the costs of expedited qualification and testing, engineering modifications of product
and process specification, and other activities to enable participants to rapidly convert
production facilities to Department-directed
manufacturing upon the activation of the
CRMN.
The agreement directs the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Industrial Base and Policy) to provide quarterly briefings, until September 30, 2027, to the congressional defense
committees on the progress of establishing a
CRMN starting not later than the congressional reporting requirement in section
1841(b)(1) of Public Law 119–60.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Civil Reserve Manufacturing
Network’’ in House Report 119–162.
JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER

The agreement fully funds the quantity of
aircraft requested in the President’s budget
request for fiscal year 2026. To account for
economic factors within the program, the
agreement provides an increase of $401,611,000
in Aircraft Procurement, Air Force. The
agreement prioritizes the sustainment of aircraft in the fleet and includes an additional
$280,000,000 for F135 spare parts and
$160,000,000 for F–35 spare parts in the Aircraft Procurement, Navy and Aircraft Procurement, Air Force appropriation accounts.
To ensure visibility into the cost and performance of propulsion efforts, and to maintain traceability of both appropriated and requested funding to fielded capabilities, the
agreement directs administrative changes
outlined in both the Research, Development,
Test and Evaluation, Navy and Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Air Force
sections of this report.
Lastly, the agreement notes that the requirement for the Joint Strike Fighter’s
power and thermal management system
(PTMS) has been revised without adequate
funding required to advance the development
capability. The agreement encourages the
Secretaries of the Navy and the Air Force to
fully fund the continued development of
PTMS to keep the program on schedule.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Joint Strike Fighter’’ in Senate Report 119–52.
COST ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAM EVALUATION

The agreement expresses concern about
cost and personnel growth in the Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation (CAPE)
office, as well as concern about the expansion of its remit. The Secretary of Defense is
accordingly directed to, not later than 30
days after the fiscal year 2027 President’s
budget request, submit a detailed progress
report and provide a briefing to the congressional defense committees on how the Department plans to optimize the CAPE office,
while reducing contracted personnel within
the office. Furthermore, such optimization
may not include reduction in personnel performing cost assessment functions or capability enabling functions, including defense
industrial base, economic, and manpower
analyses.
TECHNICAL COMPETENCY IN THE DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENSE—SPACE FORCE PILOT PROGRAM

The agreement remains concerned that the
Department of Defense continues to struggle
with delivering critical capabilities on-time

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and on-budget. Last year, the President
signed an executive order directing the Secretary of Defense to review the antiquated
defense acquisition process, address burdensome regulations, and make recommendations to incentivize the acquisition workforce to utilize innovative acquisition authorities and take measured risks. The
agreement supports this review and looks
forward to receiving its recommendations.
However, a major contributor and perhaps
the root cause of the Department’s failed acquisition system is the military rotation
system where program managers are replaced every two to three years and are rarely in the job long enough to develop the necessary expertise and competencies. This dynamic is exacerbated as defense systems and
weapons platforms, especially space systems,
have become more technologically complex.
Therefore, the agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to propose to the House
and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees, not later than 180 days after the
enactment of this Act, a plan for a pilot program in the Space Force to organize its programs and people by mission area. The
agreement encourages the Department to require those assigned to each mission area to
serve for substantially longer tours of service so that they may more fully develop the
requisite technical skills and expertise. The
intent of the pilot program is to implement
mission area program offices with responsibility, authority, and accountability for the
entire life-cycle of a mission, from system
concept, through acquisition, development,
fielding, and operational life. Furthermore,
the Space Force pilot program should examine elimination of the current occupational
specialty categories, such as acquisition or
operations, in favor of specializations focused on mission areas, such as missile warning or satellite communications, with assignments focused on developing expertise in
all aspects of a mission area.
FULL FUNDING OF SATELLITES

The Office of Management and Budget Circular A–11 directs that executive departments must propose full funding to cover the
full costs of the project or a useful segment.’’
The Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation directs that under the
full funding policy, the entire procurement
cost of a weapon or piece of military equipment is to be funded in the year in which the
item is budgeted.’’ The adherence of the full
funding’’ principle is inconsistent for satellite programs within the fiscal year 2026
President’s budget request.
The advent of proliferated satellite constellations requires an evolution in the approach to budgeting for satellites. Therefore,
the agreement directs the Under Secretary
of Defense (Comptroller) in coordination
with the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence and Security) and the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management and Comptroller) to provide a briefing
not later than 90 days after enactment of
this Act to the House and Senate Defense
Appropriations Subcommittees on proposed
changes to the budget process for satellite
programs.
Further, the agreement directs a restructuring of the Auxiliary Payload and Ground
Moving Target Indicator programs as specified in the project level tables of this joint
explanatory statement within the Procurement, Space Force and Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Space Force appropriations. Additionally, the agreement
authorizes advance procurement for the
Ground Moving Target Indicator program
within the Procurement, Space Force appropriation. Finally, the agreement directs the
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management and Comptroller) to follow

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.044

H22JAPT2

H1358

this budget structure in the fiscal year 2027
President’s budget request.
AIR FORCE CIVILIAN PERSONNEL

The agreement directs the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management and Comptroller) to ensure that the
United States Air Force acquisition workforce civilian full-time equivalent calculations for each future years defense program
submission are accurate and fully funded.
Any adjustments in the year of execution in
the Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Air Force appropriation are directed
to be provided through monthly updates to
the House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees, with the first brief occurring 30 days after the enactment of this
Act.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Air Force Civilian Personnel’’
in Senate Report 119–52.
POLAR AIRLIFT AIRCRAFT

The agreement notes the importance of
polar tactical airlift capabilities for Arctic
and Antarctic operations. In previous fiscal
years, additional funds were appropriated for
polar airlift aircraft, which enabled the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) to initiate a
program to address future polar airlift requirements. Ensuring that this effort progresses as scheduled remains a priority.
The agreement provides corresponding increases of an additional $29,000,000 for the
non-recurring engineering effort as well as
$165,000,000 for the procurement of an initial
LC–130J aircraft and its components. Addi-

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

tionally, the Assistant Secretary of the Air
Force (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics), not later than 90 days after the enactment of this Act, is directed to provide the
congressional defense committees a report
that contains a detailed set of requirements
for this capability, projected costs for the
program over the future years defense program, and a program schedule that delineates key engineering and production milestones.
AUDIT TO IDENTIFY PROHIBITED SEAFOOD
IMPORTS

The agreement directs the Under Secretary
of Defense (Acquisition and Sustainment)
and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisition) to
submit a report to the congressional defense
committees, not later than 180 days after the
enactment of this Act, that provides an update on the Department’s implementation of
the recommendations in the Department of
Defense Office of Inspector General report,
‘‘Audit of the DoD’s Policies and Procedures
to Prevent the Procurement of Prohibited
Seafood Products,’’ from September 2025.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Audit to Identify Prohibited
Seafood Imports’’ in Senate Report 119–52.
COMPLETE AND TIMELY FINANCIAL REPORTING

The Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) is directed to provide the congressional defense committees, not later than 60
days after the enactment of this Act, comprehensive obligation and execution data, including expenditure data for funds with a
tenure longer than one year.

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

INDIRECT COSTS

The agreement acknowledges that there is
room for improvement in the system used to
identify and recover indirect cost rates
under the Uniform Grant Guidance, particularly with respect to the need for greater
transparency into these costs.
Various models have been suggested to
achieve these improvements, including the
Financial Accountability in Research (FAIR)
model advanced by the Joint Associations
Group on Indirect Costs (JAG), which the
Committees believe merit further consideration.
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (NATO)

Since its establishment on April 4, 1949,
NATO has brought peace and stability to its
thirty-two member states by safeguarding
territorial integrity and advancing the national security interests of its members. The
agreement supports NATO’s renewed focus to
increase the levels of military investment by
each member state, most recently the June
2025 summit at The Hague, where all pledged
to invest five percent of gross domestic product annually on core defense requirements as
well as defense- and security-related spending by 2035. These achievements will continue to ensure that it remains the most important and effective military alliance in
history. As such, the agreement underscores
Congress’ ironclad support for NATO and all
its thirty-two member states.
TITLE I—MILITARY PERSONNEL
The agreement provides $193,280,322,000 in
Title I, Military Personnel.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.045

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1359

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.045

H22JAPT2

Insert graphic folio 8000/23 EH220126.001

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1360

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
SUMMARY OF MILITARY PERSONNEL END STRENGTH

Fiscal year 2026

Active Forces (End Strength)
Army ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Navy .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Marine Corps ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Air Force ..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Space Force .....................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Total, Active Forces ................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Guard and Reserve Forces (End Strength)
Army Reserve ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Navy Reserve ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Marine Corps Reserve .....................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Air Force Reserve ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Army National Guard .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Air National Guard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Total, Selected Reserve ..........................................................................................................................................................................................................
Total, Military Personnel ........................................................................................................................................................................................................

MILITARY PERSONNEL OVERVIEW

The agreement provides the resources required for 1,302,800 active forces and 764,900
selected reserve forces in order to meet operational needs for fiscal year 2026. The agreement also provides the funding necessary to
support a 3.8 percent pay raise for all military personnel effective January 1, 2026, as
requested in the President’s budget request.
REPROGRAMMING GUIDANCE FOR MILITARY
PERSONNEL ACCOUNTS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

The Secretary of Defense is directed to
submit the Base for Reprogramming (DD
Form 1414) for each of the fiscal year 2026 appropriations accounts not later than 60 days
after the enactment of this Act. The Secretary of Defense is prohibited from executing any reprogramming or transfer of
funds for any purpose other than originally
appropriated until the aforementioned re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

port is submitted to the House and Senate
Defense Appropriations Subcommittees.
The Secretary of Defense is directed to use
the normal prior approval reprogramming
procedures to transfer funds in the Services’
military personnel accounts between budget
activities, or between sub-activities in the
case of the reserve components, in excess of
$15,000,000.
MILITARY PERSONNEL SPECIAL INTEREST ITEMS

Items for which additional funds have been
provided or have been specifically reduced as
shown in the project level tables or in paragraphs using the phrase ‘‘only for’’ or ‘‘only
to’’ in this joint explanatory statement are
congressional special interest items for the
purpose of the Base for Reprogramming (DD
Form 1414). Each of these items must be carried on the DD Form 1414 at the stated
amount as specifically addressed in this
joint explanatory statement. Below threshold reprogrammings may not be used to ei-

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Fiscal year
2025 Authorized

Budget Request

442,300
332,300
172,300
320,000
9,800
1,276,700

454,000
344,600
172,300
321,500
10,400
1,302,800

454,000
344,600
172,300
321,500
10,400
1,302,800

–––
–––
–––
–––
–––
–––

11,700
12,300
0
1,500
600
26,100

175,800
57,700
32,500
67,000
325,000
108,300
766,300

172,000
57,500
33,600
67,500
328,000
106,300
764,900

172,000
57,500
33,600
67,500
328,000
106,300
764,900

–––
–––
–––
–––
–––
–––
–––

¥3,800
¥200
1,100
500
3,000
¥2,000
¥1,400

2,043,000

2,067,700

2,067,700

–––

24,700

Final Bill

Change
from request

Change
from fiscal
year 2025

ther restore or reduce funding from congressional special interest items as identified on
the DD Form 1414.
PERMANENT CHANGE OF STATION

The agreement notes the Department of
Defense has established a Permanent Change
of Station Joint Task Force to ensure that
the Department provides the highest quality
moving services for servicemembers, civilian
employees, and their families. The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to provide an updated briefing to the congressional
defense committees, not later than 90 days
after the enactment of this Act, on the Department’s projected cost savings and implementation plans for fiscal years 2027 through
2030.
MILITARY PERSONNEL, ARMY
The agreement provides $54,538,366,000 for
Military Personnel, Army, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.045

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1361

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/27 here EH220126.002

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/28 here EH220126.003

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1362

January 22, 2026

H1363

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

MILITARY PERSONNEL, NAVY
The agreement provides $40,544,559,000 for
Military Personnel, Navy, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/30 here EH220126.004

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1364

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1365

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/31 here EH220126.005

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1366

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

MILITARY PERSONNEL, MARINE CORPS
The agreement provides $16,990,389,000 for
Military Personnel, Marine Corps, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1367

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/33 here EH220126.006

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/34 here EH220126.007

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1368

January 22, 2026

H1369

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

MILITARY PERSONNEL, AIR FORCE
The agreement provides $38,768,392,000 for
Military Personnel, Air Force, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/36 here EH220126.008

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1370

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1371

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/37 here EH220126.009

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1372

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

MILITARY PERSONNEL, SPACE FORCE
The agreement provides $1,494,342,000 for
Military Personnel, Space Force, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1373

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/39 here EH220126.010

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/40 here EH220126.011

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1374

January 22, 2026

H1375

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

RESERVE PERSONNEL, ARMY
The agreement provides $5,733,696,000 for
Reserve Personnel, Army, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/42 here EH220126.012

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1376

January 22, 2026

H1377

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

RESERVE PERSONNEL, NAVY
The agreement provides $2,712,359,000 for
Reserve Personnel, Navy, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/44 here EH220126.013

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1378

January 22, 2026

H1379

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

RESERVE PERSONNEL, MARINE CORPS
The agreement provides $1,002,925,000 for
Reserve Personnel, Marine Corps, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/46 here EH220126.014

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1380

January 22, 2026

H1381

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

RESERVE PERSONNEL, AIR FORCE
The agreement provides $2,701,115,000 for
Reserve Personnel, Air Force, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/48 here EH220126.015

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1382

January 22, 2026

H1383

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

NATIONAL GUARD PERSONNEL, ARMY
The agreement provides $10,476,992,000 for
National Guard Personnel, Army, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/50 here EH220126.016

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1384

January 22, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

NATIONAL
FORCE

VerDate Sep 11 2014

GUARD

H1385

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
PERSONNEL,

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

AIR

The agreement provides $5,467,187,000 for
National Guard Personnel, Air Force, as follows:

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/52 here EH220126.017

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1386

January 22, 2026

H1387

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

TITLE II—OPERATION AND
MAINTENANCE
The agreement provides $294,367,221,000 in
Title II, Operation and Maintenance.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

REPROGRAMMING GUIDANCE FOR OPERATION
AND MAINTENANCE ACCOUNTS

The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to submit the Base for Reprogramming
(DD Form 1414) for each of the fiscal year
2026 appropriation accounts not later than 60
days after the enactment of this Act. The
Secretary of Defense is prohibited from executing any reprogramming or transfer of
funds for any purpose other than originally
appropriated until the aforementioned report is submitted to the House and Senate
Defense Appropriations Subcommittees.
The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to use the normal prior approval reprogramming procedures to transfer funds in
the Services’ operation and maintenance accounts between O–1 budget activities, or be-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

tween sub-activity groups in the case of Operation and Maintenance, Defense-Wide, in
excess of $15,000,000. In addition, the Secretary of Defense shall follow prior approval
reprogramming procedures for transfers in
excess of $15,000,000 out of the following readiness activity groups or sub-activity groups
listed below:
Army:
Activity Group 11 Land Forces
Activity Group 12 Land Forces Readiness
Activity Group 13 Land Forces Readiness
Support
Activity Group 32 Basic Skill and Advanced Training
Navy:
Activity Group 1A Air Operations
Activity Group 1B Ship Operations

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Activity Group 1C Combat Operations/Support
Activity Group BS Base Support
Marine Corps:
Activity Group 1A Expeditionary Forces
Activity Group BS Base Support
Air Force:
Activity Group ‘‘Air Operations’’, which
includes sub-activity groups 11A Primary
Combat Force and 11C Combat Enhancement
Forces
Activity
Group
‘‘Weapons
Systems
Sustainment’’, which includes sub-activity
groups 11M Depot Purchase Equipment
Maintenance, 11V Cyberspace Sustainment,
and 11W Contractor Logistics Support and
System Support

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.046

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/54 here EH220126.018

H1388

January 22, 2026

Activity Group ‘‘Installations’’, which includes sub-activity groups 11R Facilities
Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization, and 11Z Base Support
Activity Group ‘‘Flying Hours’’, which includes sub-activity group 11Y Flying Hour
Program
Space Force:
Sub-activity Group 12A Global C3I & Early
Warning
Sub-activity Group 13C Space Operations
Sub-activity Group 13W Contractor Logistics Support and System Support
Sub-activity Group 42A Administration
Air Force Reserve:
Sub-activity Group 11A Primary Combat
Forces
Air National Guard:
Sub-activity Group 11F Aircraft Operations
Additionally, the agreement directs the
Secretary of Defense to use normal prior approval reprogramming procedures when implementing transfers in excess of $15,000,000
into the following budget sub-activities listed below:
Army National Guard:
Sub-activity Group 131 Base Operations
Support
Sub-activity
Group
132
Facilities
Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization
Sub-activity Group 133 Management and
Operational Headquarters
Air National Guard:
Sub-activity Group 11W Contractor Logistics Support and System Support
REPROGRAMMING GUIDANCE FOR SPECIAL
OPERATIONS COMMAND

The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to submit a baseline report that shows
the Special Operations Command’s operation
and maintenance funding by sub-activity
group for the fiscal year 2026 appropriation
not later than 60 days after the enactment of
this Act. The Secretary of Defense is further
directed to submit quarterly execution reports to the congressional defense committees not later than 45 days after the end of
each fiscal quarter that addresses the rationale for the realignment of any funds within
and between budget sub-activities and the
movement of any base funds used to support
overseas contingency operations. Finally,
the Secretary of Defense is directed to notify
the congressional defense committees 30
days prior to the realignment of funds in excess of $15,000,000 between sub-activity
groups.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE SPECIAL
INTEREST ITEMS

Items for which additional funds have been
provided or have been specifically reduced as
shown in the project level tables or in paragraphs using the phrase ‘‘only for’’ or ‘‘only
to’’ in this report are congressional special
interest items for the purpose of the Base for
Reprogramming (DD Form 1414). Each of
these items must be carried on the DD Form
1414 at the stated amount as specifically addressed in this report. Below threshold
reprogrammings may not be used to either
restore or reduce funding from congressional
special interest items as identified on the DD
Form 1414.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

QUARTERLY OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
UPDATES

The agreement notes the successful quarterly meetings with each of the Services as
regular interaction with each of the Services’ financial management offices enhances
the ability of the House and Senate Defense
Appropriations Subcommittees to perform
its essential oversight responsibilities. The
agreement directs the Director of each of the
Service’s Operations Divisions (Financial

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1389

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Management and Budget) to continue to provide quarterly briefings to the House and
Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees on their respective operation and maintenance execution rates in fiscal year 2026.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE BUDGET
EXECUTION DATA

The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense and Service Secretaries to provide the
congressional defense committees with quarterly budget execution data. Such data
should be provided not later than 45 days
after the close of each quarter of the fiscal
year and should be provided for each O–1
budget activity, activity group, and sub-activity group for each of the active, defensewide, reserve, and National Guard components. For each O–1 budget activity, activity
group, and sub-activity group, these reports
should include the budget request and actual
obligations amount, the distribution of
unallocated congressional adjustments to
the budget request, all adjustments made by
the Department in establishing the Base for
Reprogramming (DD Form 1414) report, all
adjustments resulting from below threshold
reprogrammings, and all adjustments resulting from prior approval reprogramming requests.
CIVILIAN PAY RAISE

The agreement notes that the one percent
civilian pay raise was not included in the
President’s budget request. The agreement
also notes that the President informed Congress of a one percent civilian pay raise on
August 28, 2025. Therefore, the agreement directs a minimum reduction for underexecution of civilian compensation while providing the funding necessary to support the
one percent pay raise for all civilian personnel, effective January 1, 2026, and expects
that any future civilian compensation adjustments will be reflected in the President’s
budget request.
DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION AGENCY
PROGRAM

The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense, not later than 60 days after the enactment of this Act, to submit to the congressional defense committees a detailed spend
plan for amounts made available for the Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA).
The spend plan shall include amounts for
each program listed in the budget justification documents and, for International Security Cooperation Programs, amounts provided in the prior two fiscal years and
planned for fiscal year 2026 by combatant
command, country, and authority, to include
Public Law 119–21. The spend plan shall only
reflect the amounts requested in the fiscal
year 2026 budget justification materials as
modified by fiscal year 2026 appropriations. A
similar document with requested amounts
shall be provided to such committees concurrent with the submission of the fiscal year
2027 President’s budget request.
Of the amount provided for the DSCA, the
agreement includes $1,499,808,000 for International Security Cooperation Programs.
The agreement directs that congressional
notifications for these funds specify the fiscal year, whether funds support ongoing or
new programs, and the duration and expected cost over the life of each program.
The Secretary of Defense is encouraged to,
in consultation with DSCA, have greater coordination with combatant commanders and
foreign allied governments to improve the
efficacy and enduring impact of our security
assistance programs. The agreement emphasizes the need for timely and thorough communication from the Director of DSCA to
the congressional defense committees on
resourcing decisions and requirements.
Delays in communications during the fiscal

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

year 2026 process must be an exception to the
rule for providing briefs and budget justifications. Congressional oversight of vital security cooperation programs should not require
repeated requests for basic information.
In addition, the Secretary of Defense is directed, not later than 60 days after the enactment of this Act, to submit to the House
and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees a report on the status of DSCA
programs, including, but not limited to: fiscal year 2025 unobligated balances, a list of
programs that have or will end earlier than
originally notified, and a detailed justification for eliminating programs in the fiscal
year 2026 request. Such information shall be
provided to the House and Senate Defense
Appropriations Subcommittees concurrent
with the submission of the fiscal year 2027
President’s budget request.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Defense Security Cooperation
Agency Programs’’ in House Report 119–162
as well as the language under the heading
‘‘Defense Security Cooperation Agency Oversight’’ in Senate Report 119–52.
INDO-PACIFIC SECURITY COOPERATION
The agreement supports the President’s
budget request of $1,000,000,000 for the Taiwan Security Cooperation Initiative, in addition to the $1,000,000,000 provided through
this Act and Public Law 119–21 for the replacement of defense articles provided to
Taiwan. The agreement also provides an increase of $40,000,000 for the Philippines within the Defense Security Cooperation Agency’s International Security Cooperation Programs account in recognition of growing
threats by the People’s Republic of China to
Taiwan and the Philippines, a treaty ally of
the United States.
The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Commander,
United States Indo-Pacific Command, to provide the House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees, not later than 60
days after the enactment of this Act, with a
spend plan and briefing on the Taiwan Security Cooperation Initiative and the additional funding provided for International Security Cooperation Programs—Philippines.
The agreement further directs the Secretary
of Defense, in consultation with the Commander, United States Indo-Pacific Command, to provide a report to the congressional defense committees, not later than 90
days after the enactment of this Act, detailing the threats to the security of the Philippines by the People’s Republic of China,
changing military requirements of the
Armed Forces and Coast Guard of the Philippines to deter and defend against such
threats, and a plan for enhanced security cooperation with the Philippines.
SEXUAL ASSAULT PREVENTION

The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to provide a report to the House and
Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees not later than 90 days after enactment
of this Act on the Department of Defense and
Military Services’ implementation of recommendations from the Independent Review
Commission on Sexual Assault in the Military, the Special Victims Counsel program,
and other sexual assault prevention initiatives undertaken in calendar year 2025. The
report shall also include the total number of
billets designated to Integrated Primary
Prevention (IPP) workforce, Sexual Assault
Prevention and Response (SAPR), and related roles at the start of the calendar year
2025; the number of vacant positions that
have been open over one year; details on any
exemptions designated to hiring IPP, SAPR,
and related roles; and the number of staff
who have opted to accept the deferred resignation program, disaggregated by month of
acceptance.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.047

H22JAPT2

H1390
UNITED STATES SOUTHERN COMMAND
HEADQUARTERS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

United
States
Southern
Command
(USSOUTHCOM) plays a critical role in addressing transnational threats, strengthening partnerships, and responding to humanitarian crises, and its current headquarters location is critical to fulfilling
these missions. Transferring the head-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

quarters of USSOUTHCOM would undermine
United States national security interests,
weaken regional stability efforts, and reduce
the effectiveness of military and interagency
coordination. The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to maintain the current
USSOUTHCOM headquarters and functions
given their importance for effective command and control of United States military

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

forces in the region, protecting United
States interests, and supporting stability
throughout Latin American and the Caribbean.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, ARMY
The agreement provides $58,249,178,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Army, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1391

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/62 here EH220126.019

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/63 here EH220126.020

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1392

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1393

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/64 here EH220126.021

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/65 here EH220126.022

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1394

January 22, 2026

H1395

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, NAVY
The agreement provides $74,723,177,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Navy, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00044

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/67 here EH220126.023

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1396

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1397

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00045

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/68 here EH220126.024

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00046

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/69 here EH220126.025

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1398

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1399

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00047

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/70 here EH220126.026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1400

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE,
MARINE CORPS
The agreement provides $10,983,917,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Marine Corps,
as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00048

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1401

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00049

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/72 here EH220126.027

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1402

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, AIR
FORCE
The agreement provides $61,542,591,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Air Force, as
follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00050

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1403

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00051

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/74 here EH220126.028

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00052

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/75 here EH220126.029

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1404

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1405

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00053

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/76 here EH220126.030

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1406

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, SPACE
FORCE
The agreement provides $5,687,748,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Space Force, as
follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00054

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1407

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00055

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/78 here EH220126.031

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1408

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE,
DEFENSE-WIDE
The agreement provides $56,089,818,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Defense-Wide,
as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00056

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1409

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00057

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/80 here EH220126.032

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00058

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/81 here EH220126.033

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1410

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1411

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00059

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/82 here EH220126.034

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00060

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.048

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/83 here EH220126.035

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1412

January 22, 2026

H1413

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

COUNTER–ISIS TRAIN AND EQUIP FUND

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS

The agreement provides $342,516,000 for
Counter-ISIS Train and Equip Fund, as follows:

[In thousands of dollars]

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS—
Continued
[In thousands of dollars]

Mandatory
IRAQ TRAIN AND EQUIP ............
SYRIA TRAIN AND EQUIP ..........
LEBANON TRAIN AND EQUIP .....

Budget
Request

....................
....................
....................

212,516
130,000
15,000

Final Bill
212,516
130,000
0

Mandatory

Budget
Request

Final Bill

Transfer to OM DW line
4GTD for Lebanese Armed
Forces ..............................

....................

....................

¥15,000

TOTAL, COUNTER–ISIS
TRAIN AND EQUIP
FUND ...........................

....................

357,516

342,516

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, ARMY
RESERVE
The agreement provides $3,258,861,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Army Reserve,
as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00061

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.049

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00062

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.049

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/86 EH220126.036

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1414

January 22, 2026

H1415

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, NAVY
RESERVE
The agreement provides $1,421,774,000 Operation and Maintenance, Navy Reserve, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00063

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.055

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00064

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.055

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 88 here EH220126.037

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1416

January 22, 2026

H1417

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE,
MARINE CORPS RESERVE
The agreement provides $319,941,000 for Operation and Maintenance, Marine Corps Reserve, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00065

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.056

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00066

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.056

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 90 here EH220126.038

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1418

January 22, 2026

H1419

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, AIR
FORCE RESERVE
The agreement provides $4,246,342,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Air Force Reserve, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00067

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.057

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00068

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.057

H22JAPT2

Insert graphic folio 8000/92 here EH220126.039

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1420

January 22, 2026

H1421

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, ARMY
NATIONAL GUARD
The agreement provides $8,578,238,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Army National
Guard, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00069

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.058

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00070

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.058

H22JAPT2

Insert graphic folio 8000/94 here EH220126.040

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1422

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1423

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00071

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.058

H22JAPT2

Insert graphic folio 8000/95 here EH220126.041

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1424

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, AIR
NATIONAL GUARD
The agreement provides $7,267,399,000 for
Operation and Maintenance, Air National
Guard, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00072

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.059

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1425

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00073

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.059

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/97 here EH220126.042

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1426

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE ARMED FORCES
The agreement provides $21,243,000 for the
United States Court of Appeals for the
Armed Forces.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, ARMY
The agreement provides $190,870,000 for Environmental Restoration, Army.

Budget
Request

[In thousands of dollars]

TOTAL, ENVIRONMENTAL
RESTORATION, AIR
FORCE .........................

Final Bill

ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION,
ARMY ....................................
Program increase—PFAS remediation and cleanup ...

....................

148,070

190,870

....................

....................

42,800

TOTAL, ENVIRONMENTAL
RESTORATION, ARMY ..

....................

148,070

190,870

ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, NAVY
The agreement provides $368,949,000 for Environmental Restoration, Navy.

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS

TOTAL, ENVIRONMENTAL
RESTORATION, NAVY ...

342,149

396,149

....................

....................

46,000

....................

....................

8,000

....................

342,149

396,149

Budget
Request

[In thousands of dollars]

357,949

368,949

....................

....................

11,000

357,949

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

The agreement provides $396,149,000 for Environmental Restoration, Air Force.

Jkt 069060

FOREIGN DISASTER RELIEF ......
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE .....
HUMANITARIAN MINE ACTION
PROGRAM .............................

368,949

ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, AIR
FORCE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

BIOLOGICAL THREAT REDUCTION PROGRAM ....................
CHEMICAL SECURITY & ELIMINATION .................................
DELIVERY SYSTEM THREAT REDUCTION ...............................
PROLIFERATION PREVENTION
PROGRAM .............................
GLOBAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ....
OTHER ASSESSMENTS/ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS ....................
TOTAL, COOPERATIVE
THREAT REDUCTION ACCOUNT .............................

TOTAL, OVERSEAS HUMANITARIAN, DISASTER, AND
CIVIC AID .........................

Budget
Request

Final Bill

....................
....................

9,994
79,599

9,994
79,599

....................

11,200

11,200

....................

100,793

100,793

COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION
ACCOUNT
The agreement provides $282,830,000 for the
Cooperative Threat Reduction Account, as
follows:

PO 00000

Frm 00074

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Final Bill

....................

138,565

138,565

....................

25,292

25,292

....................

6,249

6,249

....................
....................

47,146
38,134

47,146
38,134

....................

27,444

27,444

....................

282,830

282,830

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ACQUISITION
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNT
The agreement provides $50,846,000 for the
Department of Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Account, as follows:

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS
[In thousands of dollars]
Mandatory

Final Bill

Budget
Request

Mandatory

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS

....................

....................

Final Bill

....................

Mandatory
ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION,
NAVY ....................................
Program increase—PFAS remediation and cleanup ...

Budget
Request

ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION,
DEFENSE-WIDE
The agreement provides $8,885,000 for Environmental Restoration, Defense-Wide.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION,
FORMERLY USED DEFENSE SITES
The agreement provides $235,156,000 for Environmental Restoration, Formerly Used Defense Sites.
OVERSEAS HUMANITARIAN, DISASTER,
AND CIVIC AID
The agreement provides $100,793,000 for
Overseas Humanitarian, Disaster, and Civic
Aid, as follows:

[In thousands of dollars]
Mandatory

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS

[In thousands of dollars]

ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION,
AIR FORCE ...........................
Program increase—PFAS remediation and cleanup ...
Program increase—PFAS remediation and cleanup
for Air National Guard ....

[In thousands of dollars]
Mandatory

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS

Mandatory

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

RECRUITING AND HIRING .........
TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT ..
Program increase—classified ready employee
workforce .........................
Program increase—Fulbright icebreaker talent
exchange .........................
RECOGNITION AND RETENTION
TOTAL, DOD ACQUISITION
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNT ..........

Budget
Request

Final Bill

....................
....................

2,770
42,176

2,770
47,676

....................

....................

5,000

....................
....................

....................
400

500
400

....................

45,346

50,846

TITLE III—PROCUREMENT
The agreement provides $167,068,712,000 in
Title III, Procurement, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.060

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1427

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00075

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.060

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/104 here EH220126.043

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1428

REPROGRAMMING GUIDANCE FOR ACQUISITION
ACCOUNTS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

The Secretary of Defense is directed to
continue to follow the reprogramming guidance as specified in the report accompanying
the House version of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2008 (House Report
110–279). Specifically, the dollar threshold for
reprogramming funds shall be $15,000,000 for
procurement and research, development, test
and evaluation.
Also, the Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller) is directed to continue to provide the congressional defense committees
quarterly, spreadsheet-based DD Form 1416
reports for Service and defense-wide accounts in titles III and IV of this Act. Reports for titles III and IV shall comply with
the guidance specified in the joint explanatory statement accompanying the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2006.
The Department shall continue to follow the
limitation
that
prior
approval
reprogrammings are set at either the specified dollar threshold or 20 percent of the procurement or research, development, test and
evaluation line, whichever is less. These
thresholds are cumulative from the base for
reprogramming value as modified by any adjustments. Therefore, if the combined value
of transfers into or out of a procurement (P–
1) or research, development, test and evaluation (R–1) line exceeds the identified threshold, the Secretary of Defense must submit a
prior approval reprogramming to the congressional defense committees. In addition,
guidelines on the application of prior approval reprogramming procedures for con-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

gressional special interest items are established elsewhere in this statement.
FUNDING INCREASES

The funding increases outlined in these tables shall be provided only for the specific
purposes indicated in the tables. Additional
guidance is provided in the overview of this
joint explanatory statement.
PROCUREMENT SPECIAL INTEREST ITEMS

Items for which additional funds have been
recommended or items for which funding is
specifically reduced as shown in the project
level tables detailing recommended adjustments or in paragraphs using the phrase
‘‘only for’’ or ‘‘only to’’ in this joint explanatory statement are congressional special interest items for the purpose of the Base for
Reprogramming (DD Form 1414). Each of
these items must be carried on the DD Form
1414 at the stated amount, as specifically addressed elsewhere in this joint explanatory
statement.
JOINT LIGHT TACTICAL VEHICLE

In May 2025, the Secretary of the Army announced the Army’s cancellation of future
procurement of the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV). The agreement notes that the
Secretary of the Army is the joint program
acquisition lead for JLTV and that per the
requirements of section 3067 of title 10,
U.S.C., the House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees expect that the
Secretary of Defense coordinates with the
Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)
and relevant Service Secretaries on programmatic decisions for joint programs that

PO 00000

Frm 00076

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

impact planned budget activities and requirements across the military departments.
The agreement also notes the Army’s inadequate supporting analysis provided to the
House and Senate Defense Appropriations
Subcommittees.
Therefore, with the submission of the fiscal year 2027 Presidents budget request, the
Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition and
Sustainment) shall, in coordination with the
Service Secretaries, provide a report to the
congressional defense committees detailing
each Service’s acquisition strategy for
JLTV. The report shall include by Service:
(1) the current acquisition procurement objective, projected order and delivery schedule across the future years defense program,
sustainment strategy, and funding shortfalls
associated with previously awarded vehicle
contracts; (2) identification of any impacts
associated with the dissolution of the joint
program office, including unit cost increases,
schedule delays, production gaps, and termination fees to be assessed as part of future
budget requests; (3) an analysis of potential
risks to supply chain, and related programs
and projects for integration with JLTV Family of Vehicles; (4) an analysis of alternatives
to JLTV for related programs and projects to
include comparative costs and integration
efforts; and (5) a holistic evaluation of vehicle requirements and how the JLTV will be
implemented in all areas of operation.
AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT, ARMY
The agreement provides $3,625,324,000 for
Aircraft Procurement, Army, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1429

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00077

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/108 here EH220126.044

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00078

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/109 here EH220126.045

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1430

January 22, 2026

H1431

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

MISSILE PROCUREMENT, ARMY
The agreement provides $7,287,263,000 for
Missile Procurement, Army, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00079

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00080

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/111 here EH220126.046

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1432

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1433

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00081

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/112 here EH220126.047

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1434

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

PROCUREMENT OF WEAPONS AND
TRACKED COMBAT VEHICLES, ARMY
The agreement provides $3,005,021,000 for
Procurement of Weapons and Tracked Combat Vehicles, Army, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00082

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1435

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00083

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/114 here EH220126.048

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00084

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/115 here EH220126.049

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1436

January 22, 2026

H1437

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

PROCUREMENT OF AMMUNITION, ARMY
The agreement provides $4,576,705,000 for
Procurement of Ammunition, Army, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00085

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00086

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/117 here EH220126.050

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1438

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1439

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00087

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/118 here EH220126.051

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1440

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OTHER PROCUREMENT, ARMY
The agreement provides $9,412,655,000 for
Other Procurement, Army, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00088

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1441

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00089

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/120 here EH220126.052

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00090

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/121 here EH220126.053

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1442

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1443

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00091

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/122 here EH220126.054

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00092

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/123 here EH220126.055

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1444

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1445

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00093

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/124 here EH220126.056

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00094

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/125 here EH220126.057

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1446

January 22, 2026

H1447

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT, NAVY
The agreement provides $17,239,853,000 for
Aircraft Procurement, Navy, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00095

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00096

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/127 here EH220126.058

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1448

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1449

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00097

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/128 here EH220126.059

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00098

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/129 here EH220126.060

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1450

January 22, 2026
E–2D ADVANCED HAWKEYE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

The agreement recognizes the importance
of the Navy’s E–2D Advanced Hawkeye program and its central mission of providing

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1451

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

airborne early warning and control to the
fleet. Therefore, the agreement includes
$1,100,800,000 in funding for up to three aircraft, including up to $330,000,000 to fund the
production gap.

PO 00000

Frm 00099

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

WEAPONS PROCUREMENT, NAVY
The agreement provides $6,086,954,000 for
Weapons Procurement, Navy, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00100

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/132 here EH220126.061

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1452

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1453

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00101

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/133 here EH220126.062

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1454

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

PROCUREMENT OF AMMUNITION, NAVY
AND MARINE CORPS
The agreement provides $1,098,630,000 for
Procurement of Ammunition, Navy and Marine Corps, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00102

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1455

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00103

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/135 here EH220126.063

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1456

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

SHIPBUILDING AND CONVERSION, NAVY
The agreement provides $27,151,616,000 for
Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00104

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1457

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00105

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/137 here EH220126.064

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00106

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.061

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/138 here EH220126.065

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1458

January 22, 2026
CONSTELLATION CLASS FRIGATE
COMPREHENSIVE FRAMEWORK

On November 25, 2025, the Navy announced
the cancellation of the Constellation class
Frigate program, ending its second attempt
at fielding a new small surface combatant.
The agreement reflects the Navy’s decision
and rescinds $2,565,062,000. In alignment with
the Navy’s November 23, 2025, Comprehensive
Framework,
the
agreement
provides
$800,000,000 for the Medium Landing Ship
program to stabilize the industrial base affected by the cancellation with transitional
workload. Further, the agreement notes the
Navy’s plan under the Comprehensive
Framework to continue FFG–62 and FFG–63
workload during this transition at the shipyard. Under the Framework the Navy will
identify and prioritize additional, more suitable workload to protect the stability and
capacity of the shipyard.
FF(X) FRIGATE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

On December 19, 2025, the Navy announced
the selection of the Coast Guard’s Legend
class National Security Cutter (NSC) as the
baseline for a new FF(X) Frigate design. The
agreement notes the Navy’s Battle Force
Ship Assessment and Requirement includes
73 small surface combatants and appreciates
the urgency with which the Navy has sought
an alternative path forward in the wake of
the cancellation of the Constellation-class
Frigate program. However, the agreement
notes the Navy has identified five areas requiring significant design study to incorporate key capabilities, including those related to lethality, into the NSC design. The
agreement notes the Navy’s previous small
surface combatant programs, to include the
Littoral Combat Ship (LCS), were challenged
from the outset due to unrealistic program
objectives, rushed design, numerous design
changes, underestimation of cost and schedule, and a fundamental mismatch with actual combat needs. The agreement notes the
Navy’s aggressive timeline for the lead
FF(X) ship and expects that the Navy will
apply lessons learned from both the challenges of the Constellation-class Frigate and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1459

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

the LCS when proceeding with FF(X) Frigate
acquisition. In support of the Navy’s objective to quickly deliver a small surface combatant to the Fleet, the agreement provides
$242,000,000 for procurement of long lead materials for FF(X) Frigate.
MEDIUM LANDING SHIP

The agreement reflects the Navy’s plan to
begin procurement of the Medium Landing
Ship (LSM), including use of a vessel construction manager (VCM). However, significant concerns remain regarding the LSM
program, beginning with the cost. In materials presented to the House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees in February 2025, the cost per ship was estimated at
$228,800,000. As of December 17, 2025, the estimated price for the lead ship is $316,000,000,
(an increase of more than 38 percent) resulting from a change in the design. The Navy
estimates that price will increase an additional ten to twenty percent for the fee to
use a VCM. It is imperative that the Secretary of the Navy mitigates cost growth in
order to keep the program affordable for the
Marine Corps’ program objective range of between 18–35 LSMs.
The agreement provides $800,000,000 for additional LSMs to expedite fielding and deliver this capability to the Marine Corps. In
keeping with the Navy’s Comprehensive
Framework, the funding is intended to provide a strong demand signal to rapidly construct new classes of ships, ensure sufficient
workload to reduce the risk of workforce
shortage,
prevent
supply
chain
vulnerabilities, preserve the multi-tiered
shipbuilding supplier base, and protect national security shipbuilding capabilities following the termination of the last four ships
of the Constellation-class Frigate program.
A total of $1,963,941,000 was provided for
LSMs in Public Law 119–21. The agreement
directs the Secretary of the Navy to
prioritize assigning ships for construction to
shipyards negatively impacted by the cancellation of the Constellation-class Frigate
program and to ensure those shipyards have
sufficient workload to remain fully staffed
before other allocations.

PO 00000

Frm 00107

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

COLUMBIA CLASS SUBMARINE PROGRAM

The agreement provides the Columbia
class submarine program with funding commensurate to the level of the fiscal year 2026
President’s budget request. Regrettably,
there is insufficient funding available to the
House and Senate Defense Appropriations
Subcommittees in fiscal year 2026 to fully
fund this and other Department priorities.
The agreement intends the incremental
funding to be a one-time occurrence. The
Navy did not demonstrate that incremental
funding results in meaningful improvements
to affordability or program stability to justify an extraordinary exception to key budget principles. The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the
Secretary of the Navy, to provide concurrently with submission of the President’s
budget request for fiscal year 2027, a list of
proposed offsets to achieve full funding of future Columbia class submarines if the fiscal
year 2027 President’s budget request again
assumes incremental funding for Columbia
class submarines.
VIRGINIA CLASS SUBMARINE PROGRAM

The agreement provides an increase of
$1,918,600,000 for a second Virginia class submarine to address the funding shortfall created by misalignment of the President’s
budget request and Public Law 119–21.
Further, the agreement notes the Department’s decision to realign funding from Public Law 119–21 to address funding shortfalls
in the Columbia class submarine advance
procurement and the Virginia class submarine advance procurement budget line
items. The shortfall created by the incongruence between the budget request and available mandatory resources is being funded
from multiple provisions in Public Law 119–
21 and is intended to support infrastructure
and wage enhancements at the prime shipyards.
OTHER PROCUREMENT, NAVY
The agreement provides $14,693,978,000 for
Other Procurement, Navy, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00108

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/143 here EH220126.066

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1460

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1461

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00109

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/144 here EH220126.067

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00110

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/145 here EH220126.068

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1462

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1463

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00111

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/146 here EH220126.069

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00112

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/147 here EH220126.070

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1464

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1465

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00113

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/148 here EH220126.071

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1466

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

PROCUREMENT, MARINE CORPS
The agreement provides $3,682,643,000 for
Procurement, Marine Corps, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00114

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1467

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00115

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/150 here EH220126.072

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00116

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/151 here EH220126.073

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1468

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1469

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00117

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/152 here EH220126.074

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1470

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT, AIR FORCE
The agreement provides $19,964,954,000 for
Aircraft Procurement, Air Force, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00118

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1471

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00119

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/154 here EH220126.075

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00120

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/155 here EH220126.076

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1472

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1473

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00121

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/156 here EH220126.077

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00122

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/157 here EH220126.078

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1474

January 22, 2026

H1475

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

MISSILE PROCUREMENT, AIR FORCE
The agreement provides $3,963,961,000 for
Missile Procurement, Air Force, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00123

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00124

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/159 here EH220126.079

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1476

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1477

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00125

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/160 here EH220126.080

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1478

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

PROCUREMENT OF AMMUNITION, AIR
FORCE
The agreement provides $773,327,000 for
Procurement of Ammunition, Air Force, as
follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00126

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1479

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00127

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/162 here EH220126.081

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1480

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OTHER PROCUREMENT, AIR FORCE
The agreement provides $32,605,147,000 for
Other Procurement, Air Force, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00128

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1481

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00129

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/164 here EH220126.082

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00130

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/165 here EH220126.083

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1482

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1483

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00131

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/166 here EH220126.084

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1484

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

PROCUREMENT, SPACE FORCE
The agreement provides $4,036,035,000 for
Procurement, Space Force, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00132

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1485

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00133

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/168 here EH220126.085

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00134

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.062

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/169 here EH220126.086

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1486

January 22, 2026
SPACE FORCE PROCUREMENT QUANTITIES

The agreement provides $1,329,263,000 to
procure four space launch services under the
National Security Space Launch program
line; $648,446,000 to procure seven space
launch services under the Space Development Agency Launch program line; and
$637,944,000 to procure two Global Positioning System IIIF spacecraft.
LAUNCH INFRASTRUCTURE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Access to space remains a critical national
security priority, and the agreement commends the Assured Access to Space program
office for its administration and growth of
the National Security Space Launch program. As demand for launch and the number
of launch providers continues to grow, space
launch infrastructure must be used efficiently and effectively to advance United
States national security priorities. This requires launch pad allocation to be competitive, transparent, and forward-looking, especially for heavy lift launch sites. To ensure
the best use of limited space launch infrastructure, the agreement directs the Secretary of the Air Force, in consultation with
the Chief of Space Operations, to submit a
report to the congressional defense committees not later than 120 days after enactment
of this Act detailing a strategy for launch
site allocations, including a plan for investments to modernize United States space

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1487

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

launch range capabilities to support planned
launch rates. The strategy shall: include an
open and competitive process for launch site
allocation decisions; prioritize diversity of
launch providers; consider providers’ access
to commercial, private, or other government
launch facilities; consider each provider’s
readiness to launch, including realistic assessments of the launch vehicle’s development status and path toward certification;
ensure coordination with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; and provide for appropriate durations of launch site
allocations to allow reasonable periods of recompetition. The strategy shall detail a fiveyear investment plan by fiscal year to fully
implement the strategy. The investment
plan shall include the use of any funds provided in Public Law 119–21 for space launch
infrastructure.
GPS IIIF PROCUREMENT

In 2018, the Space Force entered into a contract to develop and procure 22 GPS IIIF satellites. GPS IIIF provides important new capabilities, including Regional Military Protection for a boosted M–Code signal for increased anti-jam capabilities, improved
search and rescue capabilities, as well as improvements to the nuclear detection payload
and various other technical upgrades. The
contract includes pre-priced production options to leverage economies of scale, signifi-

PO 00000

Frm 00135

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

cantly reducing unit costs when buying more
than one spacecraft in a year. The acquisition strategy to procure at least one and up
to four spacecraft each year would appear to
be exactly the kind of long-term commitment, with incentives to leverage economies
of scale, that improves efficiency and stability to field new systems. However, the
Space Force’s fiscal year 2026 GPS IIIF budget request did not include funding to procure
any spacecraft, thus creating a ‘‘gap year’’
and triggering a costly penalty payment
under the terms of the contract. The consequence is the taxpayer pays more and receives less. The House and Senate Defense
Appropriations Subcommittees do not seek
to encourage such fiscally imprudent decisions in the future; therefore, the agreement
provides funding for two GPS IIIF spacecraft. The agreement urges the Secretary of
the Air Force to prioritize this program in
the fiscal year 2027 President’s budget request and not use it to pay for other projects
as the GPS mission is a core responsibility of
the Space Force and essential to military operations as well as civil and commercial activity.
PROCUREMENT, DEFENSE–WIDE
The agreement provides $7,142,723,000 for
Procurement, Defense-Wide, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.063

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00136

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.063

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/173 here EH220126.087

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1488

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1489

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00137

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.063

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/174 here EH220126.088

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00138

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.063

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/175 here EH220126.089

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1490

January 22, 2026

DEFENSE PRODUCTION ACT PURCHASES
The agreement provides $321,923,000 for Defense Production Act Purchases, as follows:

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS—
Continued
[In thousands of dollars]

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS

Mandatory

Budget
Request

....................
....................

....................
0

115,000
46,000

....................
....................

....................
0

46,000
22,000

....................
....................

0
0

22,000
132,000

....................

....................

132,000

....................

0

800,000

[In thousands of dollars]
Budget
Request

Mandatory
DEFENSE PRODUCTION ACT
PURCHASES ..........................
Program increase—domestic black powder advanced manufacturing
expansion ........................
Program increase—domestic test and evaluations
for munitions ...................
Program increase—recovery
of copper from domestic
copper smelter slag mills
Program increase—standard missile 3 block IIA
TDACS second source ......
TOTAL, DEFENSE PRODUCTION ACT PURCHASES .......................

Final Bill

....................

236,923

321,923

....................

....................

20,000

....................

....................

30,000

....................

....................

15,000

....................

....................

20,000

....................

236,923

321,923

NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVE
EQUIPMENT ACCOUNT
The agreement provides $800,000,000 for the
National Guard and Reserve Equipment Account, as follows:

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS
[In thousands of dollars]
Mandatory

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

ARMY NATIONAL GUARD ...........
Program increase—miscellaneous equipment .....
AIR NATIONAL GUARD ...............
Program increase—miscellaneous equipment .....
ARMY RESERVE ........................

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Budget
Request

Final Bill

....................

0

250,000

....................
....................

0
0

250,000
235,000

....................
....................

....................
0

235,000
115,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1491

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Program increase—miscellaneous equipment .....
NAVY RESERVE .........................
Program increase—miscellaneous equipment .....
MARINE CORPS RESERVE .........
Program increase—miscellaneous equipment .....
AIR FORCE RESERVE ................
Program increase—miscellaneous equipment .....
TOTAL, NATIONAL GUARD
AND RESERVE EQUIPMENT ACCOUNT ..........

Final Bill

NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVE EQUIPMENT
ACCOUNT

The agreement includes an appropriation
of $800,000,000 for the National Guard and Reserve Equipment Account. Of that amount,
$250,000,000 is for the Army National Guard;
$235,000,000 is for the Air National Guard;
$115,000,000 is for the Army Reserve;
$46,000,000 is for the Navy Reserve; $22,000,000
is for the Marine Corps Reserve; and
$132,000,000 is for the Air Force Reserve to
meet urgent equipment needs in the coming
fiscal year. The agreement includes direction
for the component commanders of the Army
Reserve, Navy Reserve, Marine Forces Reserve, Air Force Reserve, Army National
Guard, and Air National Guard to submit to
the congressional defense committees a detailed assessment of their component’s modernization priorities, not later than 30 days
after the enactment of this Act.
The Secretary of Defense is directed to ensure that the National Guard and Reserve

PO 00000

Frm 00139

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Equipment Account is executed by the Chiefs
of the National Guard and Reserve components with priority consideration given to
the following items: acoustic hailing devices;
aircraft survivability equipment and weapons training aids; aviation status dashboards; ballistic and multiband laser eye protection; cloud defense solutions; construction equipment systems; controlled humidity preservation; crash-survivable UH–60 helicopter gunner seats; degraded visual environment systems; emergency response refuel
equipment kits for C–130/135 aircraft; heavy
dump trucks; high mobility multi-purpose
wheeled vehicle modernization; human performance wearable technology; improved
thermal acoustic blankets; internal auxiliary crashworthy, ballistically tolerant auxiliary fuel systems for UH–60 helicopters;
KC–135 aircrew ground cooling units; land
surveying systems; lightweight, rapidly
deployable, computerbased artillery call for
fire training and simulation; litter stabilization systems; modular small arms ranges
and small arms training simulators and
tools; National Security Agency compliant,
multiple network configurable, secure tactical voice bridge; secure enterprise, emergency, and social communication; software
defined radios; UH–72 Lakota mission equipment modernization; upgraded commercial
off the shelf ground mapping for C–130 aircraft; and vehicle–mounted, man–portable
radiological nuclear detection systems.
TITLE IV—RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT,
TEST AND EVALUATION
The agreement provides $145,922,309,000 in
Title IV, Research, Development, Test and
Evaluation, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.063

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00140

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/180 here EH220126.090

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1492

January 22, 2026

REPROGRAMMING GUIDANCE FOR ACQUISITION
ACCOUNTS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

The Secretary of Defense is directed to
continue to follow the reprogramming guidance as specified in the report accompanying
the House version of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2008 (House Report
110–279). Specifically, the dollar threshold for
reprogramming funds shall be $15,000,000 for
procurement and research, development, test
and evaluation.
Also, the Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller) is directed to continue to provide the congressional defense committees
quarterly, spreadsheet-based DD Form 1416
reports for Service and defense-wide accounts in titles III and IV of this Act. Reports for titles III and IV shall comply with
the guidance specified in the joint explanatory statement accompanying the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2006.
The Department shall continue to follow the
limitation
that
prior
approval
reprogrammings are set at either the specified dollar threshold or 20 percent of the procurement or research, development, test and
evaluation line, whichever is less. These
thresholds are cumulative from the base for
reprogramming value as modified by any adjustments. Therefore, if the combined value
of transfers into or out of a procurement (P–

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1493

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

1) or research, development, test and evaluation (R–1) line exceeds the identified threshold, the Secretary of Defense must submit a
prior approval reprogramming to the congressional defense committees. In addition,
guidelines on the application of prior approval reprogramming procedures for congressional special interest items are established elsewhere in this statement.
FUNDING INCREASES

The funding increases outlined in these tables shall be provided only for the specific
purposes indicated in the tables. Additional
guidance is provided in the overview of this
joint explanatory statement.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION SPECIAL INTEREST ITEMS

Items for which additional funds have been
recommended or items for which funding is
specifically reduced as shown in the project
level tables detailing recommended adjustments or in paragraphs using the phrase
‘‘only for’’ or ‘‘only to’’ in this joint explanatory statement are congressional special interest items for the purpose of the Base for
Reprogramming (DD Form 1414). Each of
these items must be carried on the DD Form
1414 at the stated amount, as specifically addressed elsewhere in this joint explanatory
statement.

PO 00000

Frm 00141

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS

The agreement urges the full disclosure of
federal support and transparency by recipients of Department of Defense research and
development funds, as codified by title 10,
U.S.C. section 4027. The agreement notes the
Department’s ‘‘Fundamental Research Security Initiative and Implementation’’ memorandum and acknowledges that the initiative
represents a step toward further safeguarding the Department’s fundamental research from adverse exploitation.
The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense, not later than 90 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, to provide a progress
report to the congressional defense committees detailing plans for ensuring compliance
with title 10, U.S.C. section 4027, including
enforcement actions related to disclosure of
federal funds.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Disclosure Requirements for
Recipients of Research and Development
Funds’’ in Senate Report 119–52.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, ARMY
The agreement provides $16,705,760,000 for
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Army, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00142

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/184 here EH220126.091

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1494

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1495

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00143

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/185 here EH220126.092

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00144

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/186 here EH220126.093

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1496

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1497

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00145

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/187 here EH220126.094

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00146

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/188 here EH220126.095

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1498

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1499

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00147

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/189 here EH220126.096

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00148

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/190 here EH220126.097

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1500

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1501

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00149

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/191 here EH220126.098

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00150

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/192 here EH220126.099

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1502

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1503

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00151

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/193 here EH220126.100

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00152

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/194 here EH220126.101

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1504

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1505

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00153

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/195 here EH220126.102

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00154

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/196 here EH220126.103

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1506

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1507

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00155

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/197 here EH220126.104

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00156

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/198 here EH220126.105

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1508

January 22, 2026

H1509

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, NAVY
The agreement provides $28,099,776,000 for
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Navy, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00157

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00158

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/200 here EH220126.106

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1510

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1511

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00159

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/201 here EH220126.107

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00160

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/202 here EH220126.108

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1512

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1513

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00161

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/203 here EH220126.109

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00162

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/204 here EH220126.110

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1514

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1515

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00163

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/205 here EH220126.111

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00164

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/206 here EH220126.112

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1516

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1517

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00165

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/207 here EH220126.113

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00166

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/208 here EH220126.114

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1518

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1519

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00167

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/209 here EH220126.115

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00168

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/210 here EH220126.116

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1520

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1521

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00169

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/211 here EH220126.117

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00170

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/212 here EH220126.118

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1522

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1523

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00171

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/213 here EH220126.119

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1524
FF(X) FRIGATE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

The agreement supports the Navy’s effort
to quickly deliver a small surface combatant
to the fleet. Therefore, the agreement provides $84,199,000 for the design and development for the FF(X) Frigate program. Further, the Secretary of the Navy is directed,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

not later than 90 days after the enactment of
this Act, to submit a report to the congressional defense committees that details the
current acquisition strategy, accompanied
by a spend plan for funds that have been
made available to the Department of Defense
for this program.

PO 00000

Frm 00172

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, AIR FORCE
The agreement provides $50,614,595,000 for
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Air Force, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1525

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00173

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/216 here EH220126.120

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00174

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/217 here EH220126.121

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1526

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1527

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00175

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/218 here EH220126.122

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00176

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/219 here EH220126.123

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1528

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1529

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00177

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/220 here EH220126.124

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00178

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/221 here EH220126.125

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1530

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1531

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00179

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/222 here EH220126.126

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00180

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/223 here EH220126.127

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1532

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1533

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00181

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/224 here EH220126.128

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00182

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/225 here EH220126.129

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1534

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1535

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00183

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/226 here EH220126.130

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00184

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/227 here EH220126.131

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1536

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1537

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00185

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/228 here EH220126.132

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00186

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/229 here EH220126.133

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1538

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1539

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00187

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.064

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/230 here EH220126.134

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1540
AIR FORCE RESOURCE ALLOCATION

SENTINEL

As the Integrated Capabilities Command
(Provisional) is expected to be fully integrated into the Headquarters of the Air
Force A5/7 directorate by April 2026, the
agreement directs the Secretary of the Air
Force to brief the congressional defense committees on the status of this integration, and
any other restructuring of the A5/7 directorate, not more than 90 days after enactment of this Act.
The agreement further directs the Director
of the Integrated Development Office and the
Commander of Integrated Capabilities Command (Provisional), or equivalent, to jointly
provide semi-annual briefings to the House
and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees on how their work is informing
modernization plans, developing programming inputs to align with force design, and
providing a cost-effective and realistic pipeline to deliver warfighting capabilities.
Finally, the agreement directs the Secretary of the Air Force, through the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial
Management and Comptroller), to ensure
that the fiscal year 2027 President’s budget
request reflects Integrated Development Office capability development activities in the
appropriate budget line items.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Air Force Resource Allocation’’
in House Report 119–162.

The agreement maintains the direction
House Report 119–162, under this heading, for
the Secretary of the Air Force to provide
quarterly briefings on the Sentinel program
to the congressional defense committees.
The agreement also modifies direction provided in Senate Report 119–52, under this
heading, for the Secretary of the Air Force
to include during the quarterly briefings a
detailed breakout of efforts utilizing discretionary and mandatory funding in fiscal year
2026, and an updated spend plan that includes
the entire requirement (discretionary and
mandatory) for the Sentinel program in fiscal year 2026.
E–7
The agreement bolsters the E–7 Wedgetail
aircraft program and includes a new general
provision that prohibits the use of funds to
pause, cancel, or terminate the E–7. The
agreement emphasizes the importance of the
E–7 Wedgetail platform and the airborne
early warning and battle management mission for the Department of the Air Force.
Therefore, $1,100,000,000 is included in Research, Development, Test and Evaluation,
Air Force for fiscal year 2026 to continue E–
7 rapid prototyping activities and transition
to engineering and manufacturing development aircraft. The Secretary of the Air
Force is directed to present a plan to the
congressional defense committees, not later
than 90 days after the enactment of this Act,
on ongoing actions to streamline requirements and control costs on future production
of the E7 aircraft.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘E–7’’ in Senate Report 119–52.
B–52 HIGH FIDELITY SIMULATOR MODERNIZATION
The agreement directs the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) to submit to the congressional defense committees, not later
than 90 days after the enactment of this Act,
a report that provides an acquisition strategy and cost estimate by appropriation,
budget-line item, and fiscal year for the development, test, and procurement of modernized B–52H high fidelity flight simulators.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘B–52 High Fidelity Simulator
Modernization’’ in House Report 119–162 and
Senate Report 119–52.

AIR FORCE REQUIREMENTS OPTIMIZATION

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

The agreement emphasizes the importance
of the Air Force’s ongoing planning to optimize investments based on fleet size, capability type and necessary quantities of fighter planes, bombers, tankers, and mobility assets. In particular, the ongoing work to assess the requirements for new aircraft versus
sustainment of existing aircraft has generated valuable, data-driven analysis that
has provided a greater level of insight to inform the appropriations process. Therefore,
the Chief of Staff of the Air Force is directed
to brief the congressional defense committees annually, in coordination with the
President’s budget request, on how the current and budget year investments are strategically aligned with future year goals and
provide retention-copy charts that depict a
multi-year overview of each platform.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Future of the Tanker Refueling
Fleet’’ in Senate Report 119–52.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

NEXT GENERATION ADAPTIVE PROPULSION

Maintaining competition in the Next Generation Adaptive Propulsion (NGAP) pro-

PO 00000

Frm 00188

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

gram remains a priority to spur innovation
and sustain a healthy industrial base. The
agreement encourages the Secretary of the
Air Force to maintain the NGAP competition until two fully developed and tested prototypes are presented to the Air Force for
evaluation.
EDUCATION PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENTS

Education Partnership Agreements (EPAs)
offer an opportunity to help meet Defense Industrial Base workforce development requirements in technology areas critical to
national security, such as artificial intelligence, autonomous systems, hypersonics,
space systems, and advanced manufacturing.
The Air Force Research Laboratory and
other defense laboratories are encouraged to
make use of new EPA financial assistance
mechanisms enabled through section 213 of
the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2025 (Public Law 118–159) and
brief the congressional defense committees
on their application and use with respect to
fiscal year 2025 and 2026 funds.
QUANTUM INFORMATION SCIENCE

The agreement finds that accelerated investment in quantum information science,
encompassing both computing and networking, is critical for maintaining technological superiority and ensuring mission resilience across the Department of the Air
Force (DAF). Quantum capabilities are essential for achieving the DAF’s core operational goals. Sustained funding should
prioritize the Air Force Research Laboratory’s strategic goal of realizing secure, distributed quantum networks and highly accurate computing systems. The agreement encourages the Secretary of the Air Force to
prioritize research and development focused
on trapped ion systems to meet unique DAF
needs for powerful computing and resilient
quantum networking.
EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS SILICONE MATERIALS

The agreement recognizes the importance
of advancing research on silicone materials
in extreme environments. The agreement encourages the Secretary of the Air Force to
prioritize research and development efforts
in this area to improve warfighting readiness.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, SPACE FORCE
The agreement provides $14,917,160,000 for
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Space Force, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.065

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1541

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00189

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.065

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/235 here EH220126.135

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00190

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.065

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/236 here EH220126.136

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1542

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1543

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00191

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.065

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/237 here EH220126.137

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00192

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.065

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/238 here EH220126.138

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1544

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

COMMERCIAL SERVICES

Space-based commercial service offerings
are increasingly broad and comprised of
high-quality commercial data available to
support Space Force missions, especially
space domain awareness. Therefore, the
agreement provides an additional $49,500,000
to explore the use of commercial positioning,
navigation, and timing services to ensure resilient navigation in GPS-denied environments; space-based environmental monitoring to strengthen mission planning in
areas where information is insufficient; and
space domain awareness mission needs to
mitigate growing threats. The Secretary of
the Air Force shall submit a report to the
congressional defense committees, not later
than 180 days following enactment of this

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1545

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Act, on the efficacy of these commercial
space-based capabilities.
TACTICAL SURVEILLANCE, RECONNAISSANCE,
AND TRACKING

The Tactical Surveillance, Reconnaissance, and Tracking Services (TacSRT) program, while only in its pilot phase, has instituted a novel marketplace for commercial
remote sensing tasking, which allows for
vendor competition, and allows for execution
of the requirement in tactically relevant
timelines. The marketplace for commercial
service offerings for electro-optical/infrared,
synthetic aperture radar, hyperspectral imaging capabilities, radio frequency, and
other phenomenologies continue to expand.
However, despite directed appropriations of

PO 00000

Frm 00193

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

$40,000,000 in both fiscal year 2024 and fiscal
year 2025 as provided in the Department of
Defense Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law
118–47) and the funding tables accompanying
the Full-Year Continuing Appropriations and
Extensions Act, 2025 (Public Law 119–4), the
fiscal year 2026 President’s budget request
fails to request adequate resources to continue the TacSRT effort. Therefore, the
agreement provides an additional $30,000,000
for continued execution of the TacSRT program through combatant command directed
requirements.
Additionally, it is noted that section 1607
of the National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2026 (Public Law 119–60)

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.065

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/239 here EH220126.139

January 22, 2026

H1546

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

states ‘‘the Secretary of the Air Force, in coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence and Security), shall conduct a study on the feasibility and advisability of establishing a program of record
for tactical surveillance, reconnaissance, and
tracking capabilities within the Department
of Defense.’’ Therefore, the agreement provides $50,000,000 for sustained new or existing
agreements with commercial providers to
augment the TacSRT marketplace through
data and analytics commercial remote sensing procurement to allow the Space Force to
prioritize and fulfill combatant commander
operational requirements. Further, the
agreement directs the Secretary of the Air
Force to institute a new sustained commercial services electro-optical program in the
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Space Force account and to properly
resource this program across the fiscal year
2027 future years defense program. This program shall provide long-term stability that
will maintain a consistent level of support
that combatant commanders can plan for,
while also allowing industry to reinvest in
their own capabilities in order to maintain
their competitive advantage across the global marketplace.
Finally, the agreement directs the Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation (CAPE) to review the program, its mission use cases and objectives, and its contracting mechanisms; identify and make recommendations for the program’s organization, its operations, and its use of contracts
with commercial vendors. The Director of
CAPE shall provide a briefing with the findings and recommendations of this review to
the congressional defense and congressional
intelligence committees not later than 180
days after the enactment of this Act.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Tactical Surveillance, Reconnaissance, and Tracking’’ in House Report
119–162, the language under the heading
‘‘Commercial Surveillance, Reconnaissance,
and Tracking Services’’ in Senate Report
119–52, and the language under the heading
‘‘Commercial Electro-Optical Program Restructure’’ in Senate Report 119–52.
RESILIENT POSITION, NAVIGATION, AND TIMING
The agreement recognizes the vital importance of enhancing the resilience of position,
navigation, and timing (PNT) services provided by the Global Positioning System

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(GPS) to ensure its availability for military
operations, particularly in highly contested
environments against sophisticated adversaries. The loss of GPS, even temporarily,
would cause catastrophic damage to the nation while also severely impacting military
effectiveness.
The
agreement
provides
$15,000,000 to continue the development of resilient GPS space systems.
Unfortunately, the Department of Defense
has not taken any significant actions to address the findings and recommendations of
the Defense Science Board’s (DSB) May 2024
classified final report on Position, Navigation and Timing, which highlights many, but
not all, the issues that must be addressed to
make PNT services more resilient, such as
accelerating the delivery of jam resistant
user equipment and increasing resilience of
the ground control segment. Therefore, the
agreement provides $30,000,000 to develop an
integrated PNT architecture that maximizes
enduring competition while using a Modular
Open Mission Systems approach to maintain
the Nation’s commitment to a resilient PNT
capability for military and civilian users.
Furthermore, the agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to provide the congressional defense committees, not later than 90
days after enactment of this Act, with a
comprehensive written plan of action and
milestones for investments in more resilient
capabilities across space, ground, and user
equipment segments. This plan shall specifically address each of the findings and recommendations of the DSB report, as well as
provide investments by Service and Agency
and by fiscal year.
NEXT GENERATION OVERHEAD PERSISTENT
INFRARED

The agreement continues to strongly support the pivot to proliferated missile warning/missile tracking systems in low-Earth
orbit and medium-Earth orbit, as these systems will provide greater resilience and coverage for tactical use. However, these systems, and their associated ground processing
systems are not designed to meet the strategic indications and warning requirements
of the Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications (NC3) enterprise. The Department of Defense lacks a clear plan to meet
strategic NC3 requirements after the current
legacy Space-Based Infrared systems age
out. Therefore, section 8149 of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2026

PO 00000

Frm 00194

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

prohibits termination of the Next Generation Overhead Persistent Infrared systems
for geosynchronous and polar orbits. The
Secretary of the Air Force, in collaboration
with the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition and Sustainment) and the Commander, United States Strategic Command,
shall provide a report to the House and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees,
not later than 180 days after the enactment
of this Act, with findings and recommendations on the future of strategic missile warning systems to meet NC3 requirements.
COMPETITIVE SPACE TRANSPORT CAPABILITIES

Open competition and competitive design,
development, and production of systems are
essential to ensure that the Department is
getting the right system at the right price.
Several recent acquisitions by the National
Reconnaissance Office within the Geospatial
Intelligence portfolio utilize non-competitive sole-source procurements on contracts
that are non-severable and hamper the oversight of appropriated funds by the congressional defense committees. In contrast, the
Space Development Agency (SDA) utilizes an
approach where iterative tranches are
awarded to multiple vendors to spur competition and maintain a robust industrial
base.
Further, the Proliferated Warfighter Space
Architecture (PWSA) was designed and purpose-built to deliver mission critical data directly to operational users. This capability,
inherent in SDA’s Transport Layer, is critical and must be maintained as the PWSA
architecture evolves and space-based data
transport capabilities increase. Therefore,
the agreement provides $50,000,000 to maintain warfighter centric capabilities within
the PWSA architecture.
GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM III—OPERATIONAL
CONTROL SEGMENT

The agreement includes a Space Force requested transfer of $72,500,000 to the Global
Positioning System III—Operational Control
Segment program to develop Global Positioning System ground architecture enhancements.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, DEFENSE–WIDE

The agreement provides $35,248,875,000 for
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Defense-Wide, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1547

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00195

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/245 here EH220126.140

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00196

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/246 here EH220126.141

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1548

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1549

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00197

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/247 here EH220126.142

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00198

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/248 here EH220126.143

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1550

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1551

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00199

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/249 here EH220126.144

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00200

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/250 here EH220126.145

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1552

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1553

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00201

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/251 here EH220126.146

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00202

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/252 here EH220126.147

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1554

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1555

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00203

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/253 here EH220126.148

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00204

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/254 here EH220126.149

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1556

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1557

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00205

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/255 here EH220126.150

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00206

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/256 here EH220126.151

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1558

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1559

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00207

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/257 here EH220126.152

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00208

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/258 here EH220126.153

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1560

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1561

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00209

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/259 here EH220126.154

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00210

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/260 here EH220126.155

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1562

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1563

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00211

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/261 here EH220126.156

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00212

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.066

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/262 here EH220126.157

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1564

January 22, 2026
ADVANCED AEROSPACE COMPOSITES

The agreement notes that advanced aerospace composite manufacturing is constrained by domestic industrial production
capacity limitations. Therefore, the agreement directs the Under Secretary of Defense
(Research and Engineering), in partnership
with a designated technology hub, to develop
domestic capabilities for advanced largescale composite manufacturing for aerospace
components, and includes $55,000,000 within
the Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Defense-Wide appropriation account
to initiate this effort.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘Advanced Composites’’ in Senate Report 119–52.
BIOMANUFACTURING

The agreement supports the Department of
Defense’s decision to designate biomanufacturing as one of its six Critical Technology
Areas and encourages the Department to
quickly identify and empower strong leadership to properly oversee and manage its biomanufacturing programs, establish a rapid
tempo of execution commensurate with the
urgency of scaling up domestic biomanufacturing capabilities, and fully invest resources in the success of these efforts. Bioindustrial manufacturing has immense potential to enable new military capabilities,
mitigate supply chain vulnerabilities, expand markets for domestic agricultural producers, and strengthen American industrial
competitiveness. It encourages the Secretary
of Defense to increase collaborations with
North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies
and partners to enhance national security,
pool resources, and counter adversarial advances in biotechnology and bioindustrial
manufacturing.
The agreement recognizes the strategic
importance of achieving sufficient biomanufacturing and bioindustrial capacity, as the
United States faces many challenges across
supply chains, and notes concerns that the
Department has not focused enough, despite
congressional special interest provided in
prior years, on bioindustrial investments
that will facilitate the private sector crossing the valley of death to full-scale, domestic commercialization and manufacturing.
The agreement encourages the Department
to rapidly scale investments in pilot plants,
facilities, and downstream processing infrastructure. Therefore, the agreement directs
the Secretary of Defense to prioritize fiscal
year 2026 investments in biomanufacturing
and bioindustrial manufacturing facilities
and to provide to the congressional defense
committees, not later than 60 days after the
enactment of this Act, a comprehensive
spend plan for the Department’s biomanufacturing and bioindustrial activities and quarterly reports, until September 30, 2027, on
progress thereafter. The spend plan shall include details below the project level and describe how the Department will use fiscal
year 2026 funds to rapidly accelerate development, piloting, facility development, and
scale-up of domestic biomanufacturing and
bioindustrial capabilities with national security applications.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

DEFENSE MICROELECTRONICS ACTIVITY

The agreement notes the Department intends to apportion funding from section
20005(a)(27) of Public Law 119–21 to the Defense Microelectronics Activity (DMEA) for
the purposes of carrying out current process
improvements and throughput capacity expansion. The agreement supports these activities and has included an additional
$62,000,000 for DMEA. Given these funds, the
agreement encourages the Secretary of Defense to maximize existing cost-effective options to reduce obsolescence in current and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1565

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

future munitions inventories. The agreement
also directs the Secretary of Defense to provide certification in writing to the congressional defense committees, not later than 60
days after the enactment of this Act, that
not less than a total of $152,000,000 of funds
appropriated for fiscal year 2026, comprising
$62,000,000 from this Act and the remainder
from Public Law 119–21, are available to the
Defense Microelectronics Activity for the
purposes of carrying out current process improvements and throughput capacity expansion.
TEST RESOURCE MANAGEMENT CENTER BUDGET
JUSTIFICATION MATERIALS

The agreement expresses concern about
the Test Resource Management Center’s unjustified fiscal year 2026 budget request and
failure to provide clear and consistent information on the amounts, purposes, and plans
for requested discretionary funding, requested mandatory funding, and later,
amounts made available by Public Law 119–
21 for multiple efforts. Additionally, the Department of Defense did not provide a test
roadmap, a viable project plan, or a path forward for the billions of increased spending
for such efforts. Therefore, the incorporated
tables recommend an undistributed reduction of $400,000,000 to be applied against increases to the program’s funding.
The agreement also highlights concerns
with respect to limited and dilapidated range
and test infrastructure across the Department. Multiple recent studies have concluded that limited test capacity, old and
aging facilities, and inadequate modernization are a strategic risk to the Department’s
ability to field advanced capabilities at the
pace required.
OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION,
DEFENSE
The agreement provides $336,143,000 for
Operational Test and Evaluation, Defense, as
follows:

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS
[In thousands of dollars]
Mandatory
OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION .................................
Program increase—cyber
assessments ....................
Program increase—
microgrid cyber security ..
Program increase—Operational Test and Evaluation ..................................
Program decrease ................
LIVE FIRE TESTING ...................
Program increase—Live Fire
Testing .............................
Program decrease ................
OPERATIONAL TEST ACTIVITIES
AND ANALYSIS ......................
Program increase—Operational Test Activities
and Analysis ....................
Program decrease ................
TOTAL, OPERATIONAL
TEST & EVALUATION,
DEFENSE .....................

Budget
Request

Final Bill

....................

133,542

151,542

....................

....................

15,000

....................

....................

3,000

....................
....................
....................

....................
....................
108,109

133,542
¥133,542
108,109

....................
....................

....................
....................

108,109
¥108,109

....................

76,492

76,492

....................
....................

....................
....................

....................

318,143

76,492
¥76,492

336,143

TEST AND EVALUATION ACTIVITIES

Frm 00213

TITLE V—REVOLVING AND
MANAGEMENT FUNDS
The agreement provides $2,132,240,000 in
Title V, Revolving and Management Funds.
DEFENSE WORKING CAPITAL FUNDS
The agreement provides $2,132,240,000 for
Defense Working Capital Funds, as follows:

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS
[In thousands of dollars]
Mandatory

The agreement recognizes digital engineering as a core enabler for improving the pace
of weapon systems testing, test design, and
test infrastructure development. Its application will enhance physical test range enterprises and interconnectivity, provide live
data-driven validation, improve test confidence and assurance, provide earlier identification of safety issues and design flaws, accelerate problem discovery, and curtail expensive and dangerous live events. Digital
engineering makes attainable, tests that
were nonviable or impossible to previously
achieve.
Furthermore, the agreement recognizes
that digital engineering will not replace the

PO 00000

need for live testing. Live test events are important for reliability and insight into
human and system performance and integration where digital engineering is insufficient
or inadequate. Additionally, it is widely understood that there is increasing need for
operational test and evaluation of emerging
space, cyber, undersea, and electromagnetic
spectrum capabilities.
The agreement highlights concerns that
the Department reorganized the Office of the
Director, Operational Test and Evaluation
(DOT&E), including a reduction-in-force of 75
percent, at a time when the test and evaluation community is transforming to support
unprecedented production and fielding requirements including, but not limited to,
‘‘Golden Dome.’’ The need to prevent catastrophic failure and ensure systems and
weapons are safe, effective, secure, and reliable remains paramount.
Therefore, the Secretary of Defense is directed to, not later than 60 days after the enactment of this Act, submit a detailed report
and provide a briefing, to the congressional
defense committees, detailing the impacts of
the reorganization on operational test activities underway, the list of discontinued
activities, and the list of activities that will
continue. The report shall include a detailed
program plan for how the Department intends to meet demands for independent operational test and evaluation and validate the
capabilities expected to come online in the
future years defense program.
The agreement stipulates that all requested spending in the Operational, Test
and Evaluation appropriation account is designated as a congressional special interest
item and carries this same designation for
any funding requested in support of the
DOT&E within the Operation and Maintenance, Defense-Wide appropriation account.
This language replaces the language under
the heading ‘‘The Office of the Director,
Operational Test and Evaluation’’ in Senate
Report 119–52 as well as the language under
the heading ‘‘Test and Evaluation Activities’’ in House Report 119–162.

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

WORKING CAPITAL FUND, ARMY
Program increase—Arsenal
Sustainment Initiative .....
Program increase—industrial-focused charrette ....
WORKING CAPITAL FUND, NAVY
WORKING CAPITAL FUND, AIR
FORCE ..................................
DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY,
ENERGY MANAGEMENT ........
DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY,
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT ....................................
Unjustified growth ...............
WORKING CAPITAL FUND, DECA
NATIONAL DEFENSE STOCKPILE
TRANSACTION FUND .............
TOTAL, DEFENSE WORKING CAPITAL FUNDS ....

Budget
Request

Final Bill

....................

20,589

125,589

....................

....................

100,000

....................
....................

....................
381,600

5,000
381,600

....................

90,262

90,262

....................

1,272

1,272

....................
....................
....................

10,697
....................
1,527,817

0
¥10,697
1,527,817

1,000,000

5,700

5,700

....................

2,037,937

2,132,240

TITLE VI—OTHER DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE PROGRAMS
The agreement provides $43,649,802,000 in
Title VI, Other Department of Defense Programs, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.067

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00214

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.067

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/269 here EH220126.158

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1566

January 22, 2026

H1567

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

DEFENSE HEALTH PROGRAM
The agreement provides $41,770,246,000 for
the Defense Health Program, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00215

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.067

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00216

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.067

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/271 here EH220126.159

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1568

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1569

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00217

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.067

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/272 here EH220126.160

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

REPROGRAMMING GUIDANCE FOR THE DEFENSE
HEALTH PROGRAM

The agreement directs the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health Affairs) to provide
quarterly briefings to the congressional defense committees, not later than 30 days
after the end of each fiscal quarter, on budget execution data for all Defense Health Program budget activities and to adequately reflect changes to the budget activities requested by the Services in future budget submissions. These reports shall also be provided to the Government Accountability Office.
The agreement directs that the In-House
Care and Private Sector Care budget sub-activities remain designated as congressional
special interest items for the purpose of the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Base for Reprogramming (DD Form 1414).
Any transfer of funds in excess of $15,000,000
into or out of these sub-activities requires
the Secretary of Defense to follow prior approval reprogramming procedures for operation and maintenance funds. The agreement
further directs the Secretary of Defense to
submit a report to the congressional defense
committees, not later than 30 days after the
enactment of this Act, that delineates transfers of funds, and the dates any transfers occurred, from the Private Sector Care budget
sub-activity to any other budget sub-activity
in fiscal year 2025.
The agreement notes with concern by the
repurposing of Facilities Sustainment, Restoration and Modernization (FSRM) funding
throughout the fiscal year. Deferring FSRM

PO 00000

Frm 00218

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

projects in favor of more immediate needs of
the Defense Health Program may seem prudent at the time but comes with costly, severe,
and
enduring
ramifications
for
servicemembers and beneficiaries. The Secretary of Defense is directed to provide written notification to the congressional defense
committees of cumulative transfers in excess
of $15,000,000 out of the Base Operations and
Communications budget sub-activity not
later than 15 days after such a transfer.
CARRYOVER

The agreement provides one percent carryover authority for the Operation and Maintenance account of the Defense Health Program. The Assistant Secretary of Defense

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.067

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/273 here EH220126.161

H1570

January 22, 2026

(Health Affairs) is directed to submit a detailed spend plan for any fiscal year 2025 and
2026 designated carryover funds to the congressional defense committees not less than
30 days prior to executing the carryover
funds.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS

The agreement directs the Program Executive Officer of Defense Healthcare Management Systems (PEO DHMS), in conjunction
with the Director of the Federal Electronic
Health Record Modernization (FEHRM) and
the Director of the Defense Health Agency,
to submit quarterly reports to the congressional defense committees and the Government Accountability Office not later than 30
days after the end of each fiscal quarter on
the cost of the program, including any indirect costs funded outside of the DHMS Modernization Electronic Health Record program; the schedule of the program, to include milestones, knowledge points, and acquisition timelines; system performance; patient safety incidents and mitigations;
metrics to include clinician and patient satisfaction, milestones, knowledge points, and
acquisition timelines; and quarterly obligation reports. In addition, the agreement directs the PEO DHMS to continue to brief the
House and Senate Defense Appropriations
Subcommittees on a quarterly basis, coinciding with the report submission.
The Director of the FEHRM program office
is directed to continue to submit quarterly
reports on the progress of interoperability
between the Department of Defense and the
Department of Veterans Affairs to the House
and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees and the House and Senate Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related Agencies Appropriations Subcommittees. In addition, the agreement directs the
PEO DHMS to continue to brief the House
and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees on a quarterly basis, coinciding
with the report submission.
The agreement directs the Comptroller
General to continue quarterly performance
reviews of MHS GENESIS with a focus on
whether the program is meeting expected
cost, schedule, scope, quality and safety
standards, performance, clinician and patient satisfaction, and risk mitigation expectations, to include system enhancements,
and expects the PEO DHMS will provide the
Comptroller General with regular and indepth access to the program to facilitate
these reviews.
PEER-REVIEWED CANCER RESEARCH PROGRAM
The agreement provides $165,000,000 for the
peer-review cancer research program that
would research cancers not addressed in the
breast, prostate, kidney, ovarian, lung, rare
cancer, melanoma, glioblastoma, and pancreatic research programs. The funds provided in the peer-reviewed cancer research
program are directed to be used to conduct
research in the following areas: bladder cancer; blood cancers; brain cancer; colorectal
cancer; endometrial cancer; esophageal cancer; germ cell cancers; glioblastoma; liver
cancer; lymphoma; mesothelioma; metastatic cancer; myeloma; neuroblastoma;
neuroendocrine tumors; pediatric brain tumors; pediatric, adolescent, and young adult
cancers; sarcoma; stomach cancer; and thyroid cancer. The inclusion of the individual
rare cancer research program shall not prohibit the peer-reviewed cancer research program from funding the previously mentioned

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1571

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

cancers or cancer subtypes that may be rare
by definition.
The funds provided under the peer-reviewed cancer research program shall be
used only for the purposes listed above. The
agreement directs the Assistant Secretary of
Defense (Health Affairs) to provide a report
not later than 18 months after the enactment of this Act to the congressional defense
committees on the status of the peer-reviewed cancer research program. For each
research area, the report shall include the
funding amount awarded, the progress of the
research, and the relevance of the research
to servicemembers.
PEER-REVIEWED MEDICAL RESEARCH PROGRAM
The agreement provides $370,000,000 for the
Peer-Reviewed Medical Research Program.
The agreement directs the Secretary of Defense, in conjunction with the Service Surgeons General, to select medical research
projects of clear scientific merit and direct
relevance to military health. Research areas
considered under this funding are restricted
to: accelerated aging processes associated
with military service; Angelman syndrome;
burn pit exposure; brain injury impact on
cardiac health; celiac disease; congenital
cytomegalovirus; dystonia; eating disorders;
eczema; Ehlers-Danlos syndrome; endometriosis; Facioscapulohumeral Muscular
Dystrophy;
fibrous
dysplasia/McCuneAlbright syndrome; food allergies; Fragile X;
frontotemporal degeneration; gambling addiction; hepatitis B; hereditary and acquired
ataxias;
Hereditary
Hemorrhagic
Telangiectasia (HHT); Hermansky-Pudlack
syndrome;
hydrocephalus;
Hypertrophic
Dyschromia; Hypoxia; infertility associated
with military aviators and aviation support
personnel; inflammatory bowel disease; interstitial cystitis; intranasal ketamine anesthetics;
maternal
mental
health;
mitochondrial
disease;
myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome;
myotonic
dystrophy;
musculoskeletal
health; orthotics and prosthetics outcomes;
pancreatitis;
Pediatric
Acute-Onset
Neuropsychiatric Syndrome (PANS) and Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorder Associated with Streptococcus (PANDAS); peripheral neuropathy; polycystic kidney disease; post-traumatic stress disorder;
PraderWilli Syndrome; proteomics; pulmonary fibrosis; respiratory health; Rett
syndrome; Sarcoidosis; scleroderma; sickle
cell disease; sleep disorders and restriction;
spinal muscular atrophy; suicide prevention;
tuberculosis; and von Hippel-Lindau disease.
The additional funding provided under the
Peer-Reviewed Medical Research Program
shall be devoted only to the purposes listed
above.
CHEMICAL AGENTS AND MUNITIONS
DESTRUCTION, DEFENSE
The agreement provides $213,282,000 for
Chemical Agents and Munitions Destruction,
Defense, as follows:

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS
[In thousands of dollars]
Mandatory
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT,
TEST AND EVALUATION ........

PO 00000

TOTAL, CHEMICAL AGENTS
AND MUNITIONS DESTRUCTION, DEFENSE ......

Frm 00219

Budget
Request

....................

3,243

3,243

210,039

210,039

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

213,282

The agreement provides $1,148,675,000 for
Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities, Defense, as follows:

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS
[In thousands of dollars]

COUNTER-NARCOTICS SUPPORT
Program increase .................
Program increase—commercial ISR support for
SOUTHCOM ......................
Program increase—COMSAT
Imagery AI/ML for drug
interdiction ......................
DRUG DEMAND REDUCTION
PROGRAM .............................
NATIONAL GUARD COUNTERDRUG PROGRAM ..................
Program increase .................
Program increase—illicit
drug deactivation at U.S.
borders ............................
NATIONAL GUARD COUNTERDRUG SCHOOLS ...................
Program increase .................
TOTAL, DRUG INTERDICTION AND COUNTERDRUG ACTIVITIES, DEFENSE ..........................

213,282

Mandatory

Budget
Request

....................
....................

652,884
....................

678,737
15,853

....................

....................

5,000

....................

....................

5,000

....................

134,938

134,938

....................
....................

110,125
....................

305,000
189,875

....................

....................

5,000

....................
....................

6,354
....................

30,000
23,646

....................

904,301

1,148,675

Final Bill

REQUESTS FOR ASSISTANCE

In the case of a Department of Defense approval of requests for assistance from other
agencies, the agreement directs the Secretary of Defense to transmit to the House
and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees, not later than seven days after
approval, a copy of any request for assistance to the Department that the Secretary
has approved as well as the official response
transmitted to the applicable requesting department. Concurrently, the Secretary of
Defense shall provide justification for approval, a spend plan including the funding
source, and a justification for providing assistance on a reimbursable or non-reimbursable basis, as applicable, to the House and
Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees.
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
The agreement provides $517,599,000 for the
Office of the Inspector General, as follows:

EXPLANATION OF PROJECT LEVEL ADJUSTMENTS
[In thousands of dollars]
Mandatory
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE ..........................
Program increase—civilian compensation
OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, CYBER .............
PROCUREMENT .................
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND EVALUATION .........................

Final Bill

....................

....................

DRUG INTERDICTION AND COUNTER–
DRUG ACTIVITIES, DEFENSE

TOTAL, OFFICE OF
THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL .............

Budget
Request

Final Bill

10,000

494,865

509,865

....................

........................

15,000

....................
....................

2,030
1,079

2,030
1,079

....................

4,625

4,625

....................

502,599

517,599

TITLE VII—RELATED AGENCIES
The agreement provides $1,143,128,000 in
Title VII, Related Agencies, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.068

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00220

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.069

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/282 here EH220126.162

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1572

January 22, 2026

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY SYSTEM
FUND
The agreement provides $514,000,000 for the
Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and
Disability Fund.
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY
MANAGEMENT ACCOUNT
The agreement provides $629,128,000 for the
Intelligence Community Management Account.
TITLE VIII—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title VIII of the accompanying bill includes 153 general provisions. A brief description of each provision follows.
Section 8001 provides that no funds made
available in this Act may be used for publicity or propaganda purposes not authorized
by Congress.
Section 8002 provides for conditions and
limitations on the payment of compensation
to, or employment of, foreign nationals.
Section 8003 provides that no funds made
available in this Act may be obligated beyond the end of the fiscal year unless expressly provided for a greater period of availability elsewhere in the Act.
Section 8004 limits the obligation of certain funds provided in this Act during the
last two months of the fiscal year.
Section 8005 provides for the general transfer authority of funds to other military functions.
Section 8006 provides that the tables titled
Explanation of Project Level Adjustments in
this joint explanatory statement and classified annex shall be carried out in the manner
provided by the tables to the same extent as
if the tables were included in the text of this
Act.
Section 8007 provides for the establishment
of a baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for the current
fiscal year.
Section 8008 provides for limitations on the
use of transfer authority of working capital
fund cash balances.
Section 8009 provides that none of the
funds appropriated in this Act may be used
to initiate a special access program without
prior notification to the congressional defense committees.
Section 8010 provides limitations and conditions on the use of funds made available in
this Act to initiate multi-year procurement
contracts.
Section 8011 provides for the use and obligation of funds for humanitarian and civic
assistance costs.
Section 8012 provides for limitations on the
use of the Defense Modernization Account.
Section 8013 prohibits funding from being
used to influence congressional action on
any matters pending before Congress.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1573

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Section 8014 restricts the use of funds to
reduce, or prepare to reduce, the number of
deployed and non-deployed strategic delivery
vehicles and launchers.
Section 8015 provides for the transfer of
funds appropriated in title III of this Act for
the Department of Defense Pilot MentorProtégé Program.
Section 8016 provides for the Department
of Defense to purchase anchor and mooring
chains manufactured only in the United
States.
Section 8017 prohibits funds made available
in this Act for the support of any non-appropriated activity of the Department of Defense that procures malt beverages and wine
except under certain conditions.
Section 8018 prohibits funds made available
to the Department of Defense from being
used to demilitarize or dispose of certain surplus firearms and small arms ammunition or
ammunition components.
Section 8019 provides a limitation on funds
being used for the relocation of any Department of Defense entity into or within the
National Capital Region.
Section 8020 provides for incentive payments authorized by section 504 of the Indian
Financing Act of 1974 (25 U.S.C. 1544).
Section 8021 provides for the conveyance,
without consideration, of relocatable housing units that are excess to the needs of the
Air Force.
Section 8022 provides for the availability of
funds for the mitigation of environmental
impacts on Indian lands resulting from Department of Defense activities.
Section 8023 prohibits funds for the Defense
Media Activity from being used for national,
or international, political or psychological
activities.
Section 8024 provides funding in the
Army’s Working Capital Fund to maintain
competitive rates at arsenals.
Section 8025 provides funding for the Civil
Air Patrol Corporation.
Section 8026 prohibits funding from being
used to establish new Department of Defense
federally funded research and development
centers (FFRDCs), with certain limitations.
Section 8027 defines the congressional defense committees as the Armed Services
Committees of the House and Senate and the
Subcommittees on Defense of the House and
Senate Appropriations Committees.
Section 8028 defines the congressional intelligence committees as being the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the
House, the Select Committee on Intelligence
of the Senate, and the Subcommittees on Defense of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees.
Section 8029 provides for competition between private firms and Department of Defense depot maintenance activities.

Section 8030 requires the Department of
Defense to comply with the Buy American
Act, chapter 83 of title 41, U.S.C.
Section 8031 provides for the Department
of Defense to procure carbon, alloy, or armor
steel plates melted and rolled only in the
United States and Canada.
Section 8032 provides for the revocation of
blanket waivers of the Buy American Act.
Section 8033 prohibits funding from being
used for the procurement of ball and roller
bearings other than those produced by a domestic source and of domestic origin.
Section 8034 provides funding for assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces.
Section 8035 prohibits funding from being
used to purchase supercomputers which are
not manufactured in the United States.
Section 8036 provides for a waiver of ‘‘Buy
American’’ provisions for certain cooperative programs.
Section 8037 prohibits the use of funds for
the purchase or manufacture of a United
States flag unless such flags are treated as
covered items under section 4862(b) of title
10, U.S.C.
Section 8038 provides for the availability of
funds contained in the Department of Defense Overseas Military Facility Investment
Recovery Account.
Section 8039 provides authority to use operation and maintenance appropriations to
purchase items having an investment item
unit cost of not more than $350,000.
Section 8040 provides authority to use operation and maintenance appropriations for
the Asia Pacific Regional Initiative Program.
Section 8041 prohibits the sale of tobacco
products in military resale outlets below the
most competitive price in the local community.
Section 8042 prohibits the use of Working
Capital Funds to purchase specified investment items.
Section 8043 provides that none of the
funds appropriated for the Central Intelligence Agency shall remain available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year except for funds appropriated for the Reserve
for Contingencies, the Working Capital
Fund, or other programs as specified.
Section 8044 places certain limitations on
the use of funds made available in this Act
to establish field operating agencies.
Section 8045 places restrictions on converting to contractor performance an activity or function of the Department of Defense
unless it meets certain guidelines provided.
(RESCISSIONS)

Section 8046 provides for the rescission of
$5,708,887,000 from the following programs:

2020 Appropriations:
Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy:
FFG–Frigate .........................................................................................................................................
2022 Appropriations:
Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy:
FFG–Frigate .........................................................................................................................................
2023 Appropriations:
Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy:
FFG–Frigate .........................................................................................................................................
2024 Appropriations:
Cooperative Threat Reduction Account:
Cooperative Threat Reduction Account ................................................................................................
Other Procurement, Army:
Handheld Manpack Small Form Fit .....................................................................................................
Weapons Procurement, Navy:
MK–48 Torpedo ......................................................................................................................................
Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy:
FFG–Frigate .........................................................................................................................................
Aircraft Procurement, Air Force:
B–21 Raider ............................................................................................................................................
Other Production Charges .....................................................................................................................

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00221

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.069

H22JAPT2

$240,245,000
$418,624,000
$483,391,000
$33,936,000
$15,000,000
$2,943,000
$1,271,572,000
$15,000,000
$10,397,000

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1574

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Missile Procurement, Air Force:
Stand-In Attack Weapon (SiAW) ..........................................................................................................
Procurement, Space Force:
National Security Space Launch ..........................................................................................................
Defense Health Program:
PROC Replacement and Modernization ................................................................................................
2025 Appropriations:
Counter-ISIS Train and Equip Fund:
Counter-ISIS Train and Equip Fund .....................................................................................................
Procurement of Weapons and Tracked Combat Vehicles, Army:
M10 Booker ............................................................................................................................................
Stryker (Mod) .......................................................................................................................................
Other Procurement, Army:
Night Vision Devices .............................................................................................................................
Aircraft Procurement, Navy:
Joint Strike Fighter CV (AP–CY) .........................................................................................................
Joint Strike Fighter STOVL (AP–CY) ..................................................................................................
E–2D Advanced Hawkeye ......................................................................................................................
H–53 Series ............................................................................................................................................
Weapons Procurement, Navy:
AARGM–ER ...........................................................................................................................................
AARGM–ER (AP–CY) ............................................................................................................................
Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy:
FFG–Frigate .........................................................................................................................................
Aircraft Procurement, Air Force:
B–21 Raider ............................................................................................................................................
C–40 Fleet Expansion ............................................................................................................................
E–11 BACN/HAG ....................................................................................................................................
F–22A .....................................................................................................................................................
C–130 ......................................................................................................................................................
C–135 ......................................................................................................................................................
HC/MC–130 Modifications ......................................................................................................................
Initial Spares/Repair Parts ...................................................................................................................
Other Production Charges .....................................................................................................................
Classified adjustment ............................................................................................................................
Missile Procurement, Air Force:
Stand-In Attack Weapon (SiAW) ..........................................................................................................
Ballistic Missiles Replacement Equipment ..........................................................................................
Replenishment Spares and Repair Parts Missile ..................................................................................
MM III Modifications ............................................................................................................................
Classified adjustment ............................................................................................................................
Other Procurement, Air Force:
Battle Control System—Fixed ..............................................................................................................
Base Information Transport Infrastructure (BITI) Wired .....................................................................
Mobility Equipment ..............................................................................................................................
Procurement, Space Force:
Special Space Activities .......................................................................................................................
National Security Space Launch ..........................................................................................................
Family of Advanced Beyond Line-of-Sight.
Terminals (FAB–T) Force Element Terminal (FET) .............................................................................
Procurement, Defense-Wide:
CP Protection & Hazard Mitigation ......................................................................................................
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Army:
Landmine Warfare and Barrier—Adv Dev .............................................................................................
Expanded Mission Area Missile (EMAM) ..............................................................................................
Future Tactical Unmanned Aircraft System (FTUAS) .........................................................................
Tactical Unmanned Ground Vehicle (TUGV) ........................................................................................
Armored Systems Modernization (ASM)—Eng Dev ..............................................................................
Precision Strike Missile (PrSM) ...........................................................................................................
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Navy:
Air Control ............................................................................................................................................
TACAMO Modernization .......................................................................................................................
Information Technology Development .................................................................................................
Advanced Surface Machinery System ...................................................................................................
Conventional Prompt Strike (CPS) ......................................................................................................
Command and Control ..........................................................................................................................
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Air Force:
Hard and Deeply Buried Target Defeat System ....................................................................................
Joint Transportation Management System ..........................................................................................
Combat Training Ranges ......................................................................................................................
Isolated Personnel Survivability and Recovery ....................................................................................
VC–25B ..................................................................................................................................................
Collaborative Combat Aircraft .............................................................................................................
MQ–9 UAV .............................................................................................................................................
F–15E Squadrons ...................................................................................................................................
E–11A .....................................................................................................................................................
C–5 Airlift Squadrons (IF) .....................................................................................................................
C–130J Program .....................................................................................................................................
Classified adjustment ............................................................................................................................
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Space Force:
Protected Tactical Service (PTS) .........................................................................................................
GPS III Follow-On (GPS IIIF) ...............................................................................................................
Resilient Missile Warning Missile Tracking—Medium Earth Orbit (MEO) ..........................................
Long Range Kill Chains ........................................................................................................................
Classified adjustment ............................................................................................................................
Defense Modernization Account, Defense-Wide:
Defense Modernization Account, Defense-Wide ....................................................................................

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00222

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.070

H22JAPT2

$41,189,000
$107,100,000
$10,473,000
$50,000,000
$400,176,000
$52,471,000
$119,887,000
$25,086,000
$23,625,000
$62,000,000
$45,000,000
$165,668,000
$34,604,000
$151,230,000
$35,000,000
$10,000,000
$68,640,000
$16,000,000
$20,000,000
$1,134,000
$18,978,000
$2,600,000
$1,203,000
$20,000,000
$152,646,000
$4,338,000
$13,643,000
$12,818,000
$25,600,000
$9,106,000
$131,180,000
$46,352,000
$49,296,000
$98,900,000
$191,000,000
$11,807,000
$15,719,000
$30,000,000
$15,000,000
$77,192,000
$23,100,000
$17,724,000
$11,982,000
$15,000,000
$16,479,000
$15,000,000
$9,000,000
$15,000,000
$39,055,000
$27,916,000
$1,700,000
$4,085,000
$142,670,000
$8,019,000
$1,700,000
$3,850,000
$14,240,000
$11,000,000
$11,700,000
$63,500,000
$153,000,000
$30,000,000
$80,700,000
$82,000,000
$24,449,000
$28,249,000

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

Section 8047 prohibits funds made available
in this Act from being used to reduce authorized positions for military technicians (dual
status) of the Army National Guard, Air National Guard, Army Reserve, and Air Force
Reserve unless such reductions are a direct
result of a reduction in military force structure.
Section 8048 prohibits funding from being
obligated or expended for assistance to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea unless specifically appropriated for that purpose.
Section 8049 prohibits the transfer of Department of Defense and Central Intelligence
Agency drug interdiction and counter-drug
activities funds to other agencies.
Section 8050 provides funding for Red Cross
and United Service Organizations grants.
Section 8051 provides funds for the Small
Business Innovation Research program and
the Small Business Technology Transfer program.
Section 8052 prohibits funding from being
used for contractor bonuses being paid due to
business restructuring.
Section 8053 provides transfer authority for
the pay of military personnel in connection
with support and services for eligible organizations and activities outside the Department of Defense.
Section 8054 provides conditions for the use
of equipment of the National Guard Distance
Learning Project on a space-available, reimbursable basis.
Section 8055 limits funds for the retirement of C–40 aircraft.
Section 8056 provides for the limitation on
the use of funds appropriated in title IV to
procure end-items for delivery to military
forces for operational training, operational
use, or inventory requirements.
Section 8057 prohibits funding in this Act
from being used for repairs or maintenance
to military family housing units.
Section 8058 provides obligation authority
for new starts for advanced concept technology demonstration projects only after notification to the congressional defense committees.
Section 8059 provides that the Secretary of
Defense shall provide a classified quarterly
report on certain matters as directed in the
classified annex accompanying this Act.
Section 8060 provides for the use of National Guard personnel to support groundbased elements of the National Ballistic Missile Defense System.
Section 8061 prohibits the use of funds
made available in this Act to transfer to any
nongovernmental entity ammunition held by
the Department of Defense that has a centerfire cartridge and is designated as ‘‘armor
piercing’’ except for demilitarization purposes.
Section 8062 provides for a waiver by the
Chief of the National Guard Bureau or his
designee for all or part of consideration in
cases of personal property leases of less than
one year.
Section 8063 provides for the transfer of
funds made available in this Act under Operation and Maintenance, Army to other activities of the federal government for classified purposes.
Section 8064 prohibits funding to separate,
or to consolidate from within, the National
Intelligence Program budget from the Department of Defense budget.
Section 8065 provides funding to expand cooperation or improve the capabilities of allies and partners in United States Africa
Command.
Section 8066 provides the authority to
transfer funding from operation and maintenance accounts for the Army, Navy, and Air
Force for Fisher Houses and Suites.
Section 8067 provides grant authority for
the construction and furnishing of additional

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1575

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Fisher Houses to meet the needs of military
family members when confronted with the
illness or hospitalization of an eligible military beneficiary.
Section 8068 provides for the transfer of
funds made available in this Act under Operation and Maintenance, Navy to the John C.
Stennis Center for Public Service Development Trust Fund.
Section 8069 prohibits the modification of
command and control relationships to give
Fleet Forces Command operational and administrative control of United States Navy
forces assigned to the Pacific Fleet.
Section 8070 requires notification for the
rapid acquisition and deployment of supplies
and associated support services.
Section 8071 provides funding for Israeli
Cooperative Programs.
Section 8072 provides funding for prior year
shipbuilding cost increases.
Section 8073 provides that funds made
available in this Act for intelligence and intelligence-related activities not otherwise
authorized in the Intelligence Authorization
Act for the current fiscal year are deemed to
be specifically authorized by Congress for
purposes of section 504 of the National Security Act of 1947.
Section 8074 prohibits funding from being
used to initiate a new start program without
prior written notification.
Section 8075 prohibits funding from being
used for the research, development, test,
evaluation, procurement, or deployment of
nuclear armed interceptors of a missile defense system.
Section 8076 limits funds for the decommissioning of the Littoral Combat Ship.
Section 8077 provides for special transfer
authority for ship construction programs.
Section 8078 prohibits funding from being
used to reduce or disestablish the operation
of the 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron of the Air Force Reserve.
Section 8079 prohibits funding from being
used for the integration of foreign intelligence information unless the information
has been lawfully collected and processed
during conduct of authorized foreign intelligence activities.
Section 8080 limits the availability of funding provided for the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence beyond the current fiscal year, except for funds appropriated for
research and technology, which shall remain
available for the current and the following
fiscal years.
Section 8081 provides limitations on the
Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy appropriation.
Section 8082 provides for the establishment
of a baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for the Office
of the Director of National Intelligence for
the current fiscal year.
Section 8083 places limitations on the reprogramming of funds from the Department
of Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Account.
Section 8084 provides for limitations on
funding provided for the National Intelligence Program to be available for obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming or transfer of funds in accordance with
section 102A(d) of the National Security Act
of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3024(d)).
Section 8085 provides that any agency receiving funds made available in this Act
shall post on a public website any report required to be submitted to Congress with certain exceptions.
Section 8086 prohibits funds for federal
contracts in excess of $1,000,000 unless the
contractor meets certain conditions.
Section 8087 provides funds for transfer to
the Joint Department of Defense-Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Facility
Demonstration Fund.

PO 00000

Frm 00223

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Section 8088 provides for the purchase of
heavy and light armored vehicles for the
physical security of personnel or for force
protection purposes up to a limit of $450,000
per vehicle, and for the purchase of passenger motor vehicles for use by military
and civilian employees of the Department of
Defense in the United States Central Command area of responsibility up to a limit of
$75,000 per vehicle.
Section 8089 provides the Director of National Intelligence with general transfer authority with certain limitations.
Section 8090 authorizes the use of funds in
the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy account to purchase two used auxiliary vessels
for the National Defense Reserve Fleet.
Section 8091 directs the Secretary of Defense to post grant awards on a public
website in a searchable format.
Section 8092 prohibits the use of funds by
the National Security Agency targeting
United States persons under authorities
granted in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.
Section 8093 places restrictions on transfer
amounts available to pay salaries for nonDepartment of Defense personnel.
Section 8094 provides that operation and
maintenance funds may be used for any purposes related to the National Defense Reserve Fleet.
Section 8095 prohibits the use of funds to
award a new TAO Fleet Oiler or any Frigate
program contract for the acquisition of certain components unless those components
are manufactured in the United States with
some exceptions.
Section 8096 prohibits funds for the development and design of certain future naval
ships unless any contract specifies that all
hull, mechanical, and electrical components
are manufactured in the United States.
Section 8097 prohibits certain transfers
from the Department of Defense Acquisition
Workforce Development Account.
Section 8098 prohibits the use of funds for
gaming or entertainment that involves nude
entertainers.
Section 8099 prohibits funding for information technology systems that do not have
pornographic content filters.
Section 8100 prohibits the use of funds for
ceremonial honors when doing so would undermine military readiness.
Section 8101 prohibits funds in the Act
from being used to enter into a contract or
provide a loan to any corporation that has
any unpaid federal tax liability.
Section 8102 provides funds for agile development, test and evaluation, procurement,
production and modification, and the operation and maintenance for certain software
pilot programs.
Section 8103 prohibits funds from being
used to transfer the National Reconnaissance Office to the Space Force.
Section 8104 prohibits the use of funding in
contravention of the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Section 8105 prohibits the use of funds to
provide arms, training, or other assistance
to the Azov Battalion.
Section 8106 provides the authority to accept and retain contributions from foreign
governments to carry out security assistance
authorized by section 1250 of Public Law 114–
92.
Section 8107 provides for the obligation of
funds in anticipation of receipt of contributions from the Government of Kuwait.
Section 8108 provides funding for International Security Cooperation Programs.
Section 8109 provides funding to reimburse
certain countries in accordance with section
1226 of Public Law 114–92.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.070

H22JAPT2

H1576

Section 8110 prohibits funding from being
used in contravention of the War Powers
Resolution.
Section 8111 prohibits funding from being
used in violation of the Child Soldiers Prevention Act of 2008.
Section 8112 prohibits funds for any member of the Taliban.
Section 8113 provides that certain support
to friendly foreign countries be made in accordance with section 8005 of this Act.
Section 8114 prohibits funds from being
used to enter into a contract with
Rosoboronexport.
Section 8115 requires notification of the receipt of contributions from foreign governments.
Section 8116 requires the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff to report on any unplanned activity or exercise.
Section 8117 directs the Secretary of Defense to allocate amounts made available
from the Creating Helpful Incentives to
Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) for America Defense Fund:

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ALLOCATION OF FUNDS: CHIPS
AND SCIENCE ACT FISCAL YEAR 2026
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Defense-Wide
Budget Activity 02, Applied Research:
Microelectronics Commons ...............................................
Budget Activity 03, Advanced Technology Development:
Microelectronics Commons ...............................................
Budget Activity 04, Advanced Component Development and
Prototypes:
Microelectronics Commons ...............................................

79,709,000
260,731,000

59,560,000

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Section 8118 requires notification if a foreign base is opened or closed.
Section 8119 prohibits funds to establish
permanent bases in Iraq or exercise United
States control over Iraq or Syria oil resources.
Section 8120 provides security assistance to
the Government of Jordan.
Section 8121 reduces amounts appropriated
in title II of this Act to reflect excess cash
balances in Department of Defense Working
Capital Funds.
Section 8122 provides funding for the Sexual Assault Special Victims’ Counsel Program.
Section 8123 provides guidance regarding
implementation of ‘‘Policy for Assisted Reproductive Services for Benefit of Seriously
or Severely Ill/Injured (Category II or III)
Active Duty Service Member.’’

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Section 8124 provides the authority for the
Secretary of Defense to obligate funds to
modify up to nine F–35 aircraft to a test configuration.
Section 8125 prohibits the use of funds to
integrate an alternative engine on any F–35
aircraft.
Section 8126 provides for the use of funds
for the rapid acquisition and deployment of
supplies and associated support services.
Section 8127 provides the authority for Defense Innovation Unit Fielding funds for expenses related to agile research, development, test and evaluation, procurement, production, modification, and operation and
maintenance requirements, including initial
acquisition of end-items for operational use.
Section 8128 prohibits the use of funds to
be used to support any activity associated
with the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
Section 8129 prohibits funds for any work
to be performed by EcoHealth Alliance, Inc.
in China on research supported by the Government of the People’s Republic of China.
Section 8130 prohibits the use of funds to
transfer, release, or assist in the transfer to
the United States of detainees from United
States Naval Station Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.
Section 8131 prohibits the use of funds to
transfer any individual detained at United
States Naval Station Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, to the custody or control of the individual’s country of origin or any other foreign country.
Section 8132 prohibits the use of funds to
construct, acquire, or modify any facility in
the United States to house any individual
detained at United States Naval Station
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Section 8133 prohibits the use of funds to
carry out the closure of the United States
Naval Station Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Section 8134 provides funds for the ‘‘Department of Defense Credit Program Account’’ for the cost of loans and loan guarantees to support critical defense industrial
base investment.
Section 8135 limits funds to divest, or prepare to divest, U–2 aircraft.
Section 8136 reduces funds appropriated in
title II of this Act to reflect savings from
management improvements and efficiencies
in the Department of Defense.
Section 8137 requires the Secretary of Defense to provide quarterly reports to House

PO 00000

Frm 00224

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittees on execution of funds provided
from Public Law 119–21.
Section 8138 requires the Secretary of Defense to obligate funds for the Next Generation Fighter program.
Section 8139 provides funds for the establishment of a Platform Supply Vessel Pilot
Program.
Section 8140 prohibits funds for the cancellation of the UH–60 Blackhawk aircraft
program.
Section 8141 prohibits funds for the cancellation of the E–7 Wedgetail aircraft program.
Section 8142 prohibits funds to close the
Rock Island Arsenal Museum, Fort Sill National Historic Landmark and Museum,
United States Army Transportation Museum, and the General George Patton Museum of Leadership.
Section 8143 provides funds for the Taiwan
Security Cooperation Initiative.
Section 8144 provides authority for the
Secretary of Defense to reimburse the Federated States of Micronesia.
Section 8145 reduces the amount appropriated in title II of this Act to reflect savings due to favorable bulk fuel rates.
Section 8146 requires the continuation of
fiscal year 2024 negotiated indirect cost rates
for institutions of higher education.
Section 8147 provides funds for the replacement of defense articles and reimbursement
of defense services provided to Taiwan.
Section 8148 limits funds to award a solesource or non-competitive contract for
space-based airborne moving target indication systems.
Section 8149 prohibits funds to pause, cancel, or terminate Next-Generation Overhead
Persistent Infrared Geosynchronous Earth
Orbit and Next-Generation Overhead Persistent Infrared Polar programs.
Section 8150 provides limitations on military construction transaction authorities.
Section 8151 reduces amounts appropriated
under title IV due to expiration of authorizations contained in 15 U.S.C. 638.
Section 8152 provides funding for the Baltic
Security Initiative.
Section 8153 provides funding to support
the solid rocket motor industrial base.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.071

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1577

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00225

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/299 here EH220126.163

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00226

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/300 here EH220126.164

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1578

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1579

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00227

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/301 here EH220126.165

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00228

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/302 here EH220126.166

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1580

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1581

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00229

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/303 here EH220126.167

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00230

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/304 here EH220126.168

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1582

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1583

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00231

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/305 here EH220126.169

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00232

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/306 here EH220126.170

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1584

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1585

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00233

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/307 here EH220126.171

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00234

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/308 here EH220126.172

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1586

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1587

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00235

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/309 here EH220126.173

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00236

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/310 here EH220126.174

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1588

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1589

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00237

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.072

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/311 here EH220126.175

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1590

DIVISION B—DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR,
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND
EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
The explanatory statement accompanying
this division is approved and indicates Congressional intent. Unless otherwise noted,
the language set forth in House Report 119–
271 and Senate Report 119–55 carry the same
weight as language included in this explanatory statement and should be complied with
unless specifically addressed to the contrary
in this explanatory statement. While some
language is repeated for emphasis, it is not
intended to negate the language referred to
above unless expressly provided herein.
In providing the operating plan required by
section 516 of this Act, the Departments and
agencies funded in this Act are directed to
include all programs, projects, and activities, including those in House Report 119–271,
Senate Report 119–55, and this explanatory
statement accompanying this Act. All such
programs, projects, and activities are subject
to the provisions of this Act.
In cases where the House Report 119–271,
Senate Report 119–55, or this explanatory
statement direct the submission of a report,
that report is to be submitted to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate. Where this
explanatory statement refers to the Committees or the Committees on Appropriations,
unless otherwise noted, this reference is to
the House of Representatives Subcommittee
on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies and the Senate
Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human
Services, Education, and Related Agencies.
Each Department and agency funded in
this Act shall follow the directives set forth
in this Act and the accompanying explanatory statement and shall not reallocate resources or reorganize activities except as
provided herein. Funds for individual programs and activities are displayed in the detailed table at the end of the explanatory
statement accompanying this Act. Funding
levels that are not displayed in the detailed
table are identified within this explanatory
statement. Any action to eliminate or consolidate programs, projects, and activities
should be pursued through a proposal in the
President’s Budget so it can be considered by
the Committees.
Budget Submission.—As part of the President’s Budget Request, each Department is
directed to provide the Committees in an
electronic format, a table that corresponds
with every program line found in the detailed table at the end of this explanatory
statement. Such a table shall include a column for the most recently enacted appropriation, the current year, and the budget
year, assuming current law.
Congressional Reports.—Each Department
or agency is directed to provide the Committees, within 30 days from the date of enactment of this Act and quarterly thereafter, a
summary describing each requested report to
the Committees along with related actions
completed in the current and prior quarters
and planned actions to be completed in future quarters. Such a summary shall be cumulative for all fiscal years for which any
report remains outstanding.
Competitive Grant Programs.— In addition to
the directives included under ‘‘Bill-Wide Directives’’ in Senate Report 119–55 the agreement directs the agencies funded in this Act
to expeditiously publish funding opportunity
announcements, no later than 4 months prior
to the expiration of the period of availability
of funds, where applicable, to ensure sufficient time for the development of high quality applications and timely and effective implementation of programs. The agreement

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

further directs agencies funded in this Act to
brief the Committees on any competitive
grant programs for which funds have not
been awarded within 30 days of the expiration of their period of availability with a
plan for awarding funds prior to their expiration.
Questions for the Record.—The agreement
notes the inclusion of section 526 of this Act,
which requires each Department and agency
to provide answers to questions submitted
for the record within 45 business days after
receipt. The agreement expects each Department and agency to notify the Committees
at least 7 days in advance if they do not anticipate meeting this statutory requirement.
Operating Plan.—In addition to the operating plan requirement in section 516 of this
Act, the agreement notes that section 416 of
the Military Construction, Veterans Affairs,
and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,
2026 requires each Department or agency
funded in this Act in fiscal year 2026 to provide a monthly report on funds that are allotted and available for obligation and on obligations as of the end of the month, by program, project, and activity.
TITLE I—DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING ADMINISTRATION
TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT SERVICES

Within the total provided for the Dislocated Worker National Reserve Demonstration Authority, the agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Workforce Opportunity for Rural Communities Grants ..............
Strengthening Community Colleges Training Grants ................
Cybersecurity Grants ..................................................................
Employee Ownership Initiative ...................................................

$55,000,000
65,000,000
15,000,000
2,000,000

Cybersecurity Grants.—The agreement provides $15,000,000 for grants as described in the
explanatory statement accompanying division D of P.L. 118–47.
Dislocated
Worker
National
Reserve
(DWNR).—The agreement does not direct the
Department of Labor (DOL) to fund any specific DWNR grants beyond what is included
in the table included under this header.
Employee Ownership Initiative.—The agreement provides $2,000,000 for grants as described in Senate Report 119–55.
Workforce Opportunity for Rural Communities.—Within the total provided, the agreement provides $23,250,000 for grants in areas
served by the Appalachian Regional Commission, $23,750,000 for areas served by the Delta
Regional Commission, and $8,000,000 for areas
served by the Northern Border Regional
Commission, and encourages awards that
support multigenerational workforce training pipelines.
Apprenticeship Grant Program
Apprenticeship Programs.—The agreement
directs DOL to make available to States
grant funding at no less than the fiscal year
2025 level.
Water and Wastewater System Operators.—
The agreement continues to urge the Secretary to make funding available through
workforce development and registered apprenticeship activities funded under this
agreement for registered apprenticeship programs consistent with National Guideline
Standards of Apprenticeship for Water and
Wastewater System Operations Specialists
and the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act. The Department is directed to
highlight the availability of funding opportunities that may support such activities,
and to provide technical assistance and outreach to potential grantees with an emphasis
on sectors underrepresented in the apprenticeship program with demonstrated shortages.

PO 00000

Frm 00238

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending
The agreement includes $95,501,000 for the
projects, and in the amounts, specified in the
table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included
in this explanatory statement accompanying
this division.
JOB CORPS
Job Corps Competitiveness.—The agreement
directs DOL to include consideration of prior
graduation rates for purposes of awarding
center operation contracts.
Job Corps Programming.—The agreement directs DOL to include the consideration of aggregated performance of program participants within a particular concentration
when soliciting and awarding National
Training Contractor agreements.
STATE UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE AND
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE OPERATIONS

Adverse Effect Wage Rate Regulations.—The
agreement directs the Department to provide
a briefing, within 270 days of enactment of
this Act, regarding changes to the Adverse
Effect Wage calculation.
Automation
Activities.—The
agreement
modifies a provision related to unemployment insurance automation activities.
BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS
Artificial Intelligence.—The agreement recognizes the value of understanding how artificial intelligence affects our workforce and
encourages BLS to evaluate the impact of
artificial intelligence on the economy, including job loss, creation, and displacement.
DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT
Front Matter.—The agreement notes all
items in the front matter that precedes the
Department of Labor, including language set
forth in the front matter of House Report
119–271 and Senate Report 119–55 unless specifically addressed to the contrary in this explanatory statement, apply to every agency
and subcomponent funded by this Act.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
The agreement updates a provision related
to transfer authority for program integrity
activities.
The agreement updates a provision related
to transfer authority for program evaluation.
The agreement modifies a provision related to excess personal property.
The agreement modifies a provision related to the Department’s security detail.
The agreement modifies a provision related to Job Corps.
TITLE II—DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)
HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES
ADMINISTRATION (HRSA)
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE

Health Centers
Within the total provided for the Health
Centers program, the agreement includes the
following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Addressing Intimate Partner Violence and Project Catalyst .....
Alcee L. Hastings Program for Advanced Cancer Screening ....
Early Childhood Development ....................................................
Ending the HIV Epidemic ...........................................................
Native Hawaiian Health Care ....................................................
Papa Ola Lokahi (non-add) ...................................................
School Based Health Centers ....................................................

$2,000,000
10,000,000
30,000,000
157,250,000
27,000,000
10,000,000
55,000,000

Technical Assistance.—The agreement continues to support the use of funds, within the
amount provided for this account, for training and technical assistance activities available to health centers, as described in House
Report 119–271 and Senate Report 119–55.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.073

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026
HEALTH WORKFORCE

Primary Care Training and Enhancement
Eating Disorders Screening and Referrals.—
The agreement includes an increase of
$2,000,000 under the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration to
expand the availability of health care providers to respond to the needs of individuals
with eating disorders.
Oral Health Training
The agreement includes no less than
$13,500,000 for General Dentistry Programs,
no less than $13,500,000 for Pediatric Dentistry Programs, and no less than $15,000,000
for State Oral Health Workforce grants, and
includes the directives described in House
Report 119–271 and Senate Report 119–55.
Behavioral Health Workforce Education and
Training
Peer Support Specialists.—The agreement includes no less than $15,000,000 for this activity.
Public Health and Preventive Medicine Programs
The agreement includes $18,000,000 for Public Health Workforce Development and continues funding for the Public Health Training Centers Program and Preventive Medicine Residency Program.
MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Maternal and Child Health Services Block
Grant—Special Projects of Regional and National Significance (SPRANS)
Within the total provided for SPRANS, the
agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Early Childhood Development Grants ........................................
Epilepsy ......................................................................................
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome ..............................................................
Fetal Infant and Child Death Review ........................................
Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia .....................................
Infant-Toddler Court Teams .......................................................
Maternal Produce Prescriptions .................................................
Minority-Serving Institutions ......................................................
Newborn Essentials Support Toolkits ........................................
Oral Health .................................................................................
Regional Pediatric Prevention Network ......................................
Sickle Cell Disease ....................................................................
State Maternal Health Innovation Grants .................................

$10,000,000
3,642,000
1,000,000
5,000,000
3,000,000
20,000,000
15,000,000
10,000,000
5,000,000
5,250,000
25,000,000
7,000,000
55,000,000

Maternal Produce Prescriptions.—The agreement includes $15,000,000 for grants to community-based organizations to develop
produce prescription interventions for maternal populations at risk of poor health outcomes due to nutrition insecurity and other
health-related factors. These produce prescription interventions should serve maternal populations in low-income and underserved urban and rural areas and demonstrate improvements in fruit and vegetable intake; household food security; and
health outcomes, such as gestational weight
gain, overall physical and mental health, and
well-being for a cohort of pregnant women,
as well as positive birth outcomes.
Newborn Essentials Support Toolkits.—The
agreement includes $5,000,000 to continue the
work of the Newborn Supply Kit program
and directs HRSA to make contracts, grants,
or enter into cooperative agreements with
eligible entities to procure supply kits for
new mothers through partnerships with local
entities such as hospitals, health centers,
community-based organizations, or other organizations serving mothers and infants as
further directed in House Report 119–271.
Regional Pediatric Prevention Network.—The
agreement includes $25,000,000 for this program and reiterates the directives in House
Report 119–271. Further, within 30 days of enactment of this Act, the agreement directs
HRSA to provide the Committees with a
briefing regarding the status of the program
and implementation of the agreement’s directives.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1591

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Heritable Disorders
Severe
Combined
Immune
Deficiency
(SCID).—The agreement continues $4,000,000
to support newborn screening and follow-up
for SCID and other newborn screening disorders.
Healthy Start
Self-Measured Blood Pressure Monitoring Initiative.—The agreement includes no less than
$250,000 for the Healthy Start blood pressure
monitoring pilot project, as described in
Senate Report 119–55.
Poison Control Centers
The agreement includes $27,846,000 for Poison Control Centers, an increase of $1,000,000
from fiscal year 2024. The agreement encourages HRSA to address geo-routing challenges
and support the activities described in Senate Report 119–55.
HEALTH SYSTEMS

Organ Transplantation
Living Organ Donation Reimbursement Program.—The agreement includes a $1,000,000
increase for the living organ donation reimbursement program, as described in House
Report 119–271.
RURAL HEALTH

Rural Health Outreach Grants
Within the total provided for Rural Health
Outreach Grants, the agreement includes no
less than the following amounts:
FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity
Appalachian Region Healthcare Support Program ..........
Delta States .....................................................................
Delta States Rural Development Network Grants
(non-add) ................................................................
Delta Region Maternal Care Coordination Program
(non-add) ................................................................
Delta Region Community Health Systems Development Program (non-add) ........................................
Rural Northern Border Region Healthcare Support Program ............................................................................
Rural Maternity and Obstetrics Management Strategies
(RMOMS) ......................................................................

$2,500,000
31,000,000

Frm 00239

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

COVERED COUNTERMEASURES PROCESS FUND

The agreement does not include additional
administrative funding for this account due
to the availability of sufficient carryover
funds to support this activity.
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION
The agreement provides $9,202,991,000 in
total program level funding for the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
which includes $7,706,314,000 in discretionary
budget authority and $1,398,375,000 in transfers from the Prevention and Public Health
Fund.

12,000,000

IMMUNIZATION AND RESPIRATORY DISEASES

2,250,000

Within the total provided for the National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, the agreement includes the following amounts:

15,000,000
5,000,000
15,000,000

Rural Health Policy Development
The agreement continues $11,076,000 to
fund publicly available and policy relevant
research on rural health to assist providers
and Federal, State, and local governments in
addressing challenges faced by rural communities.
Rural Communities Opioid Response Program
The agreement continues $145,000,000 for
this program. Within the funding provided,
the agreement includes $10,000,000 to continue the three Rural Centers of Excellence
and $4,000,000 to support career and workforce training services for the Northern Border Regional Commission.
Rural Hospital Stabilization Program
The agreement includes $14,000,000 for this
program, which provides support to at-risk
rural hospitals to retain health care services
locally and increase service volume and revenue to enhance hospitals’ financial viability.
Rural Hospital Provider Assistance Program
The agreement includes $25,000,000 for a
Rural Hospital Provider Assistance Program
to administer a formula grant program to
support hospitals at the low end of the wage
index.
HRSA–WIDE ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAM SUPPORT
Oral Health Literacy.—The agreement includes $300,000 to continue this activity as
described in House Report 119–271 and Senate
Report 119–55.
Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending
The agreement includes $857,793,000 for the
projects, and in the amounts, specified in the
table titled Community Project Funding/

PO 00000

Congressionally Directed Spending included
in this explanatory statement accompanying
this division.
Office of Pharmacy Affairs
The agreement is concerned that HRSA’s
proposed 340B Rebate Model Pilot Program
could increase costs for patients or limit access to their prescriptions. The agreement
directs HRSA to provide a briefing to the
Committees within 30 days of enactment of
this Act about the impact of this pilot program on patients.
Office for the Advancement of Telehealth/Telehealth
The agreement includes an increase of
$3,500,000 for the Office for the Advancement
of Telehealth, which includes a $1,000,000 increase for the Telehealth Network Grant
program and a $500,000 increase for the Telehealth Resource Centers program, in addition to amounts and directives otherwise included under this heading in either House
Report 119–271 or Senate Report 119–55.

Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Section 317 Immunization Program ......................................
Section 317 Immunization Program appropriations
(non-add) ......................................................................
Section 317 Immunization Program Transfer from the
Prevention and Public Health Fund (non-add) ............
Influenza Planning and Response appropriations ................

$681,933,000
85,543,000
596,390,000
231,358,000

HIV/AIDS, VIRAL HEPATITIS, SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES, AND TUBERCULOSIS PREVENTION

Within the total provided for the National
Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and
Tuberculosis Prevention, the agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity
Domestic HIV/AIDS Prevention and Research ........
HIV Initiative (non-add) ....................................
School Health-HIV (non-add) ............................
Viral Hepatitis ........................................................
Sexually Transmitted Infections .............................
Tuberculosis ...........................................................
Infectious Diseases and the Opioid Epidemic ......

FY 2026
Agreement
$1,013,712,000
220,000,000
38,081,000
46,000,000
164,310,000
137,034,000
23,000,000

EMERGING AND ZOONOTIC INFECTIOUS DISEASES

Within the total provided for the National
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious
Diseases, the agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Antibiotic Resistance Initiative appropriations .....................
Vector-Borne Diseases appropriations ...................................
Lyme Disease appropriations .................................................
Prion Disease appropriations .................................................
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome appropriations ............................
Emerging Infectious Diseases appropriations .......................
Mycotic Disease appropriations (non-add) .......................
Sepsis appropriations (non-add) ......................................
Harmful Algal Blooms appropriations ...................................
Food Safety appropriations ....................................................
National Healthcare Safety Network appropriations .............
Quarantine appropriations .....................................................

$197,000,000
64,603,000
27,000,000
9,000,000
5,400,000
223,997,000
24,000,000
5,000,000
3,500,000
74,000,000
24,000,000
57,772,000

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.074

H22JAPT2

H1592

FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity
Advanced Molecular Detection appropriations ......................
Epidemiology and Lab Capacity Transfer from the Prevention and Public Health Fund .............................................
Healthcare-Associated Infections Transfer from the Prevention and Public Health Fund .............................................

43,000,000

12,000,000

Within the total provided for the National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion, the agreement includes
the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Tobacco ..................................................................................
Tobacco Appropriations (non-add) ....................................
Tobacco Transfer from the Prevention and Public Health
Fund (non-add) .............................................................
Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity appropriations .......
High Obesity Rate Counties appropriations (non-add) ....
School Health appropriations ................................................
Vision and Eye Health appropriations ...................................
Alzheimer’s Disease appropriations .......................................
Inflammatory Bowel Disease appropriations .........................
Interstitial Cystitis appropriations .........................................
Excessive Alcohol Use appropriations ...................................
Chronic Kidney Disease appropriations .................................
Chronic Disease Education and Awareness appropriations ..
Prevention Research Centers appropriations ........................
Heart Disease and Stroke ......................................................
Heart Disease and Stroke appropriations (non-add) .......
Heart Disease and Stroke Transfer from the Prevention
and Public Health Fund (non-add) ..............................
Diabetes .................................................................................
Diabetes appropriations (non-add) ...................................
Diabetes Transfer from the Prevention and Public Health
Fund (non-add) .............................................................
National Diabetes Prevention Program appropriations .........
Breast and Cervical Cancer appropriations ..........................
WISEWOMAN appropriations (non-add) .............................
Breast Cancer Awareness for Young Women appropriations
Cancer Registries appropriations ..........................................
Colorectal Cancer appropriations ..........................................
Comprehensive Cancer appropriations ..................................
Johanna’s Law appropriations ...............................................
Ovarian Cancer appropriations ..............................................
Prostate Cancer appropriations .............................................
Skin Cancer appropriations ...................................................
Cancer Survivorship Resource Center appropriations ...........
Oral Health appropriations ....................................................
Safe Motherhood/Infant Health appropriations .....................
Arthritis appropriations ..........................................................
Epilepsy appropriations .........................................................
National Lupus Registry appropriations ................................
Racial and Ethnic Approaches to Community Health
(REACH) appropriations .....................................................
Good Health and Wellness in Indian Country (non-add)
Million Hearts Transfer from the Prevention and Public
Health Fund .......................................................................
National Early Child Care Collaboratives Transfer from the
Prevention and Public Health Fund ..................................
Hospitals Promoting Breastfeeding Transfer from the Prevention and Public Health Fund .......................................

$246,500,000
46,500,000
200,000,000
54,320,000
16,500,000
19,400,000
4,500,000
41,500,000
3,000,000
2,100,000
3,000,000
4,500,000
4,500,000
28,961,000
156,105,000
45,000,000
111,105,000
163,130,000
45,000,000
118,130,000
37,300,000
236,500,000
34,620,000
6,960,000
53,440,000
44,294,000
22,425,000
12,000,000
15,500,000
16,205,000
5,000,000
725,000
21,250,000
113,500,000
2,000,000
11,500,000
14,000,000
68,950,000
27,000,000
5,000,000
5,000,000
9,750,000

Cancer Prevention and Control.—The agreement provides funding to support cancer prevention and control in the amounts provided
for in the table above.
Diabetes.—The agreement notes the prevalence of Type 2 Diabetes among Native
Americans and Alaska Native adults and encourages CDC to support activities aligned
with the National Diabetes Prevention Program within these populations.
Heart Disease and Stroke.—The agreement
continues funding to support implementation of the Cardiovascular Advances in Research and Opportunities Legacy Act (P.L.
117–244).
National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early
Detection Program.—The agreement encourages CDC to review breast cancer risk assessment tools and publicly release a report
within 180 days of enactment of this Act on
the planning needed to create a comprehensive, publicly accessible risk assessment tool
and strategies to increase public awareness
of said tool.
Rural Prevention Health Research.—The
agreement continues funding for Prevention
Research Centers and recognizes the importance of research to improve health outcomes among rural populations.
BIRTH DEFECTS, DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES,
DISABILITIES AND HEALTH

Within the total provided for the National
Center on Birth Defects and Developmental

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Disabilities, the agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Birth Defects ..........................................................................
Fetal Death ............................................................................
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome ..........................................................
Folic Acid ...............................................................................
Infant Health ..........................................................................
Autism ....................................................................................
Disability & Health ................................................................
Tourette Syndrome .................................................................
Early Hearing Detection and Intervention .............................
Muscular Dystrophy ................................................................
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder .................................
Fragile X .................................................................................
Spina Bifida ...........................................................................
Congenital Heart Disease ......................................................
Public Health Approach to Blood Disorders ..........................
Hemophilia Activities .............................................................
Hemophilia Treatment Centers ..............................................
Thalassemia ...........................................................................
Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome .............................................
Surveillance for Emerging Threats to Mothers and Babies ..

$19,000,000
900,000
11,500,000
3,150,000
8,650,000
28,100,000
46,500,000
2,500,000
6,760,000
9,000,000
1,900,000
2,000,000
7,500,000
9,250,000
10,400,000
3,500,000
5,100,000
2,100,000
4,250,000
23,000,000

40,000,000

CHRONIC DISEASE PREVENTION AND HEALTH
PROMOTION

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Muscular Dystrophy.—The agreement directs CDC to provide a briefing on these activities within 180 days of enactment of this
Act.
Physical Activity for People with Disabilities.—The agreement provides $20,500,000, an
increase of $1,000,000, for existing programs
that address healthy athletes.
Sickle Cell Disease.—The agreement includes $6,000,000 for the Sickle Cell Disease
Data Collection program.
PUBLIC HEALTH SCIENTIFIC SERVICES

Within the total provided for Public Health
Scientific Services, the agreement includes
the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Health Statistics ....................................................................
Health Statistics appropriations (non-add) ......................
Health Statistics section 241 of the PHS Act (non-add)
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Informatics appropriations
Advancing Laboratory Science appropriations ......................
Public Health Data Modernization appropriations ................
Public Health Workforce appropriations ................................

$187,397,000
144,453,000
42,944,000
298,100,000
26,000,000
185,000,000
71,000,000

Fertility Data and Assisted Reproductive
Technology (ART).—The agreement recognizes the Fertility Clinic Success Rate and
Certification Act of 1992 and instructs CDC
to follow the directives included in Senate
Report 119–55.
Public Health Data Modernization.—The
agreement includes funding to advance
progress on the initial five key pillars of
public health data modernization and the
implementation of enterprise-level public
health data systems at CDC and State, territorial, local, and Tribal health departments.
Within 90 days of enactment of this Act, the
agreement directs CDC to provide a briefing
on the program’s progress and plans.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH

Within the total provided for the National
Center for Environmental Health, the agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Environmental Health Laboratory appropriations ..................
Newborn Screening Quality Assurance Program appropriations (non-add) .......................................................
Newborn Screening/Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Diseases appropriations (non-add) ..............................
Safe Water appropriations .....................................................
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Registry appropriations .........
Trevor’s Law appropriations ..................................................
Climate and Health appropriations .......................................
Environmental Health Activities appropriations ....................
Environmental and Health Outcome Tracking Network appropriations .......................................................................
Asthma appropriations ..........................................................
Childhood Lead Poisoning Transfer from the Prevention and
Public Health Fund ............................................................
Lead Exposure Registry appropriations .................................

$70,750,000
21,000,000
1,250,000
8,600,000
10,000,000
3,000,000
10,000,000
17,000,000
34,000,000
33,500,000

INJURY PREVENTION AND CONTROL

Frm 00240

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

FY 2026
Agreement

Domestic Violence and Sexual Violence ................................
Child Maltreatment (non-add) ..........................................
Child Sexual Abuse Prevention (non-add) ........................
Youth Violence Prevention .....................................................
Domestic Violence Community Projects .................................
Rape Prevention .....................................................................
Suicide Prevention .................................................................
Adverse Childhood Experiences .............................................
National Violent Death Reporting System .............................
Traumatic Brain Injury ...........................................................
Elderly Falls ...........................................................................
Drowning ................................................................................
Injury Prevention Activities ....................................................
Opioid Overdose Prevention and Surveillance .......................
Injury Control Research Centers ............................................
Firearm Injury and Mortality Prevention Research ................

$38,200,000
7,250,000
3,000,000
18,100,000
7,500,000
61,750,000
30,000,000
9,000,000
24,500,000
8,250,000
3,050,000
2,000,000
29,950,000
505,579,000
11,000,000
12,500,000

Cannabinoid
Hyperemesis
Syndrome
in
Youth.—The agreement directs CDC to publicly release a report regarding Cannabinoid
Hyperemesis Syndrome in Youth within 180
days of the enactment of this Act.
Domestic Violence and Sexual Violence.—The
agreement includes funding for activities, including to collect data on the connection between brain injuries and domestic and sexual
violence, and to implement a data collection
project through the National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey that includes questions about the prevalence and
circumstances surrounding brain injuries.
Opioid or Other Drug Use and Overdose Prevention.—The agreement includes funding for
overdose prevention activities including to
support case-level syndromic surveillance
data, improvements of interventions that
monitor prescribing and dispensing practices, better timeliness and quality of morbidity and mortality data, and efforts with
medical examiners and coroner offices.
Opioid Overdose Prevention.—The agreement directs CDC to fund awards to State,
local, and Tribal health departments at no
less than the percentage of overall funding
provided for this program in fiscal year 2024.
Rape Prevention.—The agreement includes
funding to support rape prevention and education programs as authorized by P.L. 117–
103.
Suicide.—The agreement encourages CDC
to prioritize funding to public health departments for comprehensive suicide prevention
programs.
Traumatic Brain Injury.—The agreement
provides funding for the traumatic brain injury program, including concussion surveillance.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH

Within the total provided for the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, the agreement includes the following
amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

National Occupational Research Agenda ..............................
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing (non-add) ....................
Education and Research Centers ..........................................
Personal Protective Technology ..............................................
Mining Research ....................................................................
National Mesothelioma Registry and Tissue Bank ................
Firefighter Cancer Registry ....................................................
Other Occupational Safety and Health Research ..................
Total Worker Health (non-add) .....................................

$120,500,000
30,000,000
32,000,000
23,000,000
68,500,000
1,200,000
6,500,000
115,100,000
11,800,000

GLOBAL HEALTH

Within the total provided for Global
Health, the agreement includes the following
amounts:

51,000,000
5,000,000

Within the total provided for the National
Center for Injury Prevention and Control,
the agreement includes the following
amounts:

PO 00000

Budget Activity

Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Global HIV/AIDS Program .......................................................
Global Tuberculosis ................................................................
Polio Eradication ....................................................................
Measles and Other Vaccine Preventable Diseases ...............
Parasitic Diseases and Malaria ............................................
Global Public Health Protection .............................................

$128,921,000
11,722,000
180,000,000
50,000,000
29,000,000
293,200,000

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.076

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

PUBLIC HEALTH PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE

NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE (NCI)

Within the total provided for public health
preparedness and response, the agreement includes the following amounts:

Cancer Clinical Trials.—The agreement includes $3,000,000 for the activities described
under this heading in House Report 119–271.
Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI).—
The agreement includes no less than
$50,000,000 for the CCDI, including no less
than $750,000 to continue to support enhancement of the CCDI Molecular Characterization Initiative.
Childhood Cancer STAR Act.—The agreement includes no less than $30,000,000 from
amounts made available under this heading
for continued implementation of sections of
the Childhood Cancer Survivorship, Treatment, Access, and Research (STAR) Act
(P.L. 115–180). The agreement also notes the
CDC’s $2,000,000 in funding for ongoing efforts to enhance cancer registry case capture
efforts for childhood and adolescent cancers.
NATIONAL HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INSTITUTE

FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity
Public Health Emergency Preparedness Cooperative Agreement ..................................................................................
Academic Centers for Public Health Preparedness ...............
Ready
Response
Enterprise
Data
Integration
Platform/Forecasting and Outbreak Analytics ..................
CDC Preparedness and Response .........................................

$735,000,000
9,200,000
30,000,000
139,000,000

BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES

Buildings and Facilities.—The agreement includes $40,000,000 in funding to make progress
on CDC’s backlog of maintenance and repairs, including at its Atlanta campuses.
CDC-WIDE ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAM SUPPORT
Within the total provided for CDC-wide activities, the agreement includes the following amounts:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grant Transfer
from the Prevention and Public Health Fund ...................
Public Health Leadership and Support & Office of the Director appropriations .........................................................
Office of Rural Health appropriations (non-add) .............
John R. Lewis Undergraduate Public Health Scholars
Program appropriations (non-add) ...............................
NASEM Study appropriations (non-add) ...........................
Infectious Diseases Rapid Response Reserve Fund appropriations ............................................................................
Public Health Infrastructure and Capacity ...........................
Public Health Infrastructure and Capacity appropriations
(non-add) ......................................................................
Public Health Infrastructure and Capacity Transfer from
the Prevention and Public Health Fund (non-add) ......

$160,000,000
101,570,000
6,000,000

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DIABETES AND
DIGESTIVE AND KIDNEY DISEASES (NIDDK)

6,500,000
1,000,000

Diabetes.—The agreement includes an increase of $10,000,000 for diabetes research.

25,000,000
360,000,000

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF NEUROLOGICAL
DISORDERS AND STROKE (NINDS)

270,000,000
90,000,000

Infectious Diseases Rapid Response Reserve
Fund (Reserve Fund).—The agreement recognizes the importance of the Reserve Fund
and the requirements of section 231 of division B of P.L. 115–245.
Public Health Infrastructure (PHI).—The
agreement includes a new requirement that
three percent of total PHI funding be designated specifically for Tribes and Tribal organizations. The agreement further directs
that no less than 70 percent of total PHI
funding be awarded to State, local, and Territorial public health departments.
Report.—The agreement provides specific
funding for the report, including the associated directives, included under the CDC-wide
Activities and Program Support header of
Senate Report 119–55.
Reporting.—The agreement requests a briefing within 180 days of enactment of this Act
detailing the inconsistencies in surveillance
data collection as described House Report
119–271.
Unfunded Mandates.—In instances where
the agreement does not include specified
funding, the agreement does not direct the
CDC to complete any studies included under
the CDC-wide Activities and Program Support header of House Report 119–271 or Senate Report 119–55.
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH (NIH)
The agreement provides $48,716,000,000 for
NIH, which includes $1,500,000,000 for the Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health
(ARPA–H).
The
agreement
includes
$226,000,000 from the 21st Century Cures Act
(P.L. 114–255, Cures Act). Excluding ARPA–H,
the agreement provides $47,216,000,000 for the
Institutes and Centers of NIH, which includes an increase of $301,000,000 in budget
authority. The agreement also includes an
increase of $99,000,000 in Cures Act programs
and an increase of $15,000,000 in funding
under section 241 of the Public Health Service Act, for a total increase of $415,000,000.
Pursuant to the Cures Act, the bill includes
$195,000,000 for the BRAIN Initiative and
$31,000,000 for the All of Us precision medicine
initiative.

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

(NHLBI)

Valvular Heart Disease Research.—The
agreement includes $23,000,000, an increase of
$3,000,000, for research into the causation of
and risk factors for valvular heart disease, as
described in House Report 119–271.

FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H1593

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Accelerating Access to Critical Therapies for
ALS Act (P.L. 117–79).—The agreement includes $90,000,000 for this activity, an increase of $15,000,000, and reiterates the requirements and directives under the heading
ALS Research, Treatments, and Expanded
Access in Senate Report 119–55. Within the
increase, $5,000,000 is provided for research
on ALS; such additional funding could focus
on new drugs for ALS, diagnosis protocols,
enhance the quality of care, or study new
ALS biomarkers.
Alzheimer’s Disease and Alzheimer’s DiseaseRelated Dementias (AD/ADRD).—The agreement includes an increase of $100,000,000
across NIH for AD/ADRD research, including
an increase of $90,000,000 in NINDS and an increase of $10,000,000 in the National Institute
on Aging.
Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN).—The agreement includes an increase of $4,000,000 across
NIH for the BRAIN Initiative, including an
increase of $2,000,000 in NINDS and an increase of $2,000,000 in the National Institute
of Mental Health (NIMH). Pursuant to the
Cures Act (P.L. 114–255), the agreement also
includes $195,000,000 across NIH for the
BRAIN Initiative, including $97,500,000 to
NINDS and $97,500,000 to NIMH.
National Parkinson’s Project.—The agreement includes $5,000,000 for this activity as
described in Senate Report 119–55.
Opioids, Stimulants, and Pain Management.—
The agreement continues to include no less
than $285,295,000 for the Helping to End Addiction Long-term (HEAL) Initiative.
Undiagnosed Diseases Network (UDN).—
From amounts provided under this heading,
the agreement continues $18,000,000 for this
activity and continues the directives in Senate Report 119–55.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND
INFECTIOUS DISEASES (NIAID)

Antimicrobial Resistance.—The agreement
continues to include no less than $565,000,000
for this activity.
Antiviral Drug Discovery Centers.—The
agreement includes $8,000,000 for the activity
described under this heading in Senate Report 119–55.
Lyme and Tick-Borne Disease Research.—The
agreement includes not less than $110,000,000,

PO 00000

Frm 00241

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

an increase of $10,000,000, for research into
Lyme and other Tick-Borne diseases.
National Biocontainment Laboratories.—The
agreement includes $23,000,000 for the two
National Biocontainment Laboratories, as
directed under this heading in the Senate
Report 119–55.
Regional Biocontainment Laboratories.—The
agreement includes $52,000,000 for the 12 Regional Biocontainment Laboratories, as directed under this heading in House Report
119–271.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF GENERAL MEDICAL
SCIENCES (NIGMS)

Institutional
Development
Awards.—The
agreement provides not less than $450,956,000,
an increase of $20,000,000.
EUNICE KENNEDY SHRIVER NATIONAL INSTITUTE
OF CHILD HEALTH AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
(NICHD)

Implementing a Maternal Health and Pregnancy Outcomes Vision for Everyone Initiative.—From amounts under this heading, the
agreement includes no less than $63,400,000,
an increase of $10,000,000, for this activity.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON AGING (NIA)

Alzheimer’s Disease and Alzheimer’s DiseaseRelated Dementias.—The agreement includes
an increase of $100,000,000 across NIH for AD/
ADRD research, including an increase of
$10,000,000 in NIA and an increase of
$90,000,000 in NINDS. The agreement directs
NIA to provide an update on activities related to this research in the fiscal year 2027
congressional justification.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE (NIDA)

Opioid Initiative.—The agreement includes
no less than $355,295,000 for NIDA’s share of
the Helping to End Addiction Long-term
(HEAL) Initiative as described under this
heading in House Report 119–271 and under
the heading ‘‘HEAL Initiative’’ in Senate Report 119–55 and reiterates the concerns under
such headings.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH (NIMH)

Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN).—The agreement includes an increase of $4,000,000 across
NIH for the BRAIN Initiative, including an
increase of $2,000,000 in NIMH and an increase of $2,000,000 in NINDS. Pursuant to
the Cures Act (P.L. 114–255), the agreement
also includes $195,000,000 across NIH for the
BRAIN Initiative, including $97,500,000 to
NIMH and $97,500,000 to NINDS.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON MINORITY HEALTH AND
HEALTH DISPARITIES (NIMHD)

Improving Native American Cancer Outcomes.—The agreement notes that Native
Americans experience overall cancer incidence and mortality rates that are strikingly higher than non-Native populations.
The agreement includes $9,000,000, an increase of $3,000,000, to continue the Initiative
for Improving Native American Cancer Outcomes as described under this heading in
House Report 119–271 and continues the directive.
Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Health Research
Office.—The
agreement
includes
$5,000,000, an increase of $1,000,000, for the
Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Health Research Office as described in House Report
119–271.
Research Endowment Program.—The agreement continues to include $12,000,000 for the
Research Endowment Program.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR ADVANCING
TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCES (NCATS)

Clinical and Translational Science Awards
(CTSA).—The agreement continues to provide $629,560,000 for the CTSA program.
National
Clinical
Cohort
Collaborative
(N3C).—The agreement includes an increase

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.078

H22JAPT2

H1594

of $4,000,000 for this activity. In lieu of the
language under the heading ‘‘National Clinical Cohort Collaborative’’ in House Report
119–271, the agreement reiterates support for
the plan described under this heading in Senate Report 119–55.
Rare Disease Research.—The agreement includes a $10,000,000 increase for this activity,
as described in Senate Report 119–55, and directs that the briefing requirement under
this heading be on a quarterly basis.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR (OD)

All of Us Research Program.—Pursuant to
the Cures Act (P.L. 114–255), the agreement
includes $31,000,000 for the All of Us Research
Program.
Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning.—
The
agreement
continues
to
provide
$135,000,000 for the Office of Data Science
Strategy to support activities as described in
Senate Report 119–55.
Firearm Injury and Mortality Prevention Research.—The agreement continues funding at
the fiscal year 2024 enacted level for this activity as described in the explanatory statement accompanying division D of P.L. 118–47.
INCLUDE Initiative.—The agreement includes not less than $100,000,000 for this activity, an increase of $10,000,000, and continues the requirements under this heading
in House Report 119–271.
Indirect Cost Rates.—The agreement recognizes that indirect cost recovery has been essential for supporting research at universities, nonprofit laboratories, medical centers and other entities eligible for Federal
research awards and is key to sustaining
U.S. leadership in scientific research and
technological innovation. The agreement acknowledges that there is room for improvement in the system used to identify and recover indirect cost rates under the Uniform
Grant Guidance, particularly with respect to
the need for greater transparency into these
costs. Various models have been suggested to
achieve these improvements, including the
Financial Accountability in Research (FAIR)
model advanced by the Joint Associations
Group on Indirect Costs (JAG), which the
Committees believe merit further consideration. Therefore, the agreement directs the
departments and agencies funded in the Act
to engage in discussions with the Committees on proposals to achieve these improvements, including on the FAIR model. Under
this agreement, neither NIH, nor any other
department or agency, may develop or implement any policy, guidance, or rule, including publication of a notice of proposed
rulemaking, that would alter the manner in
which negotiated indirect cost rates have
been implemented and applied under NIH
regulations, as those regulations were in effect during the third quarter of fiscal year
2017.
Institute and Center (IC) Directors.—The
agreement directs NIH to maintain its longstanding practice of including external scientists and stakeholders with appropriate
subject matter expertise and familiarity
with the relevant ICs, as part of the agency’s
search to fill the current IC Director vacancies. The agreement supports allowing sufficient time for application submission to ensure a pool of qualified, competitive applicants. Until all vacancies are filled, the
agreement directs NIH to brief the Committees on a quarterly basis on such efforts, including on the search committees and process, outreach to identify and encourage applications from a broad community, the anticipated timeline for filling such vacancies,
and steps to maintain leadership and program oversight continuity during any IC Director transitions. Finally, within 60 days of
enactment of this Act, the agreement directs
NIH to provide a comprehensive report on

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

the approval process for IC Director hires, as
well as internal guidance documents that address the appointment, reappointment, assessment, and termination of IC Directors.
Such report shall include the approving authorities by agency, Department, and Office
for the current IC Director vacancies, as well
as previous IC Director searches that took
place during fiscal years 2022–2026.
Multi-Year Funding.—The agreement notes
that the fiscal year 2026 budget submission
states that in fiscal year 2026 NIH proposes
to continue a fiscal year 2025 policy to reserve half of the agency’s budget allocation
for competing RPGs for awards that fully
fund their outyear commitments as part of
the initial grant obligation. The agreement
notes strong concern about the impact of
this policy on application success rates and
the consequent reduction in the number of
grants NIH can fund; including on the impact for institutions who receive only a few
NIH grants. The agreement includes a general provision to limit the amount of funds
that can be obligated for awards that fully
fund out-year commitments and directs NIH
to fund as many new awards as possible
based on meritorious applications. The
agreement urges Institutes and Centers that
receive funding increases in fiscal year 2026
to obligate additional funds to support new
and competing research project grants. The
agreement directs NIH to submit the report
under this heading in Senate Report 119–55.
Additionally, NIH is directed to provide the
Committees with an analysis of the types of
research funded by this model in fiscal year
2025, and the selection criteria to identify
grants to be funded by the multi-year approach. Throughout fiscal year 2026, NIH is
directed to brief the Committees no less than
monthly on the status of grant announcements, applications, awards, continuations,
terminations or cancelations. Such briefing
shall include a report on grant awards by Institute or Center that fund more than the
current year of performance.
Office of Nutrition Research.—The agreement includes an increase of $5,000,000 for the
Office of Nutrition Research to support increased NIH investment in nutrition and its
relation to human health and disease.
Office of Research on Women’s Health
(ORWH).—The
agreement
includes
$106,480,000, an increase of $30,000,000, for
ORWH. Within the total for ORWH, the
agreement provides $10,000,000 for the Building Interdisciplinary Research Careers in
Women’s Health program and supports the
activities described in House Report 119–271
and Senate Report 119–55. In addition, the
agreement requests an update in the fiscal
year 2027 congressional justification on these
activities.
Primate Research Centers.—The agreement
includes $30,000,000 for the activities described under this heading in Senate Report
119–55.
Replication Experiments and/or Fraud Detection.—In lieu of the amount and directive
under this heading in House Report 119–271,
the agreement supports NIH efforts to fund
replication experiments on significant lines
of research and continues the briefing directive under the heading ‘‘Replication and Reproducibility Experiments’’ under Senate
Report 119–55.
Safe to Sleep Campaign.—The agreement
continues to provide $1,300,000 for this activity and directs NIH to reestablish the Safe to
Sleep Campaign as described in Senate Report 119–55.
Tuberous Sclerosis.—The agreement urges
NIH to fund research focused on supporting
ongoing progress for finding cutting-edge
treatments and potential cures for Tuberous
Sclerosis Complex at amounts no less than
$30,000,000 in fiscal year 2026. The agreement

PO 00000

Frm 00242

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

further reiterates strong support for the
need for more research on Tuberous Sclerosis
Complex and reiterates the requirements
under this heading in Senate Report 119–55.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND MENTAL HEALTH
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION (SAMHSA)
Adolescent Mental Health.—The agreement
reiterates the directives outlined in the explanatory statement accompanying division
D of P.L. 118–47.
Eligible Grantees.—Where permitted in the
authorizing statute, the agreement directs
SAMHSA when issuing new funding opportunity announcements to include faith-based
organizations as an eligible applicant.
Grant Opportunities.—SAMHSA is directed
to consult with the Committees not less
than three weeks prior to issuing a funding
opportunity announcement (FOA) for any
competitive grant program and provide a
draft FOA to the Committees not less than
five days prior to publicly issuing it.
Harm Reduction.—The agreement recognizes
the
Administration’s
efforts
to
prioritize prevention, treatment, and longterm recovery in relation to substance use
disorder, including the availability and provision of opioid overdose reversal medications such as naloxone to reduce overdose
deaths.
MENTAL HEALTH

988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline.—The agreement
provides an increase of $15,000,000 and instructs SAMHSA to follow the directives included in the House Report 119–271 and Senate Report 119–55.
Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics (CCBHC).—In addition to the directives
included in Senate Report 119–55, SAMHSA is
directed to brief the Committees on any requirements to continue issuing CCBHC planning grants to States that have not received
such awards, as well as if any additional
costs are incurred by establishing a joint
technical assistance center initiative.
Within the total provided for Mental
Health Programs of Regional and National
Significance, the agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity
Capacity:
Seclusion and Restraint appropriations ...........................
Project AWARE appropriations ...........................................
State Grants appropriations (non-add) ........................
Community Violence and Trauma appropriations
(non-add) ..................................................................
School-Based Trauma Informed Care appropriations
(non-add) ..................................................................
Mental Health Awareness Training appropriations ...........
Healthy Transitions appropriations ...................................
Infant and Early Childhood Mental Health appropriations
Children and Family Programs appropriations .................
Consumer and Family Network Grants appropriations .....
Project LAUNCH appropriations .........................................
Mental Health System Transformation appropriations .....
Primary and Behavioral Health Care Integration appropriations ........................................................................
National Strategy for Suicide Prevention appropriations
Zero Suicide appropriations (non-add) ........................
American Indian and Alaska Native appropriations
(non-add) ..................................................................
Mental Health Crisis Response Grants appropriations ....
988 Lifeline appropriations ...............................................
Specialized Services for Youth appropriations
(non-add) ..................................................................
Spanish Language Services appropriations (non-add)
Garrett Lee Smith–Youth Suicide Prevention State
Grants ...........................................................................
State Grants appropriations (non-add) ........................
State Grants Transfer from Prevention and Public
Health Fund (non-add) .............................................
Garrett Lee Smith–Youth Suicide Prevention Campus
Grants appropriations ...................................................
American Indian and Alaska Native Suicide Prevention
Initiative appropriations ...............................................
Tribal Behavioral Grants appropriations ...........................
Homelessness Prevention Programs appropriations .........
Minority AIDS appropriations .............................................
Criminal and Juvenile Justice Programs appropriations ..
Assertive Community Treatment for Individuals with Serious Mental Illness appropriations ..............................
Interagency Task Force on Trauma Informed Care appropriations ........................................................................
Science and Service:
Garrett Lee Smith—Suicide Prevention Resource Center
appropriations ...............................................................

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.080

H22JAPT2

FY 2026
Agreement
$1,147,000
140,001,000
110,501,000
17,500,000
12,000,000
27,963,000
18,451,000
15,000,000
7,729,000
3,954,000
19,605,000
3,779,000
55,877,000
30,200,000
23,800,000
4,400,000
20,000,000
534,618,000
33,100,000
10,000,000
$45,806,000
33,806,000
12,000,000
10,488,000
4,931,000
26,250,000
28,096,000
9,224,000
11,269,000
6,000,000
2,000,000
11,000,000

January 22, 2026

FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity
Practice Improvement and Training appropriations .........
Consumer and Consumer Support Technical Assistance
Centers appropriations .................................................
Primary and Behavioral Health Care Integration Technical Assistance appropriations ...................................
Minority Fellowship Program appropriations .....................
Disaster Response appropriations ....................................
Homelessness appropriations ............................................
Eating Disorder Identification, Treatment, and Recovery
appropriations ...............................................................

7,828,000
1,918,000
3,991,000
11,059,000
1,953,000
2,296,000
2,000,000

Eating Disorders.—The agreement includes
$2,000,000 to support the National Center of
Excellence for Eating Disorders to increase
engagement with primary care providers, including pediatricians, to provide specialized
advice and consultation related to the
screening and treatment of eating disorders.
The agreement also provides funding for a
pediatric training model for pediatric providers for prevention, early intervention,
treatment, and ongoing support protocols for
youth with or at-risk of developing an eating
disorder. The agreement requests a briefing
within 180 days of enactment of this Act as
described in Senate Report 119–55.
Primary and Behavioral Health Care Integration Technical Assistance.—The agreement directs SAMHSA to follow the directives included in House Report 119–271 and Senate
Report 119–55.
Project AWARE.—The agreement includes
funding as directed by Senate Report 119–55.
Project AWARE helps Tribes and Tribal organizations to develop sustainable schoolbased mental health programs and services.
Within the funds made available for Project
AWARE, the agreement urges SAMHSA to
consider the needs of Tribes and Tribal organizations and provide outreach to such
groups to raise awareness of their eligibility
for this program.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT

State Opioid Response Grants.—The agreement provides $1,595,000,000, including a setaside for Tribes and Tribal Organizations of
not less than 4.25 percent. The agreement
continues to direct SAMHSA to conduct an
annual evaluation of the program to be
transmitted to the Committees no later than
180 days after enactment of this Act and
make such an evaluation publicly available
on SAMHSA’s website. The agreement also
directs SAMHSA to continue funding technical assistance as described in Senate Report 119–55.
Within the total provided for Substance
Abuse Treatment Programs of Regional and
National Significance, the agreement includes the following amounts:
FY 2026
Agreement

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Budget Activity
Capacity:
Opioid Treatment Programs/Regulatory Activities ............
Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment
(SBIRT) ..........................................................................
Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment
(SBIRT) PHS Evaluation Funds .....................................
Targeted Capacity Expansion—General ...........................
Medication Assisted Treatment (non-add) ...................
Tribal Set-Aside (non-add) .......................................
Grants to Prevent Prescription Drug/Opioid Overdose ......
First Responder Training ...................................................
Rural Focus (non-add) ..................................................
SIREN Act (non-add) ................................................
Pregnant and Postpartum Women ....................................
Recovery Community Services Program ............................
Children and Families .......................................................
Treatment Systems for Homeless ......................................
Minority AIDS .....................................................................
Criminal Justice Activities .................................................
Drug Courts (non-add) .................................................
Improving Access to Overdose Treatment .........................
Building Communities of Recovery ...................................
Peer Support Technical Assistance Center .......................
Comprehensive Opioid Recovery Centers ..........................
Emergency Department Alternatives to Opioids ...............
Treatment, Recovery, and Workforce Support ...................
Youth Prevention and Recovery Initiative .........................
Science and Service:
Addiction Technology Transfer Centers .............................
Minority Fellowship Program .............................................

$10,724,000
26,840,000
2,000,000
125,416,000
114,000,000
15,500,000
16,000,000
59,000,000
34,000,000
13,500,000
38,931,000
4,434,000
30,197,000
37,114,000
66,881,000
80,000,000
75,000,000
1,500,000
17,000,000
2,000,000
7,000,000
8,000,000
12,000,000
3,000,000
9,046,000
7,136,000

First Responder Training.—The agreement
provides $13,500,000 to make awards to rural

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1595

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

public and nonprofit fire and Emergency
Medical Services (EMS) agencies as authorized in the Supporting and Improving Rural
EMS Needs Reauthorization Act (P.L. 118–84)
and directs SAMHSA to follow the directives
included in Senate Report 119–55.
Targeted Capacity Expansion and Medication-Assisted Treatment.—Within the amount
provided, the agreement includes $15,500,000
for grants to Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations and reiterates the directive included in Senate Report 119–55.

CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES
(CMS)
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT

Alzheimer’s Disease Diagnostics.—The agreement encourages CMS to support timely beneficiary access to early cognitive screening
and diagnostic tools for Alzheimer’s Disease
and Alzheimer’s Disease-Related Dementias,
as described in House Report 119–271 and Senate Report 119–55.
ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES
(ACF)

SUBSTANCE ABUSE PREVENTION

Within the total provided for Substance
Abuse Prevention Programs of Regional and
National Significance, the agreement includes the following amounts:
FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity
Capacity:
Strategic Prevention Framework/Partnerships for Success
Strategic Prevention Framework Rx (non-add) .................
Federal Drug-Free Workplace ............................................
Minority AIDS .....................................................................
Sober Truth on Preventing Underage Drinking (STOP Act)
National Adult-Oriented Media Public Services Campaign (non-add) .......................................................
Community-based Coalition Enhancement Grants
(non-add) ..................................................................
Interagency Coordinating Committee to Prevent Underage Drinking (non-add) .......................................
Tribal Behavioral Health Grants .......................................
Science and Service:
Center for the Application of Prevention Technologies ....
Science and Service Program Coordination ......................
Minority Fellowship Program .............................................

$137,484,000
10,000,000
5,139,000
43,205,000
14,500,000
2,500,000

REFUGEE AND ENTRANT ASSISTANCE

The agreement directs the Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) to continue to provide to the Committees monthly updates of
arrivals by categories, in accordance with
the directives in House Report 119–271 and
Senate Report 119–55. In addition, the agreement directs ORR to provide a briefing within 30 days of enactment of this Act on any
transfers of resettlement services or functions to ORR from other agencies or Departments, including the Department of State,
including details of what responsibilities or
contracts are being transferred and what estimated costs will be.
Spend Plan and Briefings.—The agreement
directs ORR to resume providing comprehensive quarterly spend plans to the Committees with actual and estimated obligations
by major category, at the same level of detail that has been provided in previous years.
The agreement further directs the Director
of ORR to provide monthly briefings to the
Committees.
Victims of Trafficking
The agreement includes the directives
under this heading in Senate Report 119–55
related to the National Human Trafficking
Hotline and requests ACF include an update
in its fiscal year 2027 congressional justification detailing the Hotline’s compliance with
applicable laws and policies regarding the
operation of the Hotline.
Unaccompanied Alien Children (UAC)
Case Management.—The agreement directs
ORR to brief the Committees on its implementation of a new case management system
and any applications being developed to retrieve, compile, or store data on unaccompanied children for the purposes of placement and release decisions.
Interagency
Information
Sharing.—The
agreement directs ORR to brief the Committees within 180 days of enactment of this Act
on the status of open recommendations identified in the February 2020 GAO report (GAO–
20–245), to ensure HHS receives information
needed to make decisions for placement and
release decisions of unaccompanied children.
Post-Release Services, Legal Services, and
Child Advocates.—The agreement includes
funding for these activities in the amounts
proposed in the Updated FY26 Spend Plan
submitted to the Committees in December
2025. Services must continue to be provided
in accordance with the directives in Senate
Report 119–55, and must fund services and
tasks allowable under the July 31, 2025 bridge
contract award.

1,000,000
25,665,000
9,493,000
4,072,000
1,321,000

HEALTH SURVEILLANCE AND PROGRAM SUPPORT

Within the total provided for health surveillance and program support, the agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Health Surveillance ..............................................................
PHS Evaluation Funds (non-add) ......................................
Program Support ....................................................................
Public Awareness and Support ..............................................
Performance and Quality Information Systems .....................
Drug Abuse Warning Network ................................................
Behavioral Health Workforce Data .........................................
PHS Evaluation Funds (non-add) ......................................

$50,623,000
30,428,000
63,600,000
13,260,000
10,200,000
10,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000

Community Project Funding/Congressionally
Directed Spending.—The agreement includes
$54,311,000 for the projects, and in the
amounts, specified in the table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included in this explanatory statement accompanying this division.
AGENCY FOR HEALTHCARE RESEARCH AND
QUALITY (AHRQ)
HEALTHCARE RESEARCH AND QUALITY

Within the total for the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality, the agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026 Agreement

Research on Health Costs, Quality, and Outcomes ..........
Center for Primary Care Research (non-add) ..........
Long COVID (non-add) ..............................................
Menopause Research (non-add) ...............................
Patient Safety Data Platform (non-add) ..................
United States Preventive Services Task Force
(non-add) ..............................................................
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey .....................................
Program Support ................................................................

$214,109,000
2,000,000
10,000,000
5,000,000
4,000,000

Frm 00243

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The agreement directs ACF to brief the
Committees within 30 days of enactment of
this Act on the staffing levels of the Office of
Community Services, including information
on the workforce in the LIHEAP office, and
how ACF will be addressing any vacancies to
support State heating and cooling assistance
programs, distribute LIHEAP funding in a
timely and accurate manner, and complete
the LIHEAP Formula Report as requested in
Senate Report 119–55.

11,000,000

Center for Application Prevention Technologies.—The agreement directs SAMHSA to
brief the Committees within 90 days of enactment of this Act on the current eligibility, including the feasibility of expanding
eligibility, to private, nonprofit, regional organizations, and faith-based organizations.
Strategic Prevention Framework/Partnerships
for Success.—The agreement directs SAMHSA
to follow the funding instructions in Senate
Report 119–55.

PO 00000

LOW INCOME HOME ENERGY ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM (LIHEAP)

11,542,000
72,791,000
58,480,000

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.081

H22JAPT2

H1596

CHILDREN AND FAMILIES SERVICES PROGRAMS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Head Start
Early Head Start (EHS).—The agreement
strongly supports Early Head Start and directs HHS to prioritize maintenance of current slots, and then expand slots where possible, including through Head Start to Early
Head Start (HS2EHS) slot conversion, as determined by the needs of local communities.
The agreement encourages HHS to maintain
the EHS allocation of funds to at least the
current proportion of funding within the
overall Head Start appropriations, and to include in future congressional justifications
the actual and estimated number of slots in
each of Head Start, EHS, EHS Child Care
Partnerships, and slots converted from
HS2EHS.
Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment State
Grants
Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act
Infant Plans of Safe Care.—The agreement
continues funding to help States continue to
develop and implement infant plans of safe
care as directed in Senate Report 119–55.
Child Welfare Research, Training, and Demonstration
Strengthening State Indian Child Welfare Act
Compliance.—The
agreement
provides
$3,000,000 for State-Tribal partnership grants
as directed in Senate Report 119–55.
Adoption Opportunities
The agreement continues funding for programs under this heading as directed in
House Report 119–271 and Senate Report 119–
55.
Social Services Research and Demonstration
(SSRD)
Within the total provided, the agreement
includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Diaper Distribution Demonstration and Research Pilot ........
Institutional Child Abuse Study .............................................
Preventing Youth Homelessness ............................................
Affordable Housing and Support Services .............................
Medical Legal Partnerships ...................................................
Other SSRD Activities ............................................................

$20,000,000
2,000,000
5,000,000
2,500,000
2,000,000
3,012,000

Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending
The agreement includes $40,801,000 for the
projects, and in the amounts, specified in the
table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included
in this explanatory statement accompanying
this division.
Native American Programs
The agreement includes $16,000,000 for Native American language preservation activities, including no less than $7,000,000 for Native American language immersion programs,
as
authorized
by
section
803C(b)(7)(A)–(C) of the Native American Programs Act, as amended by the Esther Martinez Native American Language Preservation Act of 2006.
Domestic Violence Hotline
The agreement includes $250,000 to support
religious communities as directed in House
Report 119–271.
Family Violence Prevention and Services
The agreement includes an increase of
$5,000,000 for Family Violence and Prevention Services and continues funding for programs under this heading as directed in Senate Report 119–55.
ADMINISTRATION FOR COMMUNITY LIVING
(ACL)
AGING AND DISABILITY SERVICES PROGRAMS

Protection of Vulnerable Older Americans
Within the total, the agreement continues
$21,885,000 for the long-term care ombudsman
program.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Family Caregivers
Within the total, the agreement includes
$3,000,000 to support demonstration grants
that develop, test, and scale models that implement commitments and recommended actions from the National Strategy to Support
Family Caregivers.
Senior Nutrition
The agreement encourages ACL to brief
the Committees on the methodologies used
by States to determine the eligibility of OAA
participants, and the policies and procedures, including outreach efforts, that States
are implementing to increase the proportion
of seniors with assessed needs receiving services.
Aging Network Support Activities
Within the total provided, the agreement
includes the following amounts:
FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity
Care Corps .............................................................................
Older Adult Transportation and Chaperone Services
(non-add)K ................................................................
Direct Care Workforce Demonstration Project .......................
Holocaust Survivor’s Assistance Program .............................
Interagency Coordinating Committee on Healthy Aging and
Age-Friendly Communities .................................................
Other Aging Network Support Activities ................................
Research, Demonstration, and Evaluation Center for the
Aging Network ...................................................................

$5,500,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
8,500,000
1,000,000
8,461,000
5,000,000

Alzheimer’s Disease Program
Within the total, the agreement includes
no less than $2,000,000 for the National Alzheimer’s Call Center.
Elder Rights Support Activities
Within the total, the agreement includes
$15,000,000 for the nationwide Adult Protective Services formula grant program.
Paralysis Resource Center
Within the total, the agreement directs
not less than $10,000,000 to the National Paralysis Resource Center.
Developmental Disabilities State Councils
Within the total, the agreement includes
not less than $800,000 for technical assistance
and training for the State Councils on Developmental Disabilities.
National Institute on Disability, Independent
Living, and Rehabilitation Research
The agreement continues funding to support the Traumatic Brain Injury Model Systems National Data and Statistical Center.
Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending
The agreement includes $13,968,000 for the
projects, and in the amounts, specified in the
table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included
in this explanatory statement accompanying
this division.
ADMINISTRATION FOR STRATEGIC
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE (ASPR)
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND PROCUREMENT
Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA)
Diagnostic Rapid Response Initiative.—The
agreement supports BARDA’s Diagnostic
Rapid Response Initiative.
Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis.—The agreement directs ASPR to provide a briefing
within 180 days of the enactment of this Act
on CARB–X and efforts to reduce the impact
of drug-resistant tuberculosis.
Infectious Disease Outbreaks with Pandemic
Potential.—The agreement includes funding
to support a Rapid Response Capability Medical Countermeasure Program that would
support Disease X (also known as viral
pathogens with a significant potential to
cause a pandemic) medical countermeasure
(MCM) activities and the expeditious development of MCMs against priority viral fami-

PO 00000

Frm 00244

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

lies, including those effective against novel
pathogens with pandemic potential.
Strategic National Stockpile (SNS)
State Strategic Stockpiles.—The agreement
directs ASPR to provide a briefing within 180
days of the enactment of this Act on agency
guidance and technical assistance for State
strategic stockpiles.
Pandemic Influenza Preparedness
Biotechnology Platform Technologies.—The
agreement recognizes challenges of developing single MCMs to address a wide range of
known and unknown threats and supports efforts by ASPR to develop and validate biotechnology platform technologies that may
be capable of addressing a variety of health
security threats.
OPERATIONS, PREPAREDNESS, AND EMERGENCY
RESPONSE

National Disaster Medical System
Mission Zero.—The agreement includes
$4,000,000 for civilian trauma centers to train
and incorporate military trauma care providers and teams into care centers.
Pediatric Disaster Care.—The agreement includes $7,000,000 for the pediatric disaster
care program.
Public Health Preparedness Equipment.—The
agreement does not include funding specifically for next generation air mobility solutions.
Health Care Readiness and Recovery
National Special Pathogen System.—The
agreement includes $7,500,000 for the National Emerging Special Pathogens Training
and Education Center and $21,000,000 to continue support for the Regional Emerging
Special Pathogen Treatment Centers Program and Special Pathogen Treatment Centers.
Regional Disaster Health Response System.—
The agreement includes $7,000,000 for these
cooperative agreements.
Trauma Care Readiness and Coordination.—
The agreement includes $2,000,000 as described in the Senate Report 119–55 in support of duties and functions included in section 1204 (42 U.S.C. 300d–6).
Industrial Base Management and Supply Chain
Diagnostic Manufacturing.—The agreement
recognizes the value of end-to-end domestic
manufacturing of diagnostics.
Industrial Based Management and Supply
Chain (IBMSC).—The agreement supports investments to accelerate advanced development of investigational vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics; emergency manufacturing of critical MCMs and ancillary supplies; and build and validate advanced manufacturing processes and facilities capable of
storing, producing, and deploying essential
medicines and diagnostics in the event of a
national health emergency.
Strengthening Domestic Manufacturing and
Production.—The
agreement
supports
IBMSC’s efforts to increase domestic manufacturing capacity of critical medicines or
their active pharmaceutical ingredients. The
agreement directs ASPR to provide details
in the fiscal year 2027 congressional justification on efforts made to support domestic capacity for essential medical products.
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
GENERAL DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT

Front Matter.—The agreement notes all
items in the front matter that precedes the
Department of Labor, including language set
forth in the front matter of House Report
119–271 and Senate Report 119–55 unless specifically addressed to the contrary in this explanatory statement, apply to every agency
and subcomponent funded by this Act.
Grant Management.—Grant terminations
can significantly and negatively impact the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.083

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

implementation of programs funded in this
Act, as they are intended to be implemented
by this agreement. HHS is directed to consult with the Committees prior to terminating grants. The agreement includes a provision requiring notification to the Committees no less than three days prior to announcing or providing notice of a grant termination.
Nonrecurring Expenses Fund (NEF).—In addition to the directives under this heading in
the Office of the Secretary in House Report
119–271 and Senate Report 119–55, the agreement directs HHS to use, from any remaining unobligated balances in the NEF, and in
addition to funds otherwise made available
for such purpose, no less than $100,000,000 to
make building repairs necessary for the
maintenance and improved security for the
campuses of the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia.
Payment Management System (PMS).—In addition to the directives included under this
heading in Senate Report 119–55, the agreement directs HHS to provide advance notification to the Committees prior to implementing any restrictions that would delay
disbursement of funds to grantees through
PMS. The agreement further directs HHS to
ensure that disbursements through PMS are
processed within five business days, except
under extraordinary circumstances. For any
delays of more than five business days, HHS
is directed to brief the Committees on the
circumstances justifying such delays.
Tribal Set-aside.—The agreement includes a
Tribal set-aside of no less than $6,000,000
within the Minority HIV/AIDS Prevention
and Treatment program.
Within the total provided under this heading, the agreement includes no less than the
following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Children’s Interagency Coordinating Council ............................
Embryo Adoption Awareness Campaign ....................................
Food is Medicine ........................................................................
Interagency Coordinating Committee on the Promotion of Optimal Birth Outcomes ............................................................
KidneyX .......................................................................................
LymeX .........................................................................................
Office of Minority Health:
Center for Indigenous Innovation and Health ......................
Improving Maternal Health Outcomes ..................................
National Lupus Training, Outreach, and Clinical Trial Education ................................................................................
Promoting Language Access Services ...................................
Office on Women’s Health:
Combatting Violence Against Women ...................................
Eating Disorders Research ....................................................
Pregnant and Lactating Women’s Advisory Committee .......
Reporting on Access to Medical Forensic Exams .................
Stillbirth Working Group ........................................................

$3,000,000
2,000,000
2,000,000
2,000,000
5,000,000
5,000,000
6,000,000
10,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
10,100,000
1,000,000
200,000
5,000,000
2,000,000

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL COORDINATOR FOR
HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (ONC)

Patient Matching.—The agreement continues to include $3,000,000 for ONC to work
with industry to develop matching standards
that prioritize interoperability, patient safety, and patient privacy.
Standards for Interoperability.—The agreement continues to include not less than
$5,000,000 to support interoperability and information sharing efforts related to the implementation of Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources standards or associated
implementation standards.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
The agreement modifies a provision related to section 241 of the Public Health
Service Act.
The agreement updates a provision related
to section 338E of the Public Health Service
Act.
The agreement updates a provision related
to international health activities.
The agreement modifies a provision to include a notification requirement for NIH.
The agreement updates a provision related
to information to include as part of a budget
justification.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1597

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

The agreement updates a provision related
to information reporting.
The agreement includes the following allocation of amounts from the Prevention and
Public Health Fund.
PREVENTION AND PUBLIC HEALTH FUND

Agency

Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

ACL ..........
ACL ..........
ACL ..........
CDC .........
CDC .........
CDC .........
CDC .........
CDC .........
CDC .........
CDC .........
CDC .........

Alzheimer’s Disease Program .............................
Chronic Disease Self-Management .....................
Elder Falls Prevention .........................................
Hospitals Promoting Breastfeeding ....................
Diabetes ..............................................................
Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity ..............
Healthcare-Associated Infections ........................
Heart Disease and Stroke ...................................
Million Hearts Program .......................................
Tobacco ...............................................................
Preventative Health and Health Services Block
Grants.
Section 317 Immunization Program ...................
Childhood Lead Poisoning ...................................
National Early Child Care Collaboratives ...........
Public Health Infrastructure and Capacity ........
Garrett Lee Smith–Youth Suicide Prevention
State Grants.

$14,700,000
8,000,000
5,000,000
9,750,000
118,130,000
40,000,000
12,000,000
111,105,000
5,000,000
200,000,000
160,000,000

CDC .........
CDC .........
CDC .........
CDC .........
SAMHSA ...

596,390,000
51,000,000
5,000,000
90,000,000
12,000,000

The agreement updates a provision related
to mammography.
The agreement modifies a provision related to the schooling of eligible dependents.
The agreement includes a new provision related to funding for the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.
The agreement modifies a provision to rescind unobligated balances.
The agreement includes a new provision related to investigations by NIH grantees.
The agreement includes a new provision related to staffing levels.
The agreement includes a new provision related to NIH awards.
The agreement includes a new provision related to title XVIII of the Social Security
Act.
TITLE III—DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY
EDUCATION
SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS

Comprehensive Centers
The agreement emphasizes language in
Senate Report 119–55 related to school support and improvement under the Education
for the Disadvantaged heading and this program. The agreement directs the Department to immediately act to improve implementation of, support for, and transparency
on implemented corrective actions and recommendations related to school support and
improvement requirements and uses of funds
under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) to bring State and local
educational agencies into compliance with
the law’s requirements. Further, the Department is directed to brief the Committees
pursuant to the direction in the Senate Report 119–55, including on related activities
underway and planned throughout the Department’s programs, program offices, and
technical assistance centers and providers.
INDIAN EDUCATION

National Activities
The agreement includes $14,365,000 for National Activities. These funds shall support
new and continuation awards and not less
than the amounts listed for programs below.
The agreement continues directives contained within House Report 119–271 and Senate Report 119–55.
Within the total National Activities, the
agreement includes the following amounts:
FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity
Budget Activity FY 2026 Agreement Native American Language Immersion ...............................................................
Native American Language Resource Centers ......................
State-Tribal Education Partnerships .....................................

PO 00000

Frm 00245

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

$4,750,000
3,000,000
4,000,000

INNOVATION AND IMPROVEMENT

Education Innovation and Research (EIR)
The Department is directed to consult with
the Committees not later than three weeks
prior to issuing a notice of proposed priorities, or a notice inviting applications, or
funding availability for all competitions
under EIR. The Department will also provide
a briefing and notice of grant awards to the
Committees at least seven days before grantees are announced.
Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending
The agreement includes $100,147,000 for the
projects, and in the amounts, specified in the
table ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included in this
explanatory statement accompanying this
division.
SAFE SCHOOLS AND CITIZENSHIP EDUCATION

School Safety National Activities
Within the total provided for school safety
national activities, the agreement includes
the program amounts identified by the table
under this heading. Any funds not needed for
Project SERV shall be used for additional
Mental Health Services Professional Grants
or School-based Mental Health Services
Grants.
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Mental Health Services Professional Grants .........................
Project SERV ..........................................................................

$82,000,000
up to
6,000,000
82,000,000
20,000,000

School-based Mental Health Services Grants .......................
School Safety Enhancement Grants ......................................

School Safety Enhancement Grants.—Building on the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act
Stronger Connections Grant program; the
agreement includes $20,000,000 for competitive grants to help schools implement best
practices to improve school safety as described in the seventh paragraph under this
program in House Report 119–271. The agreement directs the Department to consult with
the Committees within 90 days of enactment
of this Act on its plans for carrying out this
program, including any proposed priorities
or program requirements. In addition, the
Department is directed to provide notice to
the Committees at least seven days before
any notices of funding opportunities or proposed priorities are published or any grantees for a new competition are announced.
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND
REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
SPECIAL EDUCATION

Educational Technology, Media, and Materials.—The agreement includes an increase of
$1,000,000 for this program as described in
House Report 119–271.
REHABILITATION SERVICES

Helen Keller National Center.—The agreement includes funding as described under the
third paragraph under this heading in House
Report 119–271.
Parent Information and Training.—The
agreement directs the Department to hold a
new competition for the C–2 regional center
for fiscal year 2026.
SPECIAL INSTITUTIONS FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES
American Printing House for the Blind
Within the total, the agreement continues
up to $5,000,000 for additional field testing,
production, and distribution of braille and
tactile display products.
Center for Assistive Technology Training.—
The agreement also includes up to $6,000,000
as directed under this heading in House Report 119–271.
National Technical Institute for the Deaf
(NTID)
The agreement continues up to $9,500,000
for NTID’s Regional STEM Center.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.085

H22JAPT2

H1598

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Gallaudet University
The agreement continues $8,500,000 for the
Early Learning Acquisition Project.
STUDENT AID ADMINISTRATION
Free Application for Federal Student Aid
(FAFSA)
Administration.—The
agreement
modifies the briefing requirement under the
heading ‘‘FAFSA Administration’’ in Senate
Report 119–55 to be on a quarterly basis.
Financial Aid Data.—The agreement requests the report directed under this heading
in Senate Report 119–55 within 120 days of enactment of this Act and modifies the requirement to report on instances of information
sharing to be on instances in which such information was shared in a manner inconsistent with applicable law and policy.
HIGHER EDUCATION
Child Care Access Means Parents in
Schools.—The agreement directs the Department to conduct a new competition for fiscal
year 2026 pursuant to the priorities described
under this heading in Senate Report 119–55.
Strengthening Historically Black Colleges and
Universities
The agreement includes $6,000,000, an increase of $3,000,000, for supplemental grants
to eligible junior or community colleges.
Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary
Education
Consultation.—The Department is directed
to consult with the Committees not later
than two weeks prior to issuing a notice of
proposed priorities, notice inviting applications, or funding availability for all competitions under the Fund for the Improvement of
Postsecondary Education (FIPSE), as well as
provide a briefing and notice of grant awards
to the Committees at least seven days before
grantees are announced.
Within the total provided for FIPSE, the
agreement includes the following amounts:
Budget Activity

FY 2026
Agreement

Basic Needs Grants ...............................................................
Centers of Excellence for Veteran Student Success Program
HBCU, TCU, and MSI Research and Development Infrastructure Grants ................................................................
Open Textbook Pilot ...............................................................
Postsecondary Student Success Grants ................................
Rural Postsecondary and Economic Development Grant Program ..................................................................................
Transitioning Gang-Involved Youth to Higher Education ......

$10,000,000
9,000,000
15,000,000
7,000,000
45,000,000
45,000,000
5,000,000

Basic Needs Grants.—The agreement directs
the Department to carry out this program as
described in Senate Report 119–55.
Open Textbook Pilot.—The agreement directs the Department to issue a notice inviting applications, allow for a 60-day application period, and make a significant number
of grant awards under the same terms and
conditions as in prior years. The agreement
directs the Department to ensure that any
data collected from grantees about the performance
of
this
program
clearly
disaggregates data on courses subject to
course materials fees from data on the use of
free open textbooks.
Postsecondary Student Success Grants.—The
agreement directs the Department to carry
out this program in the same manner specified in the explanatory statement accompanying division H of P.L. 117–328, including
the directive to brief the Committees.
Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending
The agreement includes $224,377,000 for the
projects, and in the amounts, specified in the
table ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included in this
explanatory statement accompanying this
division.
INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION SCIENCES
Statistics
School Cellphone Bans.—In lieu of the
amount and directive under this heading in

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

House Report 119–271, the agreement supports efforts to collect data on and to assess
the best practices of school policies, and implementation of such policies, limiting the
student use of personal cellular and mobile
devices on school grounds or during the
school day.
DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

Cost Savings of Inclusive Access Programs
Study.—In lieu of the report requested under
this heading in House Report 119–271, the
agreement looks forward to any new data on
first-day access programs.
Front Matter.—The agreement notes all
items in the front matter that precedes the
Department of Labor, including language set
forth in the front matter of House Report
119–271 and Senate Report 119–55 unless specifically addressed to the contrary in this explanatory statement, apply to every agency
and subcomponent funded by this Act.
Grant Payment Conditions.—The agreement
modifies the notification requirement under
this heading in Senate Report 119–55 to be
one-day advance notification and continues
the reporting directives.
Interagency Agreements and Program Transfers.—The agreement notes that it provides
funding to the Department of Education to
carry out specific programs, projects, and activities that have been authorized in law for
the Department of Education to carry out. It
also continues a provision that prohibits the
transfer of such funding to another Federal
agency unless such transfer authority is provided in an appropriations law. The agreement further notes that no authorities exist
for the Department of Education to transfer
its fundamental responsibilities under numerous authorizing and appropriations laws,
including through procuring services from
other Federal agencies, of carrying out those
programs, projects, and activities to other
Federal agencies.
The agreement notes concern about the
Department of Education’s recent, unprecedented use of Interagency Agreements to
transfer significant programmatic responsibilities, procure services, and detail staff
to other Federal agencies, including to the
Departments of Labor, Health and Human
Services, State, and Interior. The agreement
is concerned about the assignment of such
programmatic responsibilities to agencies
that do not have experience, expertise, or capacity to carry out these programs and activities and lack developed relationships and
communications with relevant stakeholders,
including States. The agreement is concerned that fragmenting responsibilities for
education programs across multiple agencies
will create inefficiencies, result in additional
costs to the American taxpayer, and cause
delays and administrative challenges in Federal funding reaching States, school districts, and schools. The agreement is also
concerned this will weaken Federal support
to protect the rights of students, children,
youth, and families under Federal education
laws.
Given these concerns, the agreement directs the Department of Education and signatory agencies to provide biweekly briefings to the Committees on implementation
of any such interagency agreements. These
briefings shall include information on staffing transfers, implementation costs, metrics
on the delivery of services, availability of
technical support for programs to grantees,
the issuance of Notices Inviting Applications
or other funding opportunities, plans for
maintaining high standards of quality and
objectivity in grant competitions through
multi-reviewer peer panels, rates of accessing funds by grantees and any resulting
delays through the draw down of funds, up-

PO 00000

Frm 00246

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

dates on monitoring for grantees’ compliance with all federal requirements, implementation of reporting requirements by
grantees and Federal agencies and communications with eligible grantees, States, and
other stakeholders. Such information shall
include comparisons to prior years on a comparable basis.
Public Comment.—The agreement contains
no new or substantially revised direct grant
program authorities for the Department to
implement. The agreement supports robust
public participation in rulemaking, including support for the issuance of proposed priorities for public comment, unless such requirements are otherwise specifically exempted under a program’s statutory authority.
Reporting.—Last July, the Department
issued a letter to State Educational Agencies
inviting waivers from the ESEA. The Department is directed to post approved waivers on
the Department’s website within 30 days of
approving a waiver and provide quarterly
briefings to the Committees on any such approved waivers, including how the waiver
meets the requirements of ESEA section
8401.
Reporting System Improvements.—The agreement supports compliance with section 117 of
the HEA and understands its importance for
national security. The agreement supports
ongoing implementation efforts to improve
and increase transparency in the reporting
system used by institutions of higher education and managed by the Department, in
support of meeting the requirements under
section 117.
OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS

Combatting Antisemitism.—The agreement
modifies the report directive under this
heading in Senate Report 119–55 to be a report within 120 days of enactment of this
Act.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
The agreement updates authority for
pooled evaluation under the ESEA.
The agreement updates a provision allowing certain institutions to continue to use
endowment income for student scholarships.
The agreement updates a provision extending the authorization of the National Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and
Integrity.
The agreement updates a provision extending the authority to provide account maintenance fees to guaranty agencies.
The agreement updates a provision regarding evaluation of Higher Education Act programs.
The agreement modifies a provision regarding centralized support services for the
Institute of Education Sciences.
The agreement modifies a provision to rescind unobligated balances and transfer balances.
The agreement includes a new provision to
rescind unobligated balances for program administration.
The agreement includes a new provision on
formula grants.
TITLE IV—RELATED AGENCIES
CORPORATION FOR NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY
SERVICE (CNCS)
Front Matter.—The agreement notes all
items in the front matter that precedes the
Department of Labor, including language set
forth in the front matter of House Report
119–271 and Senate Report 119–55 unless specifically addressed to the contrary in this explanatory statement, apply to every agency
and subcomponent funded by this Act.
OPERATING EXPENSES

AmeriCorps
State
and
National
and
AmeriCorps Seniors Retired Senior Volunteer

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.087

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1599

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Programs.—The agreement directs CNCS to
release the AmeriCorps State and National
and AmeriCorps Seniors Retired Senior Volunteer Programs competitive funding opportunities for fiscal year 2026 no later than 10
days following the date of enactment of this
Act and shall ensure that those funding opportunities are posted for at least 45 days. If
State laws or regulations prevent a State
from completing a grant competition within
the time allowed, the agreement directs
CNCS to take all necessary measures to ensure each State’s participation, including adjusting deadlines, providing technical assistance, or otherwise modifying the process to
ensure all States can participate in grant
competitions funded under this Act.
Commission Investment Fund (CIF).—The
agreement includes no less than the amount
included in Senate Report 119–55 under the
CIF Header.
Data Collection.—The agreement directs
CNCS to follow the directive regarding data
collection as outlined in House Report 119–
271.
Timely Notice of Awards.—The agreement
directs CNCS to publish funding opportunity
announcements for competitive grant programs with sufficient time for all previously
eligible and new applicants to develop quality submissions and to award such funds in a
timely manner. Additionally, the agreement
directs CNCS to award renewal and non-competing continuations within 7 days of the end
of the period of performance, except in the
case of a grant or award where there has
been a finding of financial mismanagement,
fraud, or malfeasance.
INSTITUTE OF MUSEUM AND LIBRARY SERVICES
Within the total for the Institute of Museum and Library Services, the agreement
includes the following amounts:
FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity
Library Services Technology Act:
Grants to States ................................................................
Native American Library Services .....................................
National Leadership: Libraries ..........................................
Laura Bush 21st Century Librarian ..................................
Museum Services Act:
Museums for America .......................................................
Native American/Hawaiian Museum Services ...................
National Leadership: Museums .........................................
21st Century Museum Professional ..................................

$181,400,000
5,763,000
15,287,000
10,000,000
28,730,000
3,772,000
9,348,000
1,000,000

FY 2026
Agreement

Budget Activity
African American History and Culture Act:
Museum Grants for African American History & Culture
National Museum of the American Latino Act:
Museum Grants for American Latino History & Culture ..
Research, Analysis, and Data Collection ..............................
Program Administration .........................................................

6,000,000
6,000,000
5,500,000
19,000,000

Information Literacy Task Force.—The
agreement reiterates and supports the funding instruction, directives, and requirements
under this heading in Senate Report 119–55.
SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION (SSA)
LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

Codebase Modernization.—The agreement
directs the SSA, within 180 days of enactment of this Act, to submit to the Committees a report on SSA’s use of COBOL and
progress on the secure migration of the
codebase to a modern programming language
where applicable.
IT Activities.—The agreement directs SSA
to provide a report to the Committees, within 90 days of enactment of this Act, detailing
the number, amount, and general content of
contracts, grants, and cooperative agreements awarded under SSA’s IT portfolio.
Such a report shall be grouped by heading
and subheading on Table 3.24 of the fiscal
year 2026 congressional justification.
Staffing Plan.—The agreement includes an
increase of $50,000,000 for SSA’s base administrative expenses for resources to help ensure SSA has the necessary workforce to operate efficiently and provide high-quality
service to program beneficiaries.
The agreement is concerned by any reductions in direct-service operations, including
staff at field offices and processing and teleservice centers, and provides resources for
SSA to increase the number of staff on the
frontlines. The agreement directs SSA to
take steps to avoid field office closures, reduced office hours, and increased delays to
appointments for beneficiaries seeking inperson support. μAs part of the monthly
staffing report requested in Senate Report
119–55, the agreement directs SSA to include
appointment waiting times by field office.
Work Incentives Planning and Assistance
(WIPA) and Protection and Advocacy for Beneficiaries of Social Security (PABSS).—The
agreement includes $23,000,000 for WIPA
grants and $10,000,000 for PABSS.

TITLE V—GENERAL PROVISIONS
The agreement updates a provision related
to the salary or expenses of any grant or contract recipient.
The agreement updates a provision related
to notification of certain reprogramming of
funds.
The agreement updates a provision related
to submission of an operating plan.
The agreement updates a provision related
to submission of a report.
The agreement updates a provision related
to computer networks.
The agreement updates a provision related
to submission of a report on the status of
balances.
The agreement modifies a provision related to grant notifications.
The agreement modifies a provision to rescind unobligated balances.
The agreement modifies a provision to rescind unobligated balances.
The agreement modifies a provision related to the re-obligation of funds.
The agreement adds a new provision to rescind unobligated balances.
DISCLOSURE OF EARMARKS AND
CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING ITEMS

Following is a list of congressional earmarks and congressionally directed spending
items (as defined in clause 9 of rule XXI of
the Rules of the House of Representatives
and rule XLIV of the Standing Rules of the
Senate, respectively) included in the bill or
this explanatory statement, along with the
name of each House Member, Senator, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner who submitted a request to the Committee of jurisdiction for each item so identified. For each
item, a Member is required to provide a certification that neither the Member nor the
Member’s immediate family has a financial
interest, and each Senator is required to provide a certification that neither the Senator
nor the Senator’s immediate family has a pecuniary interest in such congressionally directed spending item. Neither the bill nor
the explanatory statement contains any limited tax benefits or limited tariff benefits as
defined in the applicable House and Senate
rules.

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

2nd LT RICHARD W COLLINS III FOUNDATION, MD, for educational programming, including
coursework and internships

50,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Alaska Joint Electrical Apprenticeship and Training Trust, AK, to provide federally registered
apprenticeship training

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Alaska Primary Care Association, AK, to establish the Alaska Graduate Medical Education
(GME) council and support GME expansion

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

AltaMed Health Services Corporation, CA, for healthcare workforce training, including tuition
and fees and purchasing equipment and training materials

995,000

Padilla

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Applied Behavioral Rehabilitation Institute, Inc., CT, for workforce development, including
supportive services for veterans

120,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Arizona Commission of African-American Affairs, AZ, to expand workforce training, including
stipends, supportive services, rentals, and equipment

300,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

AS220, RI, for workforce training, including stipends and tuition

1,120,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

ASI, Inc., IL, to expand workforce development, including purchasing equipment and providing supportive services

750,000

Durbin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Association for the Education of Young Children—Southeast Alaska, AK, to expand a child
care apprenticeship program

500,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Baltimore Alliance for Careers in Healthcare, MD, for an apprenticeship program, including
supportive services

579,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Bay Consortium Workforce Development Board, VA, for improving education and workforce
training, which may include the purchase of technology and equipment

354,000

Kaine, Warner

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Bean’s Cafe, AK, to fund a job training program

600,000

Murkowski

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00247

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.089

H22JAPT2

H1600

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Best Buddies International, Inc., NJ, for expanding workforce training, including rent, supplies, and supportive services

250,000

Kim

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Boys & Girls Club of the Northern Plains Inc., SD, to upgrade and expand early learning
centers

2,000,000

Rounds

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

BuildStrong Academy of Colorado, CO, for expanding workforce training, including the purchase of equipment, hiring instructors, and providing support services

750,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

CCARC, Inc., CT, for supporting a manufacturing internship program and workforce development

189,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Cecil College, MD, for improving commercial truck driver workforce training, including the
purchase of equipment

109,000

Alsobrooks

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Central Georgia Technical College Foundation, GA, for workforce training for veterans provided by VECTR Center, including providing supportive services and temporary housing

300,000

Ossoff

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Central Minnesota Jobs and Training Services, Inc., MN, for workforce development programs, which may include purchasing equipment

255,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Central Oregon Community College, OR, for expanding firefighter workforce training, including the purchase of equipment

800,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

City of New Haven, CT, for a career learning center, including the purchase of equipment
and lab materials

2,483,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Cloud County Community College, KS, to purchase advanced technology equipment and network infrastructure for technical education

708,000

Moran

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

College of Southern Maryland, MD, for education and training in water and wastewater
treatment programs, including the purchase of supplies

732,000

Alsobrooks

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Columbus Technical College, GA, for workforce development including the purchase of
equipment

897,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

CT Puerto Rican Forum dba Center for Latino Progress, CT, for workforce development programming, which may include stipends and purchase of equipment

1,184,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

DAY ONE Early Learning Community, Inc., NY, for establishing a teacher apprenticeship program, including rental costs and purchasing equipment

1,800,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Detroit Public Schools Community District, MI, to improve education and workforce training,
including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Peters

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Dorcas International Institute of Rhode Island, RI, for workforce training, including the purchase of supplies

680,000

Reed

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

DownCity Design, RI, for expanding career pathways programs, including providing stipends
and purchasing equipment

100,000

Reed

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Downriver Community College, MI, for workforce training, including providing supportive
services

750,000

Peters

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Drink at the Well, Inc., MD, for expanding workforce development programming, purchasing
equipment, and providing wrap around services, including child care

175,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Early Childhood Center of Excellence at Santa Fe Community College, NM, for expanding
apprenticeships and pre-apprenticeships, including providing stipends

273,000

Heinrich

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Educate Maine, ME, to purchase manufacturing and engineering equipment for Career and
Technical Education schools

2,000,000

Collins, King

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Elliot Health System, NH, for improving healthcare workforce training, including by providing scholarships

460,000

Shaheen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Fairbanks Pipeline Training Center Trust, AK, to fund training equipment for constructing
and maintaining pipelines

2,500,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Forge City Works, CT, for a culinary workforce training program, including supportive services, purchasing equipment and supplies

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Fund for the City of New York (Fiscal Sponsor of New York City Employment and Training
Coalition), NY, for workforce training

125,000

Schumer

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Goodwill Industries of the Valleys, VA, for education and workforce training, which may include the purchase of classroom supplies and equipment

1,800,000

Kaine, Warner

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Goodwill of Greater Washington, MD, for expanding workforce training, including providing
stipends

1,000,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Goodwill of North Georgia, GA, for workforce training, including the purchase of equipment
and tuition

1,950,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Greater Lake City Alliance, SC, to expand a workforce training program

734,000

Graham

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Greater Roanoke Workforce Development Board, VA, for expanding apprenticeships and
youth apprenticeships, including rent and the purchase of equipment

737,000

Kaine, Warner

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Hanley Center for Health Leadership and Education DBA Maine Medical Education Trust,
ME, to support certified nursing assistant training for long-term care

1,000,000

Collins, King

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Hire Heroes USA, GA, for workforce training for veterans, transitioning service members and
military spouses

520,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Ilisagvik College, AK, to expand Ilisagvik College’s Workforce Development program

250,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

International Institute of New England, NH, for workforce training in early childhood education

470,000

Shaheen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Iron Workers Local Union No. 8 Joint Apprenticeship and Advanced Journeyman Training
Trust Fund, WI, for expanding apprenticeships, including the purchase of equipment

700,000

Baldwin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Jackson County Airport-Reynolds Field, MI, for improving aviation maintenance training, including the purchase of equipment

500,000

Peters

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

JEVS Human Services, PA, for healthcare workforce training, including purchasing supplies
and equipment

220,000

Fetterman

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00248

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1601

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Jobs & Hope West Virginia, WV, to support wage reimbursements

750,000

Justice

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

KNOX, Inc., CT, for an apprenticeship program, including stipends

231,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Lincoln University of Pennsylvania, PA, for expanding workforce training, including purchasing equipment and providing supportive services

1,000,000

Fetterman

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Literacy Pittsburgh, PA, for workforce training and career development programs, including
for purchasing equipment and supplies

250,000

Fetterman

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Lomakatsi Restoration Project, OR, for an inter-tribal forestry workforce training program,
including the purchase of equipment and tools

1,300,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Los Angeles Conservation Corps, CA, for workforce training, including transportation

969,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service DBA Global Refuge, MD, for expanding workforce
development programming, including supportive services

300,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Madison Area Technical College, WI, for improving workforce development for nursing,
health, and EMS programs, including the purchase of equipment

660,000

Baldwin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Massachusetts Down Syndrome Congress, MA, for workforce training, including equipment
and participant stipends

722,000

Markey,
Warren

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mesalands Community College, NM, for improving workforce training, including the purchase of equipment

4,000,000

Heinrich

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Michigan AFL–CIO Workforce Development Institute, MI, for expanding workforce training,
including the purchase of equipment

2,000,000

Slotkin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mid-Atlantic States Career and Education Center, NJ, for improving workforce training, including the purchase of equipment

137,000

Booker

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mississippi Coding Academies, MS, for a digital workforce training program

700,000

Hyde-Smith

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mississippi State University, MS, to expand a workforce training program for skilled manufacturing

5,320,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mixed Magic Theatre & Cultural Events, RI, for a workforce training program, including providing stipends and purchasing supplies

100,000

Reed

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Moraine Park Technical College, WI, for improving education and workforce training, including the purchase of equipment

1,325,000

Baldwin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

MS Department of Archives and History, MS, to establish a workforce training field school

500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

National Forest Foundation, NM, for supporting workforce training and a conservation corps,
including the purchase of equipment and supplies

500,000

Luján

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

New Mexico Reentry Center, NM, for providing workforce training programs, including the
purchase of equipment

150,000

Heinrich

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Northwest Regional Workforce Investment Board, CT, for a reentry workforce training program, which includes providing supportive services

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

NPower Inc., MD, for expanding workforce training, including providing stipends and purchasing equipment

750,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Operation Stand Down Rhode Island, RI, for a workforce training program for veterans including purchasing equipment and providing supportive services

400,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Pacific Northwest Ironworkers and Employers Apprenticeship and Training Trust, AK, to fund
workforce opportunities in rural Alaska

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Plattsburgh-North Country Chamber of Commerce, NY, for workforce training, including supportive services

350,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Polytech Adult Education, DE, for expanding workforce training, including the purchase of
equipment

1,542,000

Coons

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Renewable Energy Alaska Project, AK, to fund a job training program

730,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Roxbury Community College, MA, for improving education and workforce training, including
purchasing equipment, providing financial aid and scholarships, and purchasing technology

2,000,000

Markey,
Warren

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Rural Alaska Community Action Program, AK, to provide childcare support and training in
rural Alaska

1,264,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

San Juan College, NM, for supporting workforce training for commercial drivers, including
the purchase of vehicles for a training program

1,000,000

Luján

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Sealaska Heritage Institute, AK, to fund a job training program

500,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

SMART Local Union No. 49 JATC, NM, for expanding apprenticeship programs, including the
purchase of equipment

1,200,000

Heinrich

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Southern Virginia Higher Education Center, VA, for technology workforce training, including
the purchase of equipment

751,000

Kaine, Warner

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Southwest Washington Workforce Development Council, dba Workforce Southwest Washington, WA, for education and workforce development programming, including supportive
services and tuition

1,000,000

Murray

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Survivor Ventures, DE, for workforce training, including supportive services and wage subsidies

257,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Survivor Ventures, VA, for providing workforce development, which may include providing
supportive services and financial aid

405,000

Kaine, Warner

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Tech Goes Home Incorporated, MA, for workforce development in digital skills and digital
literacy, including the purchase of equipment and technology

800,000

Markey,
Warren

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Arc Alliance, PA, for workforce training activities and improving services for individuals
with disabilities, including the purchase of equipment

200,000

Fetterman

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00249

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H1602

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Arc Montgomery County, Inc., MD, for a workforce training program, including stipends

150,000

Alsobrooks

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Arizona Office of Economic Opportunity, AZ, for construction and trades apprenticeship
expansion, including purchasing equipment and providing tuition

2,000,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Chrysalis Center, CA, for workforce training, which may include scholarships and other
supportive services

405,000

Padilla

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Economic Development Corporation Serving Fresno County, CA, for workforce training,
including the purchase of equipment

2,304,000

Schiff

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Precision Institute, DE, for expanding workforce training, including purchasing equipment and providing stipends

1,100,000

Coons

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Training Source, Inc., MD, for workforce training and career counseling, including stipends

289,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Thread, AK, to provide TA and training for childcare centers

500,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Trying Together, PA, for expanding workforce training, including supportive services

500,000

Fetterman

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Uintah Basin Technical College, UT, to purchase two mobile trailer vehicles and provide
training

1,000,000

Curtis

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of Alaska Anchorage, AK, to expand a course of study for aviation maintenance
technology

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of Alaska Anchorage, AK, to fund workforce training opportunities for students

315,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of Alaska Southeast, AK, to fund a job training program

160,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of California, Merced, CA, for medical education, including the purchase of
equipment

3,500,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of Rhode Island Research Foundation dba Polaris MEP, RI, for advanced manufacturing workforce development, including the purchase of equipment

560,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Urban League of Greater Atlanta (ULGA), GA, for workforce development, including stipends,
supportive services, rent, and purchasing equipment

1,204,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Veterans Watchmaker Initiative, DE, for workforce training for veterans, including the purchase of equipment

444,000

Coons

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

VIPER Transitions, AK, to expand a veteran career services program

1,095,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Visiting Nurse Association Health Group, NJ, for improving health care workforce training,
including purchasing equipment, providing tuition support, and providing supportive
services

1,000,000

Booker, Kim

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Wide Angle Youth Media, MD, for a pre-apprenticeship program, including providing stipends and purchasing supplies and technology

712,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Women’s Rights Information Center, NJ, for expanding workforce training, including purchasing equipment and providing supportive services

461,000

Booker, Kim

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Workforce Development Board of South Central Wisconsin, WI, for apprenticeship support,
including apprenticeship navigators

970,000

Baldwin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Workforce Development Council of Seattle King County, WA, for workforce development for
healthcare workers including providing supportive services

1,000,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College, GA, for facilities and equipment to improve rural
nurse education

424,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Addictions Recovery Center, Inc. (ARC), OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a residential treatment facility

1,400,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Adelante Healthcare, Inc., AZ, for facilities and equipment to expand a health center

2,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AdventHealth Redmond, GA, for equipment to provide ambulance services

934,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AdventHealth Shawnee Mission, KS, for facilities and equipment to expand high-risk maternal fetal clinic

1,000,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AIDS Resource Alliance, Inc., PA, for equipment to purchase a mobile clinic

375,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Alaska—Division of Public Health State Medical Examiner’s Office, AK, for facilities and
equipment for acquisition and installation of x-ray imaging machine

550,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium, AK, for facilities and equipment to renovate and
upgrade operating room recovery space and perioperative bays

1,500,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Albany Area Primary Health Care, Inc., GA, for facilities and equipment to expand a medical
center

1,806,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Alternative Community Resource Program, PA, for facilities and equipment to renovate a
behavioral health clinic

1,000,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Amador Health Center, Inc., NM, for facilities and equipment to construct counseling space

516,000

Luján

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Amani Center, OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a child services center

1,023,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Amherst H. Wilder Foundation, MN, for facilities and equipment to expand access to substance use disorder treatment

1,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ammonoosuc Community Health Services, Inc., NH, for facilities and equipment to weatherize and improve accessibility for a health clinic

250,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Amoskeag Health, NH, for equipment to improve clinic safety and establish a new service
site

485,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Anchorage Community Mental Health Services Inc. dba Alaska Behavioral Health, AK, for facilities and equipment to renovate facilities in Anchorage and Fairbanks to allow expanded mental health residential treatment

1,950,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Anchorage Fire Department, AK, for facilities and equipment to construct a decontamination
unit

1,090,000

Murkowski

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00250

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1603

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Anderson Center for Autism, NY, for facilities and equipment to install a septic system

1,064,000

Gillibrand

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AnMed Health System, SC, for acquisition of imaging, lab, and pharmacy equipment

3,800,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Archways, NH, for facilities and equipment to improve access to substance use disorder
treatment

300,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Arkansas Department of Health, AR, for the acquisition of clinical practice technology, remote patient health tools, telehealth hardware and software, and electronic medical
records upgrades

13,300,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Arkansas State University Newport, AR, for facilities and equipment for Nursing and Health
Professions Facility and purchase of academic, telehealth, mental health, and student
health and wellness technology

7,700,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Arkansas State University, AR, for facilities and equipment for construction of Mental and
Maternal-Infant Healthcare Simulation Building

9,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Athens Model Neighborhood Health Center, Inc., GA, for equipment to purchase mobile units

1,001,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Atlantic Health System, NJ, for facilities and equipment to expand access to mammography
services

750,000

Booker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AtlanticCare Health System, NJ, for facilities and equipment to provide an emergency power
supply

1,000,000

Booker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Augusta University, GA, for equipment to improve cancer treatment

800,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Augusta University, GA, for equipment to support training of medical students

630,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Avera Health, SD, for facilities and equipment to support the acquisition and installation of
fixed PET/CT scanner and linear accelerators

10,175,000

Rounds

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bailey’s Crossroads Health Access Partnership, Inc. (D/B/A Culmore Clinic), VA, for facilities
and equipment to construct a new medical clinic

550,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bath Community Hospital, VA, for equipment to purchase an ambulance

289,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bayfield County, WI, for establishing a rural first-responders program

300,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Beebe Medical Center, DE, for facilities and equipment to construct a primary care clinic

1,775,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Behavioral Health and Developmental Services of Strafford County, Inc., NH, for facilities
and equipment to improve access to behavioral health services

110,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bennett County Hospital & Nursing Home, SD, for facilities and equipment for new hospital
construction that will support emergency services, primary care, swing bed services, behavioral health programs, and other ancillary services

2,551,000

Rounds

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Blood Bank of Hawaii, HI, for equipment to purchase a blood donation center

1,000,000

Hirono

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Blue Mountain Heart to Heart, WA, for facilities and equipment to increase access to substance use disorder treatment

1,000,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, IL, for facilities and equipment to expand a
dental clinic

700,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bridgton Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate, expand, and provide diagnostic and patient room equipment for the Emergency Department

5,000,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Brightpoint Community College, Midlothian and Chester Virginia, VA, for facilities and
equipment to support health professions training

296,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bucksport Regional Health Center, ME, for facilities and equipment to support construction,
renovation, and purchase of dental equipment to expand dental services

1,980,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bucktail Medical Center, PA, for equipment to improve diagnostic services

949,000

Fetterman, McCormick

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bullhead City Fire District, AZ, for equipment to provide ambulance services

294,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

C.A.R.E. Clinic, MN, for facilities and equipment to improve training for health professionals

1,100,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Calais Community Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to expand Rural Health Clinic

4,990,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Camai Community Health Center, AK, for facilities and equipment to expand and modernize
health center for mental health, emergency services, and diagnostic capabilities and
provide critical infrastructure upgrades

3,000,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Cameron County Ambulance Service, Inc., PA, for equipment to provide ambulance services

250,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Caring Hands Healthcare Centers Inc., OK, for facilities and equipment to support construction of new primary care clinic

950,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Centenary College, LA, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation for the
Centenary College School of Health Sciences

10,000,000

Cassidy,
Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Center Senior Living, WA, for facilities and equipment for an assisted living facility

1,000,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Central Arizona Fire and Medical Authority, AZ, for equipment to provide ambulance services

750,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Central Maine Highland Fire & EMS District 1, ME, for equipment to purchase new ambulances for regional EMS

1,875,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Charleston Area Medical Center, WV, for equipment for technical infrastructure upgrades
and cybersecurity technology

15,000,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

CHI Memorial Hospital—Georgia, GA, for equipment to improve patient monitoring and
emergency response

964,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Children’s Inn at NIH, Inc., MD, for facilities and equipment to construct residential spaces
for pediatric patients

620,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Children’s National Medical Center, MD, for equipment to expand access to pediatric care
through a mobile unit

600,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00251

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

S

H1604

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine, ME, for acquisition of equipment to train dental
hygienists

525,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Christiana Care Health Services, DE, for facilities and equipment to construct an urgent
care facility

4,008,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Circle the City, AZ, for facilities and equipment to expand a health center

840,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Bridgeton, NJ, for equipment to expand rural healthcare and purchase an ambulance

435,000

Kim

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Carlin Volunteer Fire Department, NV, for equipment to improve cardiac care

98,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Chicago, IL, for facilities and equipment to construct a senior center

2,000,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Clarksburg, WV, for renovations, functional fitness equipment, development of training, and conducting cancer screenings to support City of Clarksburg’s Cancer Screening
for Firefighters program

214,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of East Point, GA, for equipment to provide ambulance services

302,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Enterprise, AL, for facilities and acquisition to purchase and install surgical robot

3,000,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Fairbanks, AK, for equipment to purchase medical ambulance bus and emergency
medical equipment

728,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Lexington, VA, for facilities and equipment to construct a primary care clinic

2,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Maricopa, AZ, for equipment to provide ambulance services

867,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Meadville Fire Department, PA, for acquisition of vehicles, cardiac technology, and
telehealth equipment and to support personnel for a new Mobile Integrated Health unit

1,180,000

McCormick

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of O’Neill, NE, for facilities and equipment for construction to support replacement and
installation of boiler and water heating systems

3,500,000

Fischer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Valdosta, GA, for equipment to purchase a vehicle

328,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Wells, NV, for facilities and equipment to expand primary care services and purchase a vehicle

227,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Winslow, AZ, for equipment to establish a rural emergency response program

68,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Clackamas County, OR, for facilities and equipment to improve access to substance use
disorder services

2,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Clinch County Hospital Authority, GA, for equipment to provide imaging and ambulance
services

450,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coastal Carolina University, SC, for acquisition of nurse simulation laboratory equipment
and nursing and health sciences education and training equipment

2,400,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

CODAC Behavioral Healthcare, RI, for facilities and equipment to improve accessibility

851,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY, for equipment to support neurodegenerative disease research

2,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Colorado State University, CO, for facilities and equipment to support a nurse training program

1,500,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Columbus Consolidated Government, GA, for equipment to provide healthcare to veterans
and software purchases

216,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Clinic of Maui, Inc. dba Malama I Ke Ola Health Center, HI, for facilities and
equipment for health information infrastructure and an electronic health records system

1,536,000

Hirono

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community College of Rhode Island, RI, for facilities and equipment to expand health care
training facilities

2,390,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Dental, ME, for facilities and equipment to expand dental services

2,334,000

King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Health Care Systems, Inc., GA, for equipment to purchase a mobile clinic

472,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Health Care, Inc., IL, for equipment to improve dental services

328,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Health Connections Inc., MA, for facilities and equipment to improve accessibility

1,500,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Concord University, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction of the Center for Rural
Healthcare Workforce Solutions

7,500,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Concordia University, Inc., WI, for facilities and equipment to renovate nurse training facilities

753,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Confederated Tribes of Coos, Lower Umpqua, and Siuslaw Indians, OR, for facilities and
equipment to renovate a behavioral health facility

1,030,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Conway Medical Center, SC, for acquisition of Emergency Department equipment

1,410,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coos County Administration, NH, for facilities and equipment to improve building safety

415,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coosa County Emergency Medical Service, AL, for equipment for purchase of new ambulance

300,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Copper Canyon Fire & Medical District, AZ, for equipment to purchase an ambulance, power
load system and gurney

320,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Copper River EMS Council, AK, to support Copper River EMS Council for providing emergency health services

291,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Cordova Community Medical Center, AK, for facilities and equipment for critical infrastructure and medical equipment upgrades

3,000,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coteau des Prairies Hospital, SD, for facilities and equipment for replacement and installation of boilers and pump systems

1,099,000

Rounds

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00252

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1605

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coteau des Prairies Hospital, SD, for facilities and equipment for replacement and installation of chiller system

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

HHS
HHS

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

683,000

Rounds

S

Cottage Hospital, NH, for facilities and equipment to remove and replace an oil tank

76,000

Shaheen

S

County of Cheshire Administration, NH, for facilities and equipment to install an emergency
communication system

936,000

Shaheen

S

Health Resources and Services Administration

County of Mono, CA, for facilities and equipment to renovate emergency facilities

1,340,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

Health Resources and Services Administration

Crisp Regional Hospital, GA, for facilities and equipment to replace boilers and fire alarm
systems

1,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

CrossOver Healthcare Ministry, VA, for facilities and equipment to expand access to dental
services

400,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Cullman Regional Medical Center, AL, for facilities and equipment to purchase and install
surgical robot

2,500,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Daily Planet Health Services, VA, for facilities and equipment to replace HVAC systems

351,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Dar a Luz Birth Center, NM, for facilities and equipment to expand a birth center

2,677,000

Heinrich

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Dartmouth Health, NH, for facilities and equipment to construct a perinatal substance use
stabilization unit

900,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Day One, RI, for facilities and equipment for building infrastructure improvements

990,000

Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Delaware Health Empowerment Coalition, DE, for facilities and equipment to construct primary care clinics

2,600,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Delta Ambulance, ME, for equipment to purchase new ambulances and emergency medical
equipment

655,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Denver Health & Hospital Authority, CO, for facilities and equipment for building improvements

3,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Deschutes County, OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a child psychiatric facility

1,304,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Desert Hills Fire District, AZ, for equipment to improve cardiac care

210,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Dorchester County, SC, for facilities and equipment for site work to support a mobile MRI
unit and the acquisition of x-ray machinery

709,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

DotHouse Health Inc., MA, for facilities and equipment to replace HVAC systems and roofing

486,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Dr. Terry Sinclair Health Clinic, VA, for facilities and equipment to renovate an exam room

490,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Eagle View Community Health System, IL, for facilities and equipment, including a mobile
clinic

525,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Easter Seals New Jersey Inc., NJ, for equipment and supplies to improve accessibility

241,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Eastern Maine Community College, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction/renovation of nursing and allied health facility

6,510,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Eastern Maine Healthcare Systems DBA Northern Light Health, ME, for acquisition of labor
and delivery equipment

1,599,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Emory University, GA, for equipment for a neonatal intensive care unit

476,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Evergreen Treatment Services, WA, for facilities and equipment to increase access to substance use disorder treatment

3,040,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Fairfax County Government, VA, for facilities and equipment to construct a regional crisis
facility to address behavioral health needs

850,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Family & Children’s Aid, Inc., CT, for facilities and equipment to increase accessibility of a
clinic

350,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Family and Children’s Center of Wisconsin, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
mental health diagnostic center

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Faulkner University, AL, for equipment for mobile care clinics

1,305,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ferris State University, MI, for facilities and equipment to renovate clinical and teaching
space

1,950,000

Peters

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Florence-Darlington Technical College, SC, for acquisition of nursing equipment to support
Nursing and Allied Health Programs

1,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Floyd Healthcare Management, Inc. d/b/a Atrium Health Floyd, GA, for facilities and equipment to improve diagnostic services

1,500,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

For All Seasons, Inc., MD, for facilities and equipment to expand access to behavioral
health services

1,000,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Frontier Behavioral Health, WA, for facilities and equipment to construct a primary care
and behavioral health clinic

2,000,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Gallup Community Health, NM, for facilities and equipment to expand behavioral and specialty care services

750,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Gannon University, PA, for facilities and equipment for construction of two laboratories for
cancer treatment, education, and research

500,000

McCormick

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Georgia State University, GA, for equipment to purchase a mobile clinic

1,350,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

GLITC Adolescent Wellness Recovery Center, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
residential treatment center

4,700,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Gloucester Mathews Care Clinic, VA, for facilities and equipment to create a nursing station and improve building infrastructure

151,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Golder Ranch Fire District, AZ, for equipment to purchase a vehicle and rescue equipment

200,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00253

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H1606

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grady Memorial Hospital Corporation, GA, for equipment to purchase a mobile unit

250,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grand Itasca Clinic and Hospital, MN, for facilities and equipment to renovate an emergency department

1,800,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grande Ronde Hospital, OR, for equipment to provide nuclear medicine services

1,356,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grant County Courthouse, WV, for equipment for purchase of new ambulance

310,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grant County Public Hospital District No 1, dba Samaritan Healthcare, WA, for facilities and
equipment to support a family medicine residency program

2,000,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Greater Fairbanks Community Hospital Foundation, AK, for facilities and equipment for construction of an inpatient psychiatric unit

3,000,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Greenwood Genetic Center, SC, for acquisition of Alzheimer’s research equipment

1,106,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grove Hill Memorial Hospital, AL, for acquisition of mammography, CT, ultrasound, and EKG
equipment

1,000,000

Tuberville

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Gunderson La Crosse Medical Center Campus, WI, for facilities and equipment to renovate
a substance use disorder treatment facility

750,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hale Makua Health Services, HI, for equipment to replace patient beds

1,850,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Harney District Hospital, OR, for facilities and equipment for building infrastructure improvements

1,250,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hawaii Island Community Health Center, HI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
clinic

1,500,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Healing Hands Clinic of Gordon County, GA, for facilities and equipment, including to repair
a roof

190,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Health Brigade, VA, for facilities and equipment to replace HVAC systems, boilers, and a
roof

750,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Health Care Authority of the City of Eufaula, AL, for acquisition of surgical and laboratory
equipment

500,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

HealthReach Community Health Centers, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate and
expand dental services wing

650,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hennepin Healthcare System, Inc., MN, for facilities and equipment to construct a substance use disorder treatment clinic

3,002,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hennepin Technical College, MN, for facilities and equipment to support dental training
programs

2,089,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Home of the Innocents, KY, for equipment for a pediatric skilled nursing facility

1,000,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hope Unlimited, Inc., KS, for facilities and equipment for construction of new domestic violence shelter that offers therapy, telehealth, primary care services, and complex care referrals

2,700,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hospital Authority of Ben Hill, GA, for facilities and equipment to improve access to wound
care

1,452,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hospital Authority of Irwin County, GA, for facilities and equipment to replace HVAC systems and improve imaging services

1,450,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Houlton Regional Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to modernize and replace critical infrastructure systems

5,458,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hurley Medical Center, MI, for equipment to replace patient beds

1,800,000

Slotkin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Iliuliuk Family and Health Services, AK, for facilities and equipment for clinic renovation
and acquisition of technology and medical imaging equipment

2,705,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Illinois Eye Institute, IL, for equipment to improve optometry services

750,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Inspira Health Network, NJ, for equipment to support telehealth services

2,000,000

Booker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Jackson County Health Department, IL, for facilities and equipment to renovate a health department

176,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Jackson Parish Hospital, LA, for facilities and equipment for construction of a rural health
clinic

4,000,000

Cassidy,
Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

JAMHI Health and Wellness, AK, for facilities and equipment to support HVAC installation
and acquisition of technology upgrades

938,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Jefferson County Commission, WV, for facilities and equipment for the Jefferson County
Health Department relocation and expansion

345,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Kanawha County Emergency Ambulance Authority, WV, for equipment for purchase of new
ambulances

2,105,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Keefe Memorial Hospital, CO, for facilities and equipment to renovate a rural hospital

2,035,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ketchikan Gateway Borough, AK, for equipment for purchase of new ambulance

347,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Kittitas Valley Healthcare, WA, for facilities and equipment for renovations to support orthopedic and surgery services

2,262,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Klickitat Valley Health, WA, for facilities and equipment to provide MRI services

500,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Kodiak Island Health Care Foundation, AK, for facilities and equipment for HVAC system
upgrades

300,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lamprey Health Care, Inc., NH, for facilities and equipment to construct a pharmacy

250,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lawrence General Hospital, MA, for equipment to provide infusion services

1,367,000

Markey,
Warren

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00254

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1607

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Requestor(s)

Amount
($)

Project

Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Liberation Programs, Inc., CT, for facilities and equipment to construct an inpatient care
facility

3,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Limen House, Inc., DE, for facilities and equipment to renovate a sober living facility

1,000,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lonesome Pine Community Hospital (Norton Community Hospital), VA, for equipment to purchase an ion lung bronchoscopy

683,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lowell Community Health Center, MA, for facilities and equipment to expand clinical space
and training opportunities

2,000,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans, LA, for acquisition of laboratory research equipment

4,500,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lummi Nation, WA, for facilities and equipment to construct a substance use disorder recovery facility

500,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Maine Veterans’ Homes, ME, for acquisition of electronic health records technology, upgrading other technology needs, and purchase of ceiling lifts equipment

3,142,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Maine Veterans’ Homes, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation to
upgrade Maine Veterans’ Homes Facilities

518,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

MaineGeneral Health, ME, for facilities and equipment for acquisition and installation of
electronic medical record upgrades

5,000,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mariposa Community Health Center, Inc., AZ, for facilities and equipment to improve access to prenatal, postnatal, and pediatric care

2,000,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Marshall University Research Corporation, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction
of Center for Informatics and Population Analytics in support of Marshall University
School of Medicine

1,861,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Marshall University Research Corporation, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction
of Marshall University Medical Simulation Center and purchase of simulation equipment

15,000,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Martinsville Henry County Coalition for Health and Wellness, VA, for facilities and equipment to improve access to medical, dental, and behavioral health

785,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Maui Memorial Medical Center, HI, for equipment to support bedside monitoring

850,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

McAlester Regional Health Center, OK, for facilities and equipment to support the expansion
of the McAlester Cancer Center

3,000,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

McCall Foundation, Inc. dba McCall Behavioral Health Network, CT, for facilities and equipment, including for a mobile clinic

264,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

McDermott Center, IL, for facilities and equipment to expand dental services

268,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

McLeod Health, SC, for facilities and equipment for construction to renovate fluoroscopy
room and purchase x-ray and CT equipment

1,143,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Medical College of Wisconsin, WI, for equipment to provide imaging services

1,600,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Memorial Health System, MS, for facilities and equipment for Labor and Delivery Department renovations

1,700,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Memorial Health System, MS, for facilities and equipment to support a radiation oncology
equipment project

5,600,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Memorial Hospital Belleville, IL, for equipment to improve intensive care services

1,250,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mescal-J6 Fire District, AZ, for facilities and equipment to purchase emergency response
vehicles

650,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Minnie Hamilton Health Care Center, Inc., WV, for facilities and equipment for renovation of
the Minnie Hamilton Hospital Emergency Department, medical clinic, laboratory, dietary
space, dental clinic, and pharmacy

3,250,000

Capito,
Justice

H/S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi Methodist Hospital & Rehabilitation Center, Inc., MS, for facilities and equipment to replace entrance canopy

714,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi Organ Recovery Agency, MS, for facilities and equipment to expand clinical
organ/tissue recovery facility

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi Public Health Institute, MS, for the Center for Optimizing Maternal Outcomes for
data development and systems implementation

2,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi State Department of Health, MS, for acquisition of telehealth equipment

801,000

Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi State Department of Health, MS, for the direct certification of healthcare staff
in obstetrics life support and neonatal resuscitation and for program coordination

250,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mitchell County Hospital Health Systems, KS, for facilities and equipment to renovate and
expand the Emergency Department and rehabilitation spaces

1,714,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mon Health Medical Center, WV, for equipment for technical infrastructure upgrades and
cybersecurity technology

8,100,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mon Health Medical Center, WV, for facilities and equipment for renovation of clinical and
kitchen space, elevator modernization, and improvements to critical infrastructure

5,485,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Monroe County Hospital, AL, for acquisition of mammography and CT scan equipment

500,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Montefiore Medical Center, NY, for facilities and equipment to increase power capacity

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Morrow County Health District, OR, for equipment to provide imaging services

652,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction
of the Center for Advancing Science Education

1,935,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mountain Comprehensive Health Corporation, KY, for facilities and equipment for construction of autism treatment facility

1,500,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Murry State College, OK, for facilities and equipment for construction of nursing education
center and acquisition of nursing simulation laboratory equipment

3,000,000

Mullin

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00255

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

Miller

H1608

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Natchitoches Regional Medical Center, LA, for facilities and equipment to acquire and install PET scanner and CT machine

4,035,000

Cassidy,
Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

National Jewish Health, CO, for facilities and equipment to improve treatment of respiratory
diseases

2,350,000

Bennet

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Nazareth University, NY, for facilities and equipment to renovate a classroom space for
health professionals

1,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Neighborhood Health, VA, for facilities and equipment to renovate a clinic to provide medical, dental, and behavioral healthcare

1,521,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Neosho Memorial Regional Medical Center, KS, for facilities and equipment for renovation
of the Cardiac Rehabilitation Center and for acquisition of imaging equipment

1,220,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Nevada State University, NV, for facilities and equipment to construct a health education
center

2,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

New England College, NH, for facilities and equipment to improve training of health professionals

775,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

New York Stem Cell Foundation, Inc., NY, for facilities and equipment to construct a precision medicine center

5,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Newport County Community Mental Health Center, Inc., RI, for facilities and equipment to
improve access to behavioral health services

1,000,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

North Country HealthCare, AZ, for facilities and equipment to construct a dental clinic

1,800,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

North Penn Comprehensive Health Services, PA, for facilities and equipment to construct a
dental clinic

500,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeast Colorado Health Department, CO, for facilities and equipment to construct a public health facility

3,041,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeast Oregon Area Health Education Center, Inc., OR, for equipment to provide obstetrics training

163,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeastern Oklahoma Community Health Centers, INC., OK, for facilities and equipment to
support construction of new primary care clinic

2,500,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeastern State University, OK, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of nursing simulation laboratory and for the acquisition of nursing simulation laboratory equipment

877,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeastern Vermont Regional Hospital, VT, for facilities and equipment to expand pharmacy services

1,400,000

Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northern Neck-Middlesex Free Health Clinic, VA, for facilities and equipment to provide dental services

1,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Norwalk Community Health Center, Inc., CT, for facilities and equipment, including for a
mobile clinic

907,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Norwich University, VT, for expanding rural nursing education and the purchase of equipment

557,000

Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

NYU Langone Hospitals, NY, for equipment to support imaging services

1,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Oakland Integrated Healthcare Network, MI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
health clinic

5,500,000

Slotkin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ochsner LSU Health—Monroe Medical Center, LA, for acquisition of equipment for the labor
and delivery department, neonatal intensive care unit department, and pre- and postpartum care department

1,010,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ogeechee Technical College, GA, for facilities and equipment to improve training for health
professionals

1,064,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ohio Christian University, OH, for acquisition of advanced simulation lab equipment

1,168,000

Moreno

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Oklahoma Primary Care Association, OK, for equipment to support electronic health record
modernization at Federally Qualified Health Centers in Oklahoma

2,000,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

One Brooklyn Health System, Inc., NY, for equipment for a neonatal intensive care unit

1,182,000

Gillibrand

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Oregon Institute of Technology, OR, for facilities and equipment, including mobile dental
clinics

1,700,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

OSF HealthCare System, IL, for facilities and equipment to construct a dental clinic

2,000,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

OU Health Partners Inc., OK, for acquisition of mobile stroke units and telehealth equipment

4,584,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Parkland College District 505, IL, for facilities and equipment to construct a dental clinic

3,500,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Philander Smith University, AR, for facilities and equipment for improvements to the Health
and Science Center and acquisition of a mobile unit for the nursing program

7,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Piedmont Access To Health Services, Inc. (PATHS), VA, for equipment to purchase a mobile
unit to provide vision services

250,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Pines Health Services, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction of a new health
center for Pines Health Services to support primary care

8,900,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Portland Recovery Community Center, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction of
Friends and Family Center for peer recovery services

2,647,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Prisma Health-Upstate, SC, for equipment for acquisition of oncology equipment

5,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Project Vision Hawaii, HI, for facilities and equipment to increase access to dental, vision,
and hearing screenings

810,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Pueblo of Pojoaque, NM, for facilities and equipment to expand a behavioral health facility

2,303,000

Heinrich

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe, NV, for facilities and equipment to expand a Tribal health clinic

4,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00256

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1609

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Racine County, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a mental health facility

5,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Range Mental Health Center, MN, for facilities and equipment to improve accessibility and
security

1,091,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Red Shield 8 Nations Inc., MT, for facilities and equipment for construction of behavioral
health treatment center

3,545,000

Sheehy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rehabilitation Hospital of the Pacific, HI, for equipment to replace patient beds

1,098,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rhode Island Hospital, RI, for equipment to provide dental services and patient monitoring

200,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

RI Department of Behavioral Healthcare, Developmental Disabilities and Hospitals, RI, for
equipment to replace patient beds

2,988,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Richmond Medical Center, NY, for facilities and equipment to renovate a neonatal intensive
care unit

2,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ridgecrest Regional Hospital, CA, for facilities and equipment to construct a behavioral
health facility

1,800,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rincon Valley Fire District, AZ, for equipment to provide cardiac care

300,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rivier University, NH, for equipment to purchase a mobile medical van

317,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rochester General Hospital, NY, for facilities and equipment to establish a hospital logistics hub

800,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Roper St. Francis Hospital, SC, for facilities and equipment to support foundational and
structural construction of new hospital

1,776,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rumford Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate, expand, and provide diagnostic and patient room equipment for the Emergency Department

6,400,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

RWJBarnabas Health, NJ, for equipment to support health professional training programs

968,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Saint Francis Hospital, DE, for facilities and equipment to construct an outpatient pharmacy

1,475,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Salina Family Healthcare Center, KS, for facilities and equipment for construction of a new
clinical education facility

3,261,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Sauk Valley Voices of Recovery, IL, for facilities and equipment to purchase a mobile clinic

222,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Sea Mar Community Health Centers, WA, for equipment to provide dental services

1,650,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Seattle Children’s Hospital, WA, for facilities and equipment to construct a behavioral
health stabilization unit

3,000,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Seattle Indian Health Board, WA, for facilities and equipment to construct a health clinic

4,500,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

SECU Family House at UNC Hospitals, NC, for facilities and equipment to support the acquisition and installation of commercial-grade generator

316,000

Tillis

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Seldovia Village Tribe Health & Wellness, AK, for acquisition of dental and physical therapy
equipment and medical treadmill

332,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Self Regional Healthcare, SC, for facilities and equipment to construct a new Rural Health
Clinic

4,600,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Seven Hills New Hampshire, Inc., NH, for facilities and equipment to improve access to
clinical services

1,350,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Singing River Health System, MS, for facilities and equipment to acquire and install generators

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Smithsburg Emergency Medical Services, Inc., MD, for equipment to provide ambulance
services

250,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

South Georgia Medical Center, Inc. d/b/a SGMC Health, GA, for facilities and equipment to
support maternal and infant care

1,581,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

South Shore Hospital, MA, for facilities and equipment to increase accessibility

1,500,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

South-Central Colorado Seniors, Inc., CO, for facilities and equipment for a resource center
for older adults

840,000

Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Southern Regional Medical Center, GA, for facilities and equipment to construct a sickle
cell wellness center

1,222,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Southern Research Institute, AL, for acquisition of biotechnology research equipment

2,000,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Southwest Health System, Inc., CO, for facilities and equipment to expand trauma diagnostic imaging services

1,950,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Southwest Minnesota State University, MN, for facilities and equipment to support nurse
training programs

1,226,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Spanish Peaks Regional Health Center, CO, for equipment to expand ambulance services

50,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Spartanburg Regional Healthcare System, SC, for facilities and equipment to renovate Cardiovascular Recovery Unit and construction of Coronary Care Unit

6,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Spokane County, WA, for facilities and equipment to expand a crisis stabilization center

3,000,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Spurwink Services, Inc, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction of Behavioral
Health Center

5,666,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Barnabas Hospital, NY, for equipment to improve imaging services

1,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Bonaventure University, NY, for facilities and equipment to support a healthcare workforce training and development program

1,100,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Joseph Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate, expand, and equip the
Emergency Department

6,800,000

Collins

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00257

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H1610

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Mary’s Regional Medical Center, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate, expand,
and modernize the Behavioral Health Emergency Department

2,619,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Peter’s Hospital, NY, for equipment to manage clinical trials using information technology

300,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Tammany Health System, LA, for acquisition of nursing and allied health simulation
equipment

1,050,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Vincent’s Blount, AL, for facilities and equipment to purchase and install CT scanner

1,667,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

StayWell Health Care Inc., CT, for facilities and equipment for health information infrastructure and an electronic health records system

750,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Stephens Memorial Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction to expand
Emergency Department and oncology infusion center

10,810,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Stillwater Medical Center Authority, OK, for facilities and equipment to expand Stillwater
Medical Center Emergency Department trauma center and ambulance bay

2,200,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Stroger Hospital, IL, for equipment to improve neonatal care

500,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Sussex County Community College, NJ, for equipment to provide imaging and dental services

428,000

Booker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Temple University Hospital, PA, for equipment to improve imaging services

240,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Arc of Delaware, DE, for facilities and equipment to renovate for accessibility

1,000,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois University (School of Dental Medicine), IL, for facilities and equipment to renovate a dental clinic

1,100,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Children’s Advocacy Center of Delaware, DE, for facilities and equipment to enhance
security

443,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The City of Friend, NE, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of operating room and purchase of operating room equipment

2,500,000

Fischer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Jackson Laboratory, ME, for facilities and equipment to purchase research equipment
for biomedical imaging and advanced microscopy

2,679,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC), SC, for facilities and equipment for acquisition and installation of high performance computing equipment and data center infrastructure upgrades

5,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Mental Health Association of Oregon, OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a
behavioral health center

750,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Mental Health Center of Greater Manchester, NH, for facilities and equipment for
health information infrastructure and an electronic health records system

354,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Thundermist Health Center, RI, for facilities and equipment to expand access to behavioral
health services

3,740,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Tidelands Health, SC, for facilities and equipment for construction of Tidelands Health’s
Comprehensive Women and Children’s Center

5,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Tidewater Community College, VA, for facilities and equipment to support EMS training

735,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of Bar Harbor Fire Department, ME, for equipment for purchase of new ambulance

125,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of Morristown, VT, for expanding rural health services through a community
paramedicine program and to purchase a mobile unit and supplies

1,000,000

Sanders

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of Plaistow, NH, for equipment to support communication system upgrades and ambulance services

1,500,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of South Kingstown Emergency Medical Services, RI, for equipment to provide ambulance services

450,000

Reed

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of Waldoboro, ME, for equipment to purchase a new ambulance

350,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Tuerk House, Inc., MD, for facilities and equipment to expand access to behavioral health
services

500,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Tufts University School of Dental Medicine, MA, for equipment to provide dental services,
including a mobile clinic

950,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ukiah Adventist Hospital, CA, for equipment to improve cardiac care

1,250,000

Schiff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Uncompahgre Combined Clinics, CO, for a patient transportation initiative in a rural area

100,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Union County Hospital Authority dba Union General Hospital Inc., GA, for equipment to provide mammography services

511,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Union County Hospital Authority, GA, for equipment to improve cardiac care

2,000,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Alaska Anchorage, AK, for the acquisition of medical equipment and simulation equipment for academic health programs

725,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for equipment for clinical care and medical and allied health professional education

3,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for equipment for life support vans, mobile
care clinics, telemedicine equipment, and supplies for prenatal care

2,500,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of the Wellness, Health, and Education Center

5,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for facilities and equipment for renovations to UAMS Barton Bridge to Translational Research

4,500,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for facilities and equipment for repair and
expansion of the Chemical Waste Facility

2,000,000

Boozman

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00258

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1611

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for facilities and equipment for the expansion and renovation of the Labor and Delivery Unit

15,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas-Fort Smith, AR, for facilities and equipment for construction of the
Center for Mother and Infant Healthcare

15,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Detroit Mercy, VT, for facilities and equipment to support dental training

4,600,000

Sanders, Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc., GA, for facilities and equipment to support
access to dementia care

420,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Hawaii Cancer Center, HI, for facilities and equipment to expand preclinical
research

1,500,000

Hirono

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Kansas Hospital, KS, for facilities and equipment to expand Emergency Department

10,000,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Kansas Hospital, KS, for the acquisition of research equipment for cancer center

10,000,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Kentucky, KY, for acquisition of laboratory research equipment

15,000,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Kentucky, KY, for facilities and equipment for construction of biomedical research facility

15,000,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisiana at Monroe, LA, for equipment for acquisition of Mobile Dental Hygiene Unit and dental equipment

905,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisiana Lafayette, LA, for acquisition of laboratory research equipment

2,500,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisville, KY, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of
laboratory space and to purchase imaging systems

12,500,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisville, KY, for facilities and equipment to acquire and install DNA sequencing systems and protein analysis systems

9,326,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisville, KY, for facilities and equipment to acquire and install research
computer systems and biobank equipment and software

8,000,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Maine System, ME, for acquisition of equipment for the health care profession
programs

1,500,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Maine System, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction of Health
Care Education Center and purchase of simulators

1,900,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Mississippi Medical Center, MS, for facilities and equipment to renovate and
upgrade research lab

4,530,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Mississippi Medical Center, MS, for facilities and equipment to support Rural
Primary Care Provider system and telehealth strategies

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Mississippi, MS, for construction of lab space and facilities and acquisition of
drug development technology and equipment

7,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Montana Neural Injury Center, MT, for equipment to establish a mobile clinic
and laboratory for vestibular and neurosensory health

455,000

Sheehy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Nebraska Board of Regents, NE, for facilities and equipment for construction
of Infectious Disease Air Transport Training Facility

12,000,000

Fischer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Nevada Las Vegas, NV, for facilities and equipment to support a nurse training program

2,398,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Nevada Reno, NV, for facilities and equipment to construct a cancer research
center

3,049,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of New Mexico, NM, for a telementoring program to support training of rural providers

1,540,000

Luján

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of New Mexico, NM, for facilities and equipment to expand substance use disorder outreach and services

1,484,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of North Alabama, AL, for acquisition of nursing education equipment

1,024,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of North Georgia, GA, for facilities and equipment to expand a health professions
training program

700,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of South Carolina Aiken, SC, for facilities and equipment for construction, renovation, and purchase of simulation equipment and technology for USC–Aiken-Nursing
Simulation Lab

2,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Southern Mississippi, MS, for facilities and equipment for construction to upgrade audiology clinic and acquire audiology equipment

396,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of St. Thomas, MN, for equipment to support health professional training programs

716,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Vermont and State Agricultural College, VT, for a rural community health
worker program

996,000

Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Vermont Health Network, VT, for facilities and equipment to improve safety
and building security

694,000

Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Nursing, WI, for facilities and equipment to
construct a rehabilitation facility

400,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Upland Hills Health, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a senior living campus

2,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

UPMC Western Maryland Corporation, MD, for facilities and equipment to expand access to
radiation therapy

2,750,000

Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Valley Family Health Care, Inc., OR, for facilities and equipment to construct an integrated
medical, behavioral, and dental clinic

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Valley Hope Association Foundation, KS, for facilities and equipment to renovate and expand residential care treatment center

1,771,000

Moran

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00259

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H1612

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Vernon Memorial Healthcare Foundation Inc., WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
clinic with consolidated medical and pharmacy services

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

HHS

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

2,213,000

Baldwin

S

Versiti, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a research facility

3,000,000

Baldwin

S

Veterans Recovery Resources, AL, for acquisition of addiction treatment, therapy, and patient care equipment

2,000,000

Britt

S

Health Resources and Services Administration

Virginia Community Healthcare Association, VA, for a rural health nutrition program and
necessary supplies

342,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Walworth County, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a residential care facility

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wasco County, OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a behavioral health center

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Washington Poison Center, WA, for equipment to support building infrastructure and
connectivity

250,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Washington State Hospital Association, WA, for a labor and delivery training program in
rural hospitals

1,000,000

Cantwell,
Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wellstar Health System, Inc., GA, for equipment to provide mammography services

500,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wentworth Home for the Aged, NH, for facilities and equipment to improve building security

300,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

West Virginia University Research Corporation, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of the WVU School of Dentistry and purchase of dental equipment

15,000,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wichita State University, KS, for the acquisition of health sciences education equipment for
Biomedical Campus

10,000,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wilkes University, PA, for facilities and equipment to improve nursing education

500,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wirt County Health Services Association, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction
of Coplin Health Systems Parkersburg health clinic and wellness center

1,500,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

WVU Medicine Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction and infrastructure and acquisition of medical equipment to establish the WVU
Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute Center for Neuromodulation and Brain Therapeutics

11,934,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

WVU Medicine-Weirton Medical Center, WV, for facilities and equipment for Emergency Department renovation and expansion

2,450,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wyoming County Healthcare Center, PA, for facilities and equipment to support a new pharmacy

543,000

McCormick

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Xavier University, LA, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation for Xavier
University Medical School

4,000,000

Cassidy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

York Hospital, ME, for equipment for electronic medical records software upgrades

5,000,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

YWCA of Van Wert County, OH, for facilities and equipment for construction of Community
Care Clinic

1,000,000

Husted

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

4th Dimension Sobriety, WI, for behavioral health services including peer support services
training

400,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

AAPI Montclair Inc., NJ, for mental health services

250,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Alaska Eating Disorders Alliance, AK, for behavioral health services to address eating disorders

250,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Amos House, RI, for mental and behavioral health services

540,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, IL, for mental health and trauma
services for pediatric patients

1,000,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Arizona Governor’s Office of Youth Faith and Family, AZ, for a suicide prevention program
for veterans

575,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Asian American Institute for Research and Engagement, NY, for mental health services

150,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Barstow Community College District, CA, for a rural mental health program

750,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Beautiful Gate Outreach Center, DE, for mental health services for those living with chronic
conditions

250,000

Blunt
Rochester

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Coastal & Northern New Jersey Inc., NJ, to promote mental
health through a mentorship program

250,000

Kim

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Boys & Girls Club Fox Valley, Inc., WI, for mental health programming for children and
youth

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Bradley Free Clinic, VA, for mental and behavioral health services

167,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Brandywine Counseling & Community Services, Inc., DE, for mobile behavioral and mental
health services

895,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Calhoun County Community Mental Health Authority, MI, for community-based mental
health services through crisis centers

750,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Carson City School District, NV, for mental health services

301,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Catholic Social Services, AK, to establish a substance use treatment program for individuals experiencing homelessness

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Child Health and Development Institute of Connecticut, Inc., CT, for a substance use prevention and education program

371,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00260

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1613

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Children’s Friend and Service, RI, for mental health services

430,000

Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

City of Albuquerque, NM, for mental health and substance use disorder services

1,135,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

City of Long Beach, CA, for a community crisis response program

1,490,000

Padilla

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

City of Lynn, MA, for a crisis response team

500,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

City of Portland, OR, for a mobile medication program to prevent drug overdoses

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Colorado Meth Project Inc., CO, for substance use prevention programming for youth

518,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Community Health Partnership, CO, to strengthen capacity and improve mental health and
substance use care, including technology

750,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Copiah-Lincoln Community College, MS, for mental and behavioral health services delivered
via telehealth

305,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Cornell Scott-Hill Health Corporation, CT, for substance use disorder treatment

822,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Covenant House International, NY, for behavioral health services for youth

500,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Department of New Jersey Veterans of Foreign Wars, Inc., NJ, for mental health services

280,000

Booker

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Eluna, MA, for a grief support and counseling program

119,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Essex County Family Justice Center, NJ, for mental health services for survivors

330,000

Kim

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Finishing Trades Institute of the Upper Midwest, MN, for mental health and supportive
services

1,298,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

For All Ages, Inc., CT, to support the mental health and wellness of college students

222,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Friends of Firefighters, Inc., NY, for mental health services

632,000

Gillibrand

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Friends of Recovery, New Hampshire dba Hope for NH Recovery, NH, for mental health and
substance use disorder services

487,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Georgia Council for Recovery, Inc., GA, for an opioid overdose prevention program, including
supplies

357,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Global Partnership to End Human Trafficking Corporation, CT, for behavioral health services
for survivors

105,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Hope Coalition, NC, to centralize and enhance youth diversion programs

1,014,000

Tillis

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

International Association of Firefighters (IAFF) Local 244 / New Mexico Professional Firefighters Association (NMPFFA), NM, for behavioral health care and substance use disorder treatment

500,000

Luján

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Johnson Health Center, VT, for substance use disorder treatment

2,385,000

Sanders

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Joliet Fire Department, IL, for a community mental health program expansion

1,000,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Legacy Behavioral Health, GA, for behavioral health services, including supplies

348,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Lifeline Horse Rescue and Rehabilitation, MD, for behavioral health and suicide prevention
programming for veterans

95,000

Alsobrooks

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Lily’s Place, Inc., WV, for mental health services for first responders

684,000

Capito

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Lines for Life, OR, for youth mental health support through a peer-to-peer crisis line

1,611,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Mercy House Teen Challenge, MS, for substance and alcohol abuse recovery and treatment

765,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

NAMI New Hampshire, NH, for an overdose prevention program, including training

444,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

National Alliance Mental Illness Albuquerque, NM, for mental health and substance use
treatment services, including equipment

300,000

Heinrich

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Nevada Department of Education, NV, for mental health programming for youth

567,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

New York Law Enforcement Assistance Program (NYLEAP), Inc., NY, for mental health services for law enforcement officers

500,000

Gillibrand

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Once Upon A Preemie, Inc., PA, for mental health education programming for providers to
support families of premature infants

275,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego, CA, for pediatric mental health services

2,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

ReadyKids, Inc., VA, for mental health and counseling services for youth

200,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Resilience Resource Center, PA, for mental health services

250,000

Fetterman

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00261

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H22JAPT2

H1614

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Rhode Island Disaster Medical Assistance Team, Inc., RI, for mental health and peer support programming for law enforcement

360,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Rosecrance, Inc., IL, for behavioral health care services for veterans

1,038,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

San Juan County Partnership, NM, for a substance use prevention program

307,000

Luján

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Ser Familia, Inc., GA, for mental health services

500,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Sinai Health System, IL, for a trauma recovery program

1,500,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Southwest Washington Accountable Community of Health, WA, for a mobile substance use
disorder medical clinic, including a vehicle and equipment

750,000

Murray

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Spectrum Youth & Family Services, VT, for school-based mental health services

250,000

Welch

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

STRYV365, WI, for mental health programming for youth, including professional development for youth-serving organizations

100,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department, WA, for a mobile substance use disorder program, including supplies and equipment

2,600,000

Murray

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Taos Pueblo Health and Community Services, NM, for peer-led recovery programming

331,000

Heinrich

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

The Carnegie Hall Corporation, NY, for a program to promote mental wellbeing for children
and families

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

The Healing Station Counseling Center, VA, for mental health services

245,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

The Pennsylvania State University, PA, for establishing the Pennsylvania Addiction Action
Network, including a statewide system of substance use interventions and data coordination

750,000

Fetterman, McCormick

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

The Sojourners Place, DE, for substance use disorder recovery programming

416,000

Coons

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Tides Family Services, RI, for mental health and mentoring programs for at-risk youth

500,000

Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Turning Point Recovery Center of Springfield, VT, for a community-based program to reduce
substance use and address mental health needs

373,000

Welch

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

University of Oregon, OR, to support pediatric mental and behavioral health care, including
equipment

2,980,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

University of Rhode Island (URI), RI, for mental health programming for youth, including
trainings

1,500,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Vinfen, Inc., MA, for a mental health crisis and substance use disorder treatment program

750,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Virginia Telemental Health Initiative, VA, for mental health counseling through telemedicine

372,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Voices of Community Activists & Leaders (VOCAL–NY), Inc., NY, for mental health services
for at-risk individuals

500,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Voices of September 11, Inc. DBA Voices Center for Resilience, CT, for resources and information for individuals impacted by tragedy

661,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Washington Recovery Alliance, WA, to support statewide networks for substance use disorder recovery

1,500,000

Murray

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

West Care Wisconsin, WI, for a mobile mental health clinic

600,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Windham Region Chamber of Commerce Foundation, CT, for mental health and supportive
services for veterans

380,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

YouthLine, HI, for youth crisis programming

431,000

Schatz

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc., GA, for programming to support children and families in
underserved communities

320,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

ABC Parenting Institute, DE, for a child abuse and neglect prevention program

544,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Aloha United Way, HI, to support referral and helpline services for basic needs, crisis, and
disaster response

800,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

American Chinese Christian Education and Social Services (ACCESS), MA, to support afterschool programming for low income children

100,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Anchorage Coalition to End Homelessness, AK, to provide housing support services

450,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Anne Arundel County Food Bank, Inc., MD, to support low income communities through food
distributions, including the purchase of a refrigerated vehicle

133,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Athens Area Diaper Bank, Inc., GA, for a diaper bank, including supplies and equipment

200,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Bangladeshi American Society Inc., NY, for services for low income individuals and families,
including food

160,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Boys & Girls Clubs of Acadiana, LA, funding to increase staffing and services for youth
programs

1,000,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Boys & Girls Clubs of Maui, Inc., HI, for mental health and wellness programming for youth

800,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00262

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1615

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Brighter Bites DC, MD, to reduce poverty through food security, including the purchase of
food

266,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Center for Housing and Health, IL, for supportive services for at-risk individuals, including
housing

1,300,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Children’s Advocacy Centers of Michigan, MI, for a child abuse prevention program

259,000

Slotkin

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Churches United For Fair Housing, Inc., NY, for a program to support low income families
to find and maintain affordable housing

1,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

City of Orchard Hill, GA, to reduce poverty through a digital library program, including
equipment

21,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

City of Whitewater, WI, to reduce poverty through an immigrant liaison

85,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Commonwealth of Massachusetts United Ways, MA, to reduce poverty for low income individuals and families, including for the purchase of food

1,500,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Community Care of West Virginia, WV, to create a connectivity hub to address gaps in foster care

370,000

Capito

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Community Investment Alliance, CO, for supportive services, including housing

800,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA) of Morris and Sussex Counties, NJ, for a program
to prevent child abuse and neglect among foster youth

200,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Craftsbury Saplings Inc., VT, to improve access to child care

1,000,000

Welch

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

DaVinci Center for Community Progress, RI, for community services for low income individuals, including food

440,000

Reed

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

East New York CLT Inc., NY, to support low income tenants and homeowners achieve housing stability

100,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Easter Seals North Georgia, GA, for programming to support children and families

767,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Essex County Legal Aid Association, Inc., NJ, for legal services for children

500,000

Booker

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Federal Hill House Association, RI, for community services and programming

425,000

Reed

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Food Well Alliance, Inc., GA, to support low income community through a mobile kitchen,
including equipment

141,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Foundation for Black Women’s Wellness, WI, for programming to enhance economic security
and family stability for at-risk women and families

750,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Friendly House, Inc., MA, to support individuals and families facing housing insecurity

100,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Fulton County Schools, GA, to reduce food insecurity among vulnerable populations, including vehicles and equipment

222,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Garden of Hope, Inc., NY, for community-based programming and services for at-risk families

135,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Georgia Center for Child Advocacy, Inc., GA, for a child abuse prevention program

350,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Good Old Lower East Side Inc., NY, for programming to prevent evictions and homelessness
among at-risk individuals

200,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Haa Yaitx’u Saiani, AK, to provide supportive services

100,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Hawaii Children’s Action Network (HCAN) on behalf of Hawaii Diaper Bank, HI, for a diaper
distribution program, including a vehicle

110,000

Hirono

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Helping Mamas, Inc., GA, for a diaper distribution program, including diapers

268,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Jewish Family Services Delaware, DE, for programming and services for at-risk individuals

1,000,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Life Learning Center, KY, for programming, technology, and equipment for the Life Learning
Center

2,700,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Mitzvah Circle Foundation, PA, to support low income populations, including through the
purchase of supplies and equipment

500,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

National Domestic Workers Alliance, NY, for programming to support low income workers

500,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

New Jersey Coalition to End Domestic Violence (NJCEDV), NJ, for services for survivors of
domestic violence, including housing

500,000

Booker

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

NH Hunger Solutions, NH, to support low income individuals and families

430,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

North Hudson Community Action Corporation, NJ, for afterschool programming and services
for low income families

74,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Open Doors for Multicultural Families, WA, to improve a child care center, including equipment

614,000

Murray

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Open Hand Atlanta, Inc., GA, to support low income individuals through food, including vehicles and equipment

383,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Partners in Development Foundation, HI, for educational programming to support low-income individuals, including financial literacy

2,300,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Ranch Hope, Inc., NJ, for supportive services and equipment

500,000

Booker

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Share Our Spare, IL, to support family relief initiatives for low income families, including
supplies

627,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

So What Else, Inc., MD, for a hunger relief program for at-risk individuals

750,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

St. Christopher’s Hospital for Children, PA, for programming to support low income children
and families

250,000

Fetterman

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00263

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H1616

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Summit County Family Resource Center, CO, to reduce poverty through a food distribution
program, including food

300,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Children’s Law Center, Inc., CT, to support legal representation for children in family
court

100,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Commercial Fisheries Center of Rhode Island, RI, to support low income communities
through a food access program, including food

300,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Family Tree, MD, for a home visiting program to support new parents and infants

373,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Giving Kitchen Initiative, Inc., GA, for wrap around services for low income workers and
their families

550,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Housing Collective, CT, for a data platform to connect low income individuals with affordable housing

723,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Northern Lighthouse, ME, to support technology improvements

92,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

United Way of Aroostook, ME, to create a childcare resource center

153,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

United Way of the Chattahoochee Valley, Inc., GA, to expand a 211 system, including technology

2,000,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for supportive services and related resources for infants and mothers

8,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Wakeman Memorial Association, CT, for after school programming for youth

300,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

West Virginia CASA Association, Inc., WV, to implement a Continuum of Care model to prevent and treat child abuse

766,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Westbay Community Action, RI, to support low income families, including food

100,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

All Out Adventures, Inc., MA, for vehicles and equipment

101,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

ALS United Rhode Island, RI, for services supporting individuals living with ALS

68,000

Whitehouse

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

APNA Brooklyn Community Center, Inc., NY, for a meal program, including equipment and
the purchase of a vehicle

530,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Appalachian Agency for Senior Citizens, VA, for supportive services for older adults, including equipment

96,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Bergen Family Center, NJ, for supportive services for older adults

85,000

Kim

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Borough of East Rutherford, NJ, for the purchase of a vehicle

29,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Children’s Therapy Center, WA, for supportive services for parents and caregivers of children with disabilities, including equipment

100,000

Murray

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Chinese Mutual Aid Association, IL, for a vehicle and equipment to support services for
older adults

152,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

City of Boston, MA, for enhancing transportation accessibility for older adults, including vehicles and equipment

1,000,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Coalition for Food and Health Equity, NJ, for a meal delivery program, including vehicles
and equipment

200,000

Booker

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Denver Regional Council of Governments, CO, for supportive services for older adults

820,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Education Health & Research International, DE, for expanding supportive services and case
coordination for older adults

1,818,000

Blunt
Rochester

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Friends in Action, ME, to purchase equipment for senior center services

140,000

Collins

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Great Bay Services, Inc., ME, for the purchase of accessible vehicles and related expenses

264,000

Collins

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Hands On Hartford, CT, for supportive services for seniors and individuals with disabilities,
including food

586,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Hospice Savannah, Inc., GA, for the purchase of vehicles and equipment

295,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Interfaith Caregivers of Greater Mercer County, Inc., NJ, for expansion of caregiving services

40,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

J–HAP, MN, for supportive services for individuals with disabilities

50,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Las Cumbres Community Services, Inc., NM, for a kinship care program

333,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Macon Bibb County Economic Opportunity Council, Inc., GA, for the purchase of vehicles
and equipment

280,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Madison House Autism Foundation, MD, for supportive services for individuals with disabilities, including equipment

650,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Matrix Human Services, MI, for programming and supportive services for older adults

1,000,000

Slotkin

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Meristem, Inc., CA, for programming and supportive services for individuals with disabilities, including equipment

1,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Middlesex United Way, CT, for supportive services for older adults

75,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Minnesota Assistance Council for Veterans, MN, for supportive services for older veterans

248,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

National Asian Pacific Center on Aging, WA, for outreach and helpline services for older
adults

1,000,000

Murray

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Needs of the Community Society, WA, for programming for young adults with disabilities

200,000

Murray

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

New York City Ballet, Inc., NY, for health and wellness programming for individuals with
disabilities

223,000

Schumer

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00264

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1617

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Administration for Community Living

SilverSource, Inc., CT, for supportive services for older adults

200,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Special Olympics New Jersey, NJ, for health and wellness programming for individuals with
disabilities

500,000

Booker

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

The Arc of Maryland, MD, for supportive services for individuals with disabilities, including
equipment

200,000

Alsobrooks

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

The Association of Indians In America—New York Chapter, NY, for supportive services for
older adults, including equipment

100,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburg Inc., NY, for supportive services for older
adults and individuals with disabilities

750,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Vermont Aging Network Consortium, VT, for supportive services for older adults, including
meal deliveries

243,000

Sanders

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Vermont Association of Senior Centers and Meal Providers (VASCAMP), VT, for supportive
services for older adults

500,000

Sanders

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Whitfield County Board of Commissioners, GA, for the purchase of a vehicle, including
equipment

92,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Accokeek Foundation, Inc., MD, for an environmental education program, including curriculum development, teacher training, classroom support, and field trips for Prince
George’s and Charles County students

425,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Achieve Twin Cities, MN, for college and career readiness programs

1,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Adams Presidential Center and Foundation, MA, for civics education

900,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

African American Museum in Philadelphia, PA, to expand education programs for students,
including exhibit development

415,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Aha Punana Leo, HI, for an early childhood education Hawaiian language immersion program

1,252,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Alaska Council of School Administrators, AK, for teacher professional development

200,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Alaska Resource Education, AK, for a STEM and natural resources education program

50,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Arts Council of Greater New Haven, Inc., CT, for youth arts journalism initiative

135,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Asian Americans for Equality, Inc., NY, for college readiness and youth development programming

100,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Ballet After Dark Inc., MD, for a comprehensive program for girls and young women focused
on wellness, health education, mentorship, and leadership training

1,071,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Baltimore SquashWise, MD, for youth development programs

200,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Bayonne School District, NJ, for high-impact tutoring programs

160,000

Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Best Buddies International, Inc., MA, to establish and deliver community-based inclusion
services

400,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Big Brothers Big Sisters Hawaii, HI, for college and career readiness programs

1,000,000

Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Eastern Massachusetts, MA, for academic assistance, college
access support, and vocational training

250,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Rhode Island, RI, for youth mentoring

100,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Big Picture Philadelphia, PA, for school-based health and wellness services and nutrition
education

240,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

BMORE Community Theatre, MD, for a summer arts education program

250,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys & Girls Club Of Hawaii, HI, for a digital literacy initiative, including Artificial Intelligence

505,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys & Girls Club of Lanier, Inc., GA, to improve access to youth programs, which may include the purchase of two vehicles

190,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys & Girls Club of the Big Island, HI, to expand afterschool, academic support, substance abuse prevention, and nutrition programs

990,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys & Girls Clubs of Warwick, RI, for out-of-school-time youth programming

640,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys and Girls Club of Paterson and Passaic, NJ, for trauma-informed, wrap around support services and out-of-school time programming

500,000

Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys to Men Mentoring Network of Virginia, Inc., VA, to expand mentoring programs

200,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Bright Lights Book Project, AK, for a literacy program

30,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Brockton Public Schools, MA, for a one-to-one laptop computer initiative

2,128,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Cal Ripken, Sr. Foundation, MD, for STEM education

1,000,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Capital District Jewish Holocaust Memorial, Inc., NY, for mobile educational programming
on the Holocaust

600,000

Gillibrand

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Ceeds of Peace, HI, to expand the community school model at Hawaii public schools

836,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Center for an Agricultural Economy, VT, for educational and curricula purposes of a farmto-school nutrition program

100,000

Welch

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Central Michigan University, MI, for distance education technology and in-person instruction
related to health career education

1,226,000

Peters

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00265

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H1618

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Central Vermont Career Center School District acting on behalf of the Vermont Association
of Career and Technical Directors, VT, to expand and enhance career and technical education programs, which may include subgrants

2,498,000

Sanders

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Chesapeake Bay Outward Bound School, MD, for an outdoor education program

250,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Children’s Foundation of Mississippi, MS, for a project to improve education outcomes

500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Citizens Campaign Fund for the Environment, NY, for science education and environmental
stewardship programs

100,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

City of Newark, NJ, for a literacy initiative

700,000

Booker, Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

City Year Providence, RI, for tutoring and mentoring programs

790,000

Reed

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

City Year, Inc., NH, for New Hampshire’s 7–Year Promise program

700,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Collaborative Support Services, HI, for early childhood education programs

1,327,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

College Visions, RI, for college access programming, including student stipends

723,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Collinsville Area Vocational Center, IL, for equipment for education program expansion

3,000,000

Duckworth

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Communities In Schools of Washington State, WA, to improve student wellness

925,000

Murray

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Community Health Center, Inc., CT, for health, nutrition and education programs

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Concilio de Organizaciones Hispanas—Concilio, PA, for youth development and violence
prevention programs

390,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Connecticut Historical Society DBA Connecticut Museum of Culture and History, CT, for a
civics education program

1,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Connecticut Junior Republic Association, Inc., dba CJR, CT, for school-based, after-school,
and summer behavioral and mental health services and programming

1,650,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Connecticut Public Broadcasting, Inc., CT, for educational programming

1,550,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Consortium for Hawaii Ecological Engineering Education, dba Malama Aina Foundation, HI,
for education programs of the Kahikina Learning Center

417,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Corning Museum of Glass, NY, for STEAM education programs, including bus rental for
transportation

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

DC Regional Early Learning Center, MD, for early childhood education

305,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Delta Health Alliance, MS, to improve education outcomes

800,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

DePaul University, IL, for a civic learning initiative

720,000

Durbin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Doc Wayne Youth Services Inc., MA, for youth development and mental health services

450,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Domestic Violence Crisis Center, CT, for youth violence prevention education program

124,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Dual Language Education of New Mexico, NM, for professional development programs related to literacy and math education

321,000

Heinrich

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Educating for Leadership, AK, to improve student safety

1,623,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Employ Milwaukee, WI, for career exploration and youth development programs, including
youth stipends

900,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Explora, NM, for STEAM education and career awareness, including student stipends

250,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Fairbanks North Star Borough School District, AK, for teacher professional development

111,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Fairbanks North Star Borough School District, AK, to improve student safety

300,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Families and Schools Together (FAST), WI, for after school family engagement programs in
Wisconsin

500,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Farm Fresh Rhode Island, RI, for farm to school programming

250,000

Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Flagman, Inc., CT, for traffic safety education in Connecticut schools

1,997,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Forrest County Agricultural High School, MS, for the purchase of equipment, technology, and
supplies

700,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Fund for the City of New York, NY, for educational programming at Floyd Bennett Field

800,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Future Focused Education, NM, for youth mental health support, including internships and
student stipends

500,000

Heinrich

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Girls on the Run International, MN, to increase access to youth development programming
in underserved communities

500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hall County School District, GA, for a career pathway program in meat processing

1,000,000

Warnock

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hands on Children’s Museum, WA, for exhibits and equipment to improve after school programming for students

3,000,000

Murray

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hawaii Department of Education, HI, for an educator workforce development initiative, including student stipends

1,000,000

Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hispanic Federation Inc., NY, to expand mentoring and training programs, which may include subgrants to existing and new partner institutions of higher education

900,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hispano Roundtable of New Mexico, NM, for STEAM education

500,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00266

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1619

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hudson River Museum of Westchester, NY, for equipment for STEM education programs

500,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival, Inc., NY, for out-of-school on-site arts education experiences and arts educational programming

534,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Inupiat Community of the Arctic Slope, AK, for a teacher apprenticeship and mentoring program, including instructor stipends

500,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Jacob’s Pillow Dance Festival, Inc., MA, for an arts education program

375,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

James City County, VA, to expand education and library services, including the purchase of
a vehicle for use as a bookmobile

375,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Joe’s Movement Emporium, MD, for after-school and in-school programs to enhance academic success through arts-based learning at William Beanes Elementary School

610,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Jumpstart for Young Children, Inc., MA, for the Accelerated Workforce program for early
childhood education

250,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Junior Achievement of Georgia, Inc., GA, for workforce development and financial literacy
education programs for middle school students

859,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

KAMP Hawaii, HI, for education and mentoring programs, including the purchase of a vehicle

350,000

Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Kent Intermediate School District, MI, for career and technical education

750,000

Peters

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Lanai High and Elementary School Foundation, HI, to develop the community school model
at Lanai High and Elementary School

120,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Launching Educational Assistance Program Forward Inc. LEAP Forward Inc., MD, for STEM
education

241,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Learning Point Alaska, AK, for a tutoring program

339,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Learning Undefeated, Inc., MD, for a mobile STEM workforce development program for secondary and postsecondary students

675,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Liberty Science Center, NJ, for environmental education programming, which may include
the acquisition of a vehicle and up to two portable planetariums

559,000

Booker

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, Inc., NY, for arts education programming

750,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Living Classrooms Foundation, MD, for music education, including by acquiring and equipping a mobile music lab bus

810,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), MD, to improve early childhood education
programs, including through a new statewide enrollment system

500,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Melwood Community Services, Inc., MD, for an afterschool program

235,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Mid -Shore Community Foundation—Bellevue Passage Museum, MD, for STEAM education

129,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Millinocket School Department, ME, for equipment, textbooks and educational materials for
education programs

1,448,000

King

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Milwaukee Jewish Federation, WI, for education on and prevention of antisemitism

312,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Mississippi School of the Arts, MS, for a college and career readiness program, including
tuition assistance, and the purchase of equipment and supplies

500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Montclair Film Festival Inc., NJ, for film education programs

80,000

Booker

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

National Youth Science Academy, WV, for the purchase of equipment and technology

500,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Hampshire School Principals Foundation, NH, for a workforce development school leadership initiative

342,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Jersey Performing Arts Center, NJ, for equipment and technology for arts education

552,000

Booker

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Mexico State University, NM, for K–12 AI curriculum development and professional development programs

762,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Mexico State University, NM, for professional development

480,000

Heinrich

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Mexico State University, NM, to improve bilingual education

250,000

Heinrich

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Urban Arts, RI, for education and curriculum development, including student stipends

150,000

Reed

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

NJ Tech Council, NJ, for workforce development, career readiness, and education and training in business development and entrepreneurship

1,450,000

Booker, Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

North Slope Borough School District, AK, for Inupiaq curriculum and instruction

500,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Northwest Maritime, WA, for a maritime workforce pilot program for high school students to
develop workforce-ready skills and competencies

1,500,000

Cantwell

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Ocean Exploration Trust, Inc., CT, for educational exhibit on ocean exploration

407,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Operation Shoestring, MS, for an out of school time program

515,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Pablo Center at the Confluence, WI, for STEAM education and workforce readiness programs

900,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Page Ahead Children’s Literacy Program, WA, for a summer reading program

300,000

Murray

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

PATCH—People Attentive to Children, HI, to improve school readiness through the expansion of a credentialing program for early childhood practitioners, including stipends

250,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Philharmonic-Symphony Society of New York, Inc., NY, for music education programs

2,000,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Pierce County, WA, to improve early childhood school readiness and education outcomes

525,000

Murray

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00267

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H1620

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Origination
Senate

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Prevention and Response Columbia County, WI, for mental health and substance use prevention programs

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Project SYNCERE, IL, for equipment for STEM education programs

200,000

Duckworth

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Purple Maia Foundation, HI, for an early college program

360,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Reach for the Top Therapy Services, NH, to expand speech language and communication
services

181,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Reading Assist, DE, to expand a tutoring program

1,000,000

Coons

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Research Foundation of the City University of New York—CUNY School of Labor and Urban
Studies Foundation, Inc., NY, to develop the Public Service Training Corps, including
scholarships and stipends

600,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Rhode Island Marine Trade Association, RI, for workforce training for high school students

480,000

Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Rhode Island Philharmonic Orchestra & Music School, RI, for music education

450,000

Reed

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

RI Department of State, RI, for civics education programming

130,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Roaring Fork School District, CO, to expand school-based mental health programs

250,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Round Valley School District, AZ, to acquire laptop computers

600,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

SAU #2, NH, for expenses of an Executive Director to develop a proposal for the creation of
a regional school in the Lakes Region for children with intensive learning needs from
preschool through grade 8

225,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Science Museum of Minnesota, MN, to establish regional STEM Educator Resource Centers

2,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

SciTech2U Inc., MD, for science education programs

214,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Shiawassee Regional Education Service District, MI, for equipment for career and technical
education

267,000

Peters

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE), CA, for STEM education programming

236,000

Padilla

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

South Carolina Department of Education, SC, for Liberty STEAM Charter School to support
the expansion of an additional grade

1,752,000

Graham

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

St. Ann’s Warehouse, Inc., NY, for arts education programming

115,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Tacoma School District No 10 DBA Tacoma Public Schools, WA, for a maritime skills program for secondary students

500,000

Murray

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Teaching Matters, Inc., NJ, for professional development and support

500,000

Booker, Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Team Long Run, ME, for a literacy program

250,000

Collins

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Brooklyn Academy of Music, Inc., NY, to improve academic achievement through artsbased education programming

1,000,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Coalition for African Americans in the Performing Arts, MD, for arts education

150,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Learning Lamp, Inc., PA, to improve early childhood education programs

100,000

Fetterman, McCormick

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Narragansett Indian Tribe, RI, for out-of-school-time programming

500,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The National Aquarium, MD, for an environmental education program, including conservation themed youth programming and community service

172,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Possible Zone, MA, for dual enrollment, career pathways, out-of-school time, and social
emotional learning programs

800,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Three Rivers Education Foundation, NM, for an early childhood literacy initiative

250,000

Heinrich

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Tree of Life, Inc., PA, for educational initiatives on antisemitism and identity-based hate for
elementary and secondary education

1,200,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Tri County Area Schools, MI, to acquire and install playground equipment for an early childhood education center

50,000

Peters

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

United Way of Delaware Inc., DE, for a literacy initiative

Blunt
Rochester

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

United Way of Kenosha County, WI, for literacy programs

278,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

United Way of the Greater Lehigh Valley, PA, to develop data infrastructure among community schools in the Greater Lehigh Valley

190,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

University of Nevada Las Vegas, NV, for Holocaust and Genocide studies education programs in Nevada

700,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

University of New Mexico, NM, for language instruction and preservation in rural communities

798,000

Luján

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, CO, for Ute language and history preservation curriculum development and education programming

1,400,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Virginia Commemorations, Inc., VA, for education programs related to America’s founding in
honor of the country’s 250th anniversary

900,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Vision To Learn, OR, for vision care services for students in under-resourced schools, including the purchase of a mobile vision clinic and a vehicle

1,369,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Wagner Free Institute of Science, PA, for science and arts education programs

100,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Washington County Public Schools, VA, for equipment and installation of accessible playgrounds at Greendale Elementary and Abingdon Elementary Schools

750,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Wharton Institute for the Performing Arts Inc., NJ, for music education

90,000

Booker

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00268

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

97,000

Requestor(s)
House

1,500,000

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

Baldwin

S

January 22, 2026

H1621

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Requestor(s)

Amount
($)

Project

Origination
House

ED

Innovation and Improvement

YMCA of Greater Nashua, NH, for summer learning programming through the Power Scholars Academy

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Youth Guidance, IL, for mentoring programs in Chicago Public Schools

500,000

Durbin

S

ED

Higher Education

Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College, GA, for improving teacher preparation programs, including the purchase of equipment

790,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Higher Education

Alabama Community College System, AL, for the purchase of equipment

5,746,000

Britt

S

ED

Higher Education

Alaska Christian College, AK, for student support services, including stipends and supplies

100,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Higher Education

Alaska Christian College, AK, for the purchase of equipment

100,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Higher Education

Albertus Magnus College, CT, for improving a nursing education program, including scholarships and the purchase of equipment

1,567,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Higher Education

Applied Research Foundation of West Virginia, WV, for campus security upgrades

1,105,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Higher Education

Arizona State University, AZ, for improving health care workforce training, including the
purchase of equipment

2,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

ED

Higher Education

Barton County Community College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

425,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Bethany College, WV, to support nursing education, including the purchase of equipment

1,150,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Higher Education

Blue Ridge Community and Technical College, WV, for aviation maintenance education, including the purchase of equipment

445,000

Capito

S

ED

Higher Education

Camden County College, NJ, for the purchase of equipment

115,000

Booker

S

ED

Higher Education

Campbellsville University, KY, to support mental health care education

3,000,000

McConnell

S

ED

Higher Education

Canisius University, NY, for expanding education programs, including purchasing equipment

1,000,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Cape Cod Community College, MA, to improve health sciences education, including purchasing equipment and technology

1,135,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Higher Education

Cape Fear Community College, NC, to support technical education, including the purchase
of equipment and supplies

650,000

Tillis

S

ED

Higher Education

Central Maine Community College, ME, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

1,000,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Central New Mexico Community College, NM, for expanding education and workforce training, including the purchase of equipment and providing scholarships

1,135,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

ED

Higher Education

Century College, MN, for expanding access to open educational resources for students, including purchasing e-books, texts and equipment, and providing stipends

346,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Chamber of Commerce of the Borough of Queens Inc., NY, for a cybersecurity education and
training program, including the purchase of technology and equipment

1,500,000

Gillibrand

S

ED

Higher Education

Charleston Animal Society, SC, to support veterinary education, including student stipends
and the purchase of equipment and supplies

1,052,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Charleston Southern University Aeronautics, SC, to support aeronautics education, including
for the purchase of equipment

1,250,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Chesapeake College, MD, for improving health education, including the purchase of equipment

721,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Higher Education

Cincinnati State Technical and Community College, OH, to support the expansion of manufacturing education

3,000,000

Husted, Moreno

H/S

ED

Higher Education

City College of San Francisco, CA, for a transportation program to help postsecondary students access education

1,000,000

Padilla

S

ED

Higher Education

Clark Atlanta University, GA, for improving science education and cancer detection, including purchasing equipment and providing financial aid and stipends

850,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Higher Education

Clayton State University, GA, for a crime scene investigation laboratory, including the purchase of equipment and student salaries

425,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

ED

Higher Education

Clemson University, SC, for curriculum development

500,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Clemson University, SC, for veterinary education, including the purchase of equipment and
technology

7,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

College of Charleston, SC, for applied sciences education, including scholarships and the
purchase of equipment and technology

695,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

College of DuPage, IL, for improving electric vehicle education and training, including the
purchase of equipment

350,000

Duckworth

S

ED

Higher Education

College of Southern Maryland, MD, for aviation education and training, including the purchase of equipment

997,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Higher Education

College of Southern Nevada, NV, for improving education for firefighters, including the purchase of equipment

305,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

ED

Higher Education

Community College of Vermont (CCV), VT, for increasing health education in rural areas, including purchasing technology

1,662,000

Sanders

S

ED

Higher Education

Community College System of New Hampshire, NH, for improving community college education programs, including the purchase of equipment

2,000,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Higher Education

Curry College, MA, for expanding education and workforce training, including the purchase
of equipment

1,000,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Higher Education

Dalton State College, GA, for expanding teacher training, including providing financial aid
and stipends

556,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

ED

Higher Education

Delaware State University, DE, for aviation program equipment for improving education, including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00269

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

95,000

Senate
Shaheen

Landsman

S

H1622

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

ED

Higher Education

Delta State University, MS, for aviation education, including the purchase of equipment

ED

Higher Education

Donnelly College, KS, for the purchase of equipment, technology, and supplies

ED

Higher Education

ED

1,750,000

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate
Hyde-Smith

S

94,000

Moran

S

East Carolina University, NC, for biomanufacturing education, including the purchase of
equipment and supplies

6,500,000

Tillis

S

Higher Education

East Stroudsburg University, PA, for expanding education programs, including the purchase
of equipment

657,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Higher Education

Eastern Mennonite University, VA, for improving STEM education programs, which may include the purchase of equipment

1,390,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Eastern Michigan University, MI, for expanding aviation education, including the purchase
of equipment

985,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

ED

Higher Education

Eastern Oregon University, OR, for an early college initiative including purchasing equipment and supplies

400,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

ED

Higher Education

Elizabeth City State University, NC, for the purchase of aviation equipment

3,900,000

Tillis

S

ED

Higher Education

Engage NJ, NJ, for expanding education and internship opportunities, including providing financial aid and stipends

1,464,000

Kim

S

ED

Higher Education

Fairmont State University, WV, for the purchase of aviation equipment

1,650,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Higher Education

Felician University, NJ, for improving education, including the purchase of equipment

675,000

Booker, Kim

S

ED

Higher Education

Flint Hills Technical College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

320,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Foundation for Grossmont and Cuyamaca Colleges, CA, For expanding educational opportunities for community college students, including purchasing equipment

655,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

ED

Higher Education

Future 5, CT, for a college access and success program, including financial aid and student supports

559,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Higher Education

Garden City Community College, KS, for the purchase of equipment, technology, and supplies

450,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Grand Valley State University, MI, for improving education for veterans and underserved
students, including the purchase of equipment

500,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Green River College, WA, for increasing educational opportunities for military families, including providing financial aid and purchasing equipment

750,000

Murray

S

ED

Higher Education

Hesston College, KS, for the purchase of equipment and technology

800,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Hinds Community College, MS, for aviation education, including the purchase of equipment

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Hinds Community College, MS, for the purchase of equipment

236,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Horry-Georgetown Technical College, SC, for the purchase of equipment

2,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Husson University, ME, to support marketing education, including for the purchase of
equipment and supplies

1,100,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

Ilisagvik College, AK, to support science education, including the purchase of equipment

191,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Higher Education

Illinois Wesleyan University, IL, to expand nursing and health education, including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Durbin

S

ED

Higher Education

Independence Community College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

300,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Jeremiah Program, MD, for supporting students in postsecondary or graduate education, including financial aid, scholarships, and child care

139,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Higher Education

Kansas State University, KS, for the purchase of equipment and technology

4,900,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Keene State College, NH, for a workforce training program, including providing stipends and
purchasing supplies

1,000,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Higher Education

Kennebec Valley Community College, ME, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

1,019,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Kennebec Valley Community College, ME, for the purchase of equipment and technology

180,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Lane Community College, OR, for improving education and apprenticeship opportunities, including the purchase of equipment and technology

1,600,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

ED

Higher Education

Lehigh Carbon Community College, PA, to support STEM education, including the purchase
of equipment and technology

463,000

McCormick

S

ED

Higher Education

Los Rios Community College District, CA, for expanding an adult learning program, including purchasing technology and providing financial aid

901,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

ED

Higher Education

Loyola College of Nursing and Health, LA, for nursing education

2,850,000

Cassidy

S

ED

Higher Education

Macomb Community College, MI, for academic support services, including the purchase of
technology

230,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Madisonville Community College, KY, for the purchase of aviation equipment

2,000,000

McConnell

S

ED

Higher Education

Maine Maritime Academy, ME, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

2,800,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Maine Maritime Academy, ME, to support maritime education

1,170,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Manhattan Area Technical College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

244,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Maricopa County Community College District, AZ, for expanding radiology education, including the purchase of equipment

2,520,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

ED

Higher Education

Marquette University School of Dentistry (MUSOD), WI, for dental education, including the
purchase of equipment

2,000,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Higher Education

Marshall University Research Corporation, WV, for the purchase of equipment and to develop curriculum, including financial aid

1,500,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Higher Education

Mercyhurst University, PA, for the purchase of equipment and technology

880,000

McCormick

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00270

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1623

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Higher Education

Middle Georgia State University, GA, for aviation education, including the purchase of
equipment

3,480,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

ED

Higher Education

Milwaukee Area Technical College, WI, for supporting parenting students, including providing financial aid and scholarships

500,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Higher Education

Minnesota State University Moorhead, MN, for improving education and training for counselors, including financial aid and stipends

901,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Mississippi Community College Board, MS, to expand nursing degree programs, including
for faculty stipends

5,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Mississippi State University, MS, for the purchase of equipment

5,459,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

ED

Higher Education

Mississippi State University, MS, to support physician assistant education

500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

ED

Higher Education

Mohave Community College, AZ, for improving automotive education, including the purchase of equipment

2,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

ED

Higher Education

Mohawk Valley Community College, NY, for education and training, including the purchase
of equipment

800,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Morris Brown College, GA, for workforce development, including the purchase of equipment,
providing financial aid, and providing stipends

1,500,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Higher Education

Nevada Governor’s Office of Economic Development (GOED), NV, for expanding an internship
program, including providing financial aid and stipends

4,530,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

ED

Higher Education

New Jersey Institute of Technology, NJ, for cybersecurity education, including the purchase
of equipment

1,000,000

Booker

S

ED

Higher Education

New Jersey Institute of Technology, NJ, for improving education and research opportunities,
including the purchase of equipment

2,890,000

Kim

S

ED

Higher Education

Niagara University, NY, for improving education, including purchasing equipment and technology upgrades

525,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Northcentral Technical College, WI, for education and workforce development, including providing financial aid, purchasing equipment and supplies, and apprenticeship wages

3,207,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Higher Education

Northeastern Technical College, SC, for the purchase of equipment, technology, and supplies

1,500,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Northern Maine Community College, ME, to support electrical and instrumentation technician education, including the purchase of supplies

1,304,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

Northern Maine Community College, ME, to support nursing and allied health education, including the purchase of equipment

650,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

Northern Michigan University, MI, for improving cybersecurity education, including purchasing equipment and technology

606,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Northern New Mexico College, NM, for improving healthcare career pathways, including curriculum development

40,000

Luján

S

ED

Higher Education

Northwest Indian College, WA, for cybersecurity education, including the purchase of equipment

500,000

Murray

S

ED

Higher Education

Northwest Technical College, MN, for improving manufacturing education and training programs, which may include the purchase of equipment and providing stipends

1,900,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Onward We Learn, RI, for college access and support services

600,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Higher Education

Parkland College, IL, for expanding aviation education and training, including the purchase
of equipment

1,050,000

Duckworth

S

ED

Higher Education

Piedmont Technical College, SC, for a mobile welding lab, including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Piedmont University, GA, for forensic science education, including the purchase of equipment

608,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Higher Education

Plymouth State University, NH, for improving education, including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Higher Education

Pratt Community College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

1,400,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Presbyterian College, SC, for the purchase of equipment and technology

224,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Prince George’s Community College, MD, for expanding quantum based education and
training including purchasing equipment and providing stipends

1,826,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Higher Education

Providence College, RI, for improving neuroscience education, including providing financial
aid and purchasing equipment

800,000

Reed

S

ED

Higher Education

Quincy University, IL, to expand education programs, including the purchase of equipment

1,320,000

Durbin

S

ED

Higher Education

Randolph College, VA, for improving STEM education programs, which may include the purchase of equipment

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Red Lake Nation College, MN, for improving postsecondary and career pathways programs,
including purchasing equipment and providing internship stipends

666,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Renton Technical College, WA, for aerospace education, including the purchase of equipment and classroom supplies

2,645,000

Murray

S

ED

Higher Education

Research Foundation of the City University of New York—Baruch College, NY, for cybersecurity education, including the purchase of equipment and providing stipends

400,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Research Foundation of the City University of New York—Brooklyn College, NY, for health
education, including purchasing equipment and providing stipends

800,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Rhode Island College, RI, for academic supports for students, including tutors

690,000

Reed

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00271

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

H1624

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Higher Education

Rhode Island College, RI, for improving cybersecurity and technology education programs,
including the purchase of equipment and technology

3,000,000

Reed

S

ED

Higher Education

Rı́o Hondo Community College District, CA, for improving firefighting education, including
the purchase of equipment

790,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

ED

Higher Education

Roanoke College, VA, to expand education programs, including the purchase of a van

274,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Saginaw Valley State University, MI, for improving environmental research opportunities for
students, including purchasing equipment

1,500,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Salina Area Technical College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

200,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Salt Lake Community College, UT, to purchase equipment, technology, and supplies

1,357,000

Curtis

S

ED

Higher Education

Schoolcraft Community College District, MI, for an apprenticeship program, including purchasing equipment and providing financial aid and student stipends

2,000,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Siena College, NY, for STEM education, including purchasing equipment and providing stipends

1,000,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

South Dakota State University—College of Nursing, SD, for the purchase of equipment and
supplies

2,953,000

Rounds

S

ED

Higher Education

South Dakota State University, SD, for curriculum development, including the purchase of
technology

750,000

Rounds

S

ED

Higher Education

Southern Arkansas University Tech, AR, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

5,000,000

Boozman

S

ED

Higher Education

Southside Virginia Community College, VA, for improving criminal justice education programs, which may include purchasing equipment and providing financial aid

940,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Spelman College, GA, to expand educational opportunities, including the purchase of equipment and paying rental costs

1,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

ED

Higher Education

St. Cloud Technical & Community College, MN, for improving an aircraft maintenance training program, including purchasing equipment and student supplies

1,154,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

The Civic Action Project, Inc., MA, for an education fellowship program, including providing
financial aid and stipends

100,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Higher Education

The College of New Jersey, NJ, for expanding education programs, including purchasing
vans, providing financial aid and stipends, and providing internships

660,000

Kim

S

ED

Higher Education

Thomas College, ME, for STEM education, including curriculum and the purchase of equipment, technology, and supplies

1,100,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

Tri-County Technical College, SC, for the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Trident Technical College, SC, to support maritime trades education, including the purchase
of equipment and supplies

1,500,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Tuskegee University, AL, for an aviation and aerotechnology program, including scholarships

5,290,000

Britt

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Alaska Southeast, AK, for professional development, including the purchase of
equipment

855,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Arkansas-Fayetteville, AR, to support national security education

750,000

Boozman

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Maine System, ME, for the purchase of equipment

500,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Maine System, ME, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

2,400,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Montevallo, AL, for nursing education equipment and supplies

1,000,000

Britt

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Nevada Las Vegas, NV, for expanding apprenticeships, including the purchase
of equipment and supplies

2,817,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

ED

Higher Education

University of New Mexico, NM, for a teacher residency program, including providing stipends

512,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Northern Colorado Foundation, CO, for improving science education, including
the purchase of equipment

300,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

ED

Higher Education

University of South Carolina, SC, for curriculum development

500,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

University of South Carolina, SC, for curriculum development, including the purchase of
technology and supplies

1,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Vermont and State Agricultural College, VT, for expanding education, including
purchasing equipment and providing tuition

2,700,000

Welch

S

ED

Higher Education

University of West Alabama, AL, for nursing education facilities and equipment

1,800,000

Britt

S

ED

Higher Education

Urban League of Greater Hartford, Inc., CT, for college success programming including financial aid and stipends, school supplies, and the purchase of technology equipment

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Higher Education

Vermont State Colleges System, VT, for education and training, including the purchase of
equipment

2,500,000

Welch

S

ED

Higher Education

Virginia Commonwealth University, VA, for supporting internship opportunities that provide
work-based learning experiences, which may include stipends and scholarships

430,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Washburn Institute of Technology, KS, for the purchase of equipment

1,600,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Washington State University, WA, for expanding health care pathways programs, including
the purchase of equipment

915,000

Murray

S

ED

Higher Education

Wesleyan University, CT, for improving education programs, including providing financial
aid and scholarships

1,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Higher Education

West Virginia Wesleyan College, WV, for improving heating and cooling systems, which may
include the purchase of equipment

2,583,000

Capito

S

ED

Higher Education

Western Colorado University, CO, for nursing education, including the purchase of equipment and technology, financial aid for students, and supportive services for students

1,940,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

ED

Higher Education

Western Michigan University, MI, for education and training in aviation, including purchasing equipment

819,000

Peters

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00272

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

January 22, 2026

H1625

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Higher Education

Western Nevada College, NV, for culinary education, including the purchase of equipment

1,450,000

ED

Higher Education

Western Oklahoma State College, OK, for the purchase of equipment and technology

3,500,000

Mullin

S

ED

Higher Education

Wor-Wic Community College, MD, for education and training in the culinary arts, including
the purchase of equipment

223,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

PO 00000

H22JAPT2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00273

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.091

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00274

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/489 here EH220126.176

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1626

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1627

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00275

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/490 here EH220126.177

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00276

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/491 here EH220126.178

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1628

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1629

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00277

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/492 here EH220126.179

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00278

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/493 here EH220126.180

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1630

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1631

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00279

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/494 here EH220126.181

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00280

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/495 here EH220126.182

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1632

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1633

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00281

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/496 here EH220126.183

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00282

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/497 here EH220126.184

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1634

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1635

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00283

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/498 here EH220126.185

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00284

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/499 here EH220126.186

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1636

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1637

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00285

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/500 here EH220126.187

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00286

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/501 here EH220126.188

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1638

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1639

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00287

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/502 here EH220126.189

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00288

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/503 here EH220126.190

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1640

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1641

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00289

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/504 here EH220126.191

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00290

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/505 here EH220126.192

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1642

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1643

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00291

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/506 here EH220126.193

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00292

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/507 here EH220126.194

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1644

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1645

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00293

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/508 here EH220126.195

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00294

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/509 here EH220126.196

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1646

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1647

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00295

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/510 here EH220126.197

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00296

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/511 here EH220126.198

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1648

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1649

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00297

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/512 here EH220126.199

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00298

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/513 here EH220126.200

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1650

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1651

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00299

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/514 here EH220126.201

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00300

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/515 here EH220126.202

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1652

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1653

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00301

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/516 here EH220126.203

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00302

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/517 here EH220126.204

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1654

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1655

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00303

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/518 here EH220126.205

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00304

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/519 here EH220126.206

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1656

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1657

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00305

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/520 here EH220126.207

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00306

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/521 here EH220126.208

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1658

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1659

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00307

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/522 here EH220126.209

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00308

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.092

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/523 here EH220126.210

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1660

January 22, 2026

DIVISION C—DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
The following is an explanation of Division
C, which makes appropriations for the Department of Homeland Security (the Department or DHS) for fiscal year 2026. Funding
provided in this agreement supports existing
programs that protect the Nation from all
manner of threats and ensures the Department’s ability to improve preparedness at
the Federal, state, local, tribal, and territorial levels; prevent and respond to terrorist attacks; and hire, train, and equip
DHS frontline personnel protecting the country.
The explanatory statement accompanying
this division is approved and indicates congressional intent. Unless otherwise noted,
the language set forth in House Report 119–
173 carries the same weight as language included in this explanatory statement and
should be complied with unless specifically
addressed to the contrary in this explanatory statement. While some language is repeated for emphasis, it is not intended to negate the language referred to above unless
expressly provided herein.
References in the explanatory statement
to ‘‘the Committees’’ or ‘‘the Committees on
Appropriations’’ should be interpreted as
both
the
House
Appropriations
Subcommittee on Homeland Security and the
Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on
Homeland Security.
This explanatory statement refers to certain entities, persons, funds, and documents
as follows: the Department of Homeland Security is referenced as DHS or the Department; the Government Accountability Office
is referenced as GAO; and the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Homeland Security is referenced as OIG. In addition, ‘‘full-time equivalents’’ are referred to
as FTE; ‘‘full-time positions’’ are referenced
as FTP; ‘‘Information Technology’’ is referred to as IT; ‘‘program, project, or activity’’ is referred to as PPA; any reference to
‘‘the Secretary’’ should be interpreted to
mean the Secretary of Homeland Security;
‘‘component’’ should be interpreted to mean
an agency, administration, or directorate
within DHS; any reference to SLTT should
be interpreted to mean state, local, tribal,
and territorial governments; any reference
to ‘‘the House report’’ should be interpreted
to mean House Report 119–173; and ‘‘budget
request’’ or ‘‘the request’’ should be interpreted to mean the budget of the U.S. Government for fiscal year 2026 that was submitted to Congress on May 2, 2025.
TITLE
I—DEPARTMENTAL
MANAGEMENT, INTELLIGENCE, SITUATIONAL
AWARENESS, AND OVERSIGHT
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY AND EXECUTIVE
MANAGEMENT

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement includes $316,295,000. Within
the total amount provided, $22,050,000 is
made available for two fiscal years, including $14,050,000 for the Office of Health Security and $8,000,000 for Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans.
MANAGEMENT AND OVERSIGHT
2026 FIFA World Cup Planning.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, the Secretary is directed to brief
the Committees on the security planning
processes, expected budgetary needs, including from Public Law 119–21, to the Department, coordination efforts with Federal and
SLTT entities, and additional resource requirements necessary for host cities to adequately prepare for the 2026 FIFA World Cup.
2028 Olympic and Paralympic Games.—The
Secretary shall submit a report to the Com-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1661

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

mittees, in coordination with the U.S. Secret
Service (USSS), not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of this Act that details the full scope of the Department’s obligations for this National Special Security
Event (NSSE). The report shall include the
nature of the Department’s coordination
with the organizing committee involved in
the 2028 Games, other Federal agencies and
departments, and representatives of the relevant state and local government entities,
including Olympic events not hosted in the
Los Angeles area. The report shall also include the Department’s projected resource
needs, by component, for this NSSE for fiscal
year 2026 through fiscal year 2029, including
specific account details for each fiscal year
and how the Department is using the funds
provided for this purpose in Public Law 119–
21. The Department shall also include any
projected budgetary shortfalls, delineated by
each fiscal year, when applicable.
287(g) Programs.—The Department shall
evaluate its interactions and relationships
with local law enforcement agencies, including but not limited to the 287(g) program.
This evaluation should result in specific recommendations for ensuring that the Department considers the costs and benefits of the
287(g) program, including for local law enforcement agencies, particularly as it relates
to the workload and community relationships. The Office of Strategy, Policy, and
Plans, in consultation with the Office of
Partnership and Engagement, is directed to
brief the Committees on the results of its
evaluation not later than 180 days after the
date of enactment of this Act. Additionally,
the agreement continues the directive under
the Office of the Secretary and Executive
Management heading ‘‘287(g) Agreements’’ in
Senate Report 118–85.
Access to High-Quality Affordable Childcare
for Federal Employees.—Within 90 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, and semiannually thereafter, the Department is directed
to provide a report on access to high-quality,
affordable childcare for children of Department employees. The report shall detail all
current programs or efforts that assist Departmental employees with childcare, identify additional programs, including recruitment and retention programs, that would assist with childcare, and detail all associated
costs with those programs and efforts, even
if such costs are projections. Additionally,
180 days after the date of enactment of this
Act, the Department shall survey employees
to capture interest in such programs or efforts and provide to the Committees the
level of interest and the number of employees using such programs. Where possible, the
Department shall identify whether access to
childcare hinders recruitment or retention
efforts, provide the geographical locations
where such hindrance occurs, and identify
targeted programs for such cases.
Administrative
Data
Research
Facility
(ADRF).—The agreement directs the DHS
Statistical Official, in consultation with the
DHS Chief Data Officer, the Chief Information Officer, and the Senior Agency Official
for Privacy, to coordinate secure access to
administrative data across the relevant DHS
components and to ensure compliance with
all applicable laws and DHS policies, including the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93–579). The
agreement provides $2,000,000 to expand the
ADRF’s capabilities, including enhanced
data-sharing partnerships, expanded security
measures, the development of advanced analytical tools to support DHS and other agencies’ homeland security research needs, and
the enhancement of DHS’s ability to securely transmit timely data to the ADRF.
The agreement directs the DHS Statistical
Official to submit a report within 180 days of
the date of enactment of this Act detailing

PO 00000

Frm 00309

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

progress on the integration of administrative
data for homeland security research, including an assessment of how ADRF is being leveraged to enhance interagency collaboration and threat analysis.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) Implementation.—
The agreement directs the Department,
within 90 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, to brief the Committees on the Department’s AI activities, including progress
on the Department’s implementation of its
AI strategy and new use cases of AI.
Asylum Processing at Ports of Entry
(POEs).—The agreement directs the Department, within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act, to provide to the Committees an analysis of current capacity to process asylum seekers and any constraints
based on Department projections of the number of anticipated asylum applicants at the
southwest border over the next five fiscal
years at POEs.
Body Armor.—The agreement directs DHS
to procure ballistic body armor and related
protective equipment that is specifically designed to fully protect the body shapes of
agents and officers and is made to conform
to the individual wearer and provides the
best possible fit and coverage to allow for either a flat or shaped front panel. The body
armor procured must meet or exceed the
most current ballistic resistance standards
developed by the National Institute of Justice (NIJ). Within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Committees detailing:
(1) an assessment of the current ballistic
protection inventory across DHS components;
(2) a plan to ensure all newly procured
body armor conforms to the latest NIJ
standards;
(3) an inventory management strategy, including equipment lifecycle replacement
schedules; and
(4) steps to maximize the health, safety,
and operational effectiveness of DHS law enforcement personnel through improved protective technologies.
Body-Worn Cameras.—The agreement provides $20,000,000 for the procurement, deployment, and operations of body-worn cameras
for agents and officers performing enforcement activities under 8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.
The agreement notes ICE’s body worn camera directive (ICE Directive 19101.3), which is
effective as of February 19, 2025, and directs
ICE to inform the Committees within 14 days
of any changes made to the directive, to include the reason for the change.
Border and Immigration Related Data and
Transparency.—Within 30 days of the date of
enactment of this Act, and quarterly thereafter, the Secretary, in consultation with
other appropriate Federal officials, shall
submit to the Committees a report that details the situational awareness of the southwest border that includes data related to the
number of ‘‘turn backs,’’ ‘‘got aways,’’ and
monthly apprehension rate data by sector.
For the purposes of this reporting requirement, the Department shall use the definitions provided in section 223 of title 6, United
States Code. U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) is also directed to ensure a review by third-party statistical experts on the
current process, assumptions, and formulas
used to derive the ‘‘got aways’’ estimates
and any proposed changes to improve such
estimates, including proposed changes to
statutory definitions, if any. The Committees also continue the requirement for the
Department to submit quarterly Border Security Status reports and data on the deportation, or removal, of the parents of U.S. citizen children semiannually. Additionally,
the Department shall provide to the Committees and shall post on a publicly accessible website by the 15th of each month the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.093

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1662

following, delineating requests received and
granted by entity, including CBP, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE),
and U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS):
(1) DHS’s total detention capacity, as well
as usage rate during the previous month;
(2) the total monthly number of ‘‘applicants for admission’’ under section 1225 of
Title 8, United States Code, who are paroled
into the United States during the previous
month;
(3) the total monthly number of ‘‘applicants for admission’’ under section 1225 of
Title 8, United States Code, who are released
into the United States, paroled or otherwise,
during the previous month;
(4) the total number of individuals paroled
into the United States during the previous
month;
(5) of the total number of individuals paroled, the rationale for each grant, and its
duration; and
(6) the total number of referrals for prosecution made to the Department of Justice
(DOJ) for illegal entry or illegal reentry during the previous month.
Border-Related
Executive
Orders.—The
agreement directs ICE, CBP, USCIS, and the
Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans to
jointly brief the Committees not later than
seven days after the execution of any borderrelated executive actions on preliminary
budgetary impacts, operational changes, new
training that may be required, revised or
new international agreements, and any additional FTE that have been deployed to implement the executive action.
Combatting Antisemitism.—The agreement
directs the Secretary to release a public report, not later than 90 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, detailing how the Department plans to implement Executive
Order 14188 of January 29, 2025, and the U.S.
National Strategy to Counter Antisemitism
to combat the rising threat of antisemitism.
Continuous Vetting.—Not later than 90 days
after the enactment of this Act, the Department shall submit a proposal for the centralization of domestic vetting of foreign nationals within one component. The agreement directs the Department to brief the
Committees on such proposal prior to implementation.
Data Aggregation.—The Department is directed to provide a briefing to the Committees not later than 90 days after the date of
enactment of this Act on current or planned
systems that draw on data from more than
two sources and include information on U.S.
citizens. The briefing should describe the
purpose and use of such systems, the sources
and types of data involved, any applicable
oversight or privacy safeguards, and how the
Department ensures that such systems are
not used for systemic, indiscriminate, or
wide-scale surveillance.
Department of Defense (DoD) Border and Immigration Enforcement Support.—Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
and monthly thereafter, the Department, including representatives from CBP and ICE, is
directed to brief the Committees on the continued support from DoD to augment DHS
border and immigration enforcement operations. The briefing shall include:
(1) the support DHS requested to DoD during the reporting period, including a copy of
the written request;
(2) the support approved by DoD for the reporting period, including a copy of the written approval;
(3) the duties, functions, and duty stations
of the DoD assets providing support to DHS
during the reporting period;
(4) a list of each DoD installation or facility that is being used to support DHS or any
of its components; and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(5) DHS plans for border and immigration
enforcement operations on the southern border and requirement for continued DoD support.
Department’s Mission in Rural Areas and
with Tribes.—The Office of Partnership and
Engagement is directed to provide a briefing
to the Committees not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of this Act on its
outreach efforts to rural communities and
tribes in their efforts to support the homeland security mission.
Deputization of Law Enforcement.—Within
90 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
the Department shall submit to the Committees the memorandums of understanding for
the deputization of law enforcement officers
that have been signed with departments and
agencies across the Federal Government, including but not limited to, DoD, DOJ, the Internal Revenue Service, the Department of
State, and components within DHS. In addition, the Department is directed to provide a
report on the authorities utilized for each
agency agreement and the training provided
to the deputized law enforcement officers,
including the costs and which agency incurs
the cost for training. For those officers deputized from other DHS components, the report
shall include an analysis of the operational
impacts of such actions, including a breakdown of number of officers deputized by component and any impacts on the original mission of such agency across the Department.
DHS Law Enforcement Officer Assault Reporting.—Within 90 days of the date of enactment of this Act and monthly thereafter, the
Department is directed to brief the Committees on the number of assaults on DHS law
enforcement officers. The data provided in
the initial brief shall include statistics for
the last five fiscal years.
DHS Uniform Policy.—The agreement encourages DHS to develop and implement a
standardized uniform policy for domestic law
enforcement operations to ensure that law
enforcement officers are clearly identifiable
as Federal law enforcement. The policy may
make exceptions for unique situations, such
as those involving undercover operations, or
for life and safety considerations in areas of
increased threat as covered under title 8,
United States Code, for enforcement activities. The Department is directed to brief the
Committees within 60 days of the date of enactment of this Act on the policy that has
been developed, the implementation plan,
how the Department intends to track compliance, and any associated resource costs.
Duplicative Activities.—The GAO’s 2025 Annual Report entitled ‘‘Additional Opportunities to Reduce Fragmentation, Overlap, and
Duplication and Achieve Billions of Dollars
in Financial Benefits’’ notes that the Department has at least 20 open and
unaddressed recommendations with another
eight recommendations only partially addressed. The Department shall provide a report, not later than 180 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, on the status of the
Department’s efforts to address the GAO’s
recommendations and any legal, resource, or
other barriers preventing the Department
from addressing the recommendations.
Ending Online Child Exploitation.—The
agreement directs the Department to brief
the Committees semiannually on all of the
required data pertaining to Department-wide
efforts to combat human trafficking and
child exploitation and provide the appropriate committees of jurisdiction with an updated comprehensive study on human trafficking as required in the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008
(Public Law 110–457). The briefing shall include steps the Department has taken to respond to the recent media reports concerning
the safety and well-being of vulnerable unaccompanied children.

PO 00000

Frm 00310

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Enforcement and Public Safety.—The Department is directed to brief the Committees
no later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and monthly thereafter,
concerning any domestic law enforcement or
immigration enforcement operation involving more than 35 Department of Homeland
Security or other deputized law enforcement
officers not assigned to the area of responsibility. The brief should include the total
number of personnel deployed to the operation by the Department, component, or entity represented and the cumulative costs of
the operation by funding source by TAFS.
The report shall be transmitted in a classified format as necessary. The agreement directs the Department’s Use-of-Force Policy
(Policy Statement 044–05), implementing
guidance, including investigative and documentation practices, as well as componentspecific use of force policies, procedures, and
training in effect as of the date of enactment
of this Act, to be provided to the Committees
within five days of enactment of this Act and
any changes to that policy shall be made
available to the Committees within 24 hours
of such a change.
Future Goods and Services for Homeland Security Feasibility Report.—The Secretary, in
conjunction with Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA),
as well as relevant departmental components
and other Federal agencies and departments,
shall provide a report to the Committees not
later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act on the feasibility of producing an annual projection of needs for
goods and services regarding response to and
recovery from nationwide events. The feasibility report shall detail the ways in which
sourcing domestic and foreign supplies affects response and recovery preparedness and
shall include the potential impact of the development of a program that communicates
anticipated national needs on the reliability
of the supply chain.
Fiscal Year (FY) 2025 FEMA Preparedness
Grants.—The agreement notes the apparent
disregard for the 200-day statutory award
mandate and concludes this lapse illustrates
obfuscation
beyond
bureaucracy
and
breaches trust that puts American lives at
risk and requires immediate attention. The
withhold of these funds until the final week
of FY 2025, and the continued stall of access
to such funds nearly four months into FY
2026, has left states and localities, from the
largest urban centers to the smallest rural
towns, in a state of indefinite limbo ahead of
near-term and high-security events such as
the 2026 FIFA World Cup, America250 celebrations, and the 2028 Olympic games. Within five days of the date of enactment of this
Act, FEMA shall provide the Committees
with updated allocations for all FY 2025 preparedness grants and is directed to provide
states full access to these funds within ten
business days of the date of enactment of
this Act.
Icebreaker Collaboration Effort (ICE) Pact
Implementation.—The agreement directs DHS
and the Coast Guard to provide a joint briefing within 90 days of the date of enactment
of this Act, detailing the progress in ICE
Pact implementation, future implementation timelines, and estimated resource or
other needs, including statutory and regulatory changes, for full implementation.
Limited English Proficient Communities.—Not
later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter,
the Department is directed to provide a detailed report to the Committees covering the
Department’s annual advertising expenditures by component. The report shall identify expenditures that relate to limited

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.094

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

English proficient communities and shall delineate between forms of advertising such as
television, radio, or internet.
Ms. L Settlement.—Within 90 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary
shall brief the Committees on the settlement
agreement that was approved by the U.S.
District Court for the Southern District of
California on December 11, 2023, in Ms. L., et
al. v. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, et al.
Non-Leaded Ammunition.—Within 90 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, the Department is directed to provide a report to
the Committees that examines whether current brass and lead can be recycled and the
environmental implications of such recycling. Within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act, the Department is directed
to report to the Committees on examining
alternatives to traditional bullet backstops
and berms in indoor and outdoor firing
ranges that would mitigate or preserve their
integrity for the reduction of lead dust and
the ability to recycle and the availability of
Reduced Training Hazard Ammunition to
meet the current training requirements
across DHS components. Additionally, the
report shall include a summary of any
amounts of lead or brass that were recycled
by DHS and the cost of that recycling for the
past five fiscal years.
Office of Homeland Security Statistics
(OHSS).—Within 30 days of the date of enactment of this Act, the agreement directs
OHSS to provide the monthly reports required in the explanatory statement accompanying Public Law 117–328 for fiscal year
2025 and provide monthly reports for fiscal
year 2026. The agreement also directs OHSS
to include in its report the arrest location
and the number of repatriations by arresting
agency, as well as detentions, removals, and
ICE arrests of U.S. citizens, Lawful Permanent Residents, and former members of the
Armed Services. The report shall include
monthly data on self-deportations through
the CBP Home App and include detailed summary-level data on prosecution types of
charges broken down by sector, country of
origin, asylum claim, and sentencing outcome.
Parole Report.—The Department is reminded of the requirement in the explanatory statement accompanying Public Law
117–103 to produce a report on its use of parole authority, including the number of parole requests received and granted, and for
those granted, the rationale for each grant
and its duration. The report shall be required
monthly and shall be released at the same
time as CBP releases its monthly operation
statistics update.
Parole Requests for Servicemembers and Veterans.—The Department is directed to make
available, on a publicly accessible website,
an interactive dashboard detailing the number of such parole requests made, processed,
approved, denied, and pending by month,
along with the average processing time. For
each parole request denial, the Department
is directed to report the country of nationality or last habitual residence of the individual, whether the individual was discharged or released from service under honorable conditions, whether the individual
was deployed overseas, their branch of service, and whether the individual has a spouse,
child or other immediate family member residing in the United States.
Public Recording of DHS Law Enforcement
Operations.—It is well established that American citizens can record law enforcement officers and agents carrying out their duties in
public under the First Amendment of the
U.S. Constitution, so long as those recording
do not obstruct or interfere with law enforcement operations. Therefore, the Depart-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1663

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ment is directed to ensure that all agents
and officers are appropriately trained on the
rights of individuals to record public operations. Not later than 90 days after the date
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall
brief the Committees on updated training
provided to all officers and agents within the
Department, both in the field and at Federal
Law Enforcement Training Centers, and provide a semi-annual report to the Committees
on any allegations or complaints of violations of First Amendment rights under investigation by any entity funded by this Act.
Recalcitrant Countries.—Not later than 90
days after the date of enactment of this Act,
the Department shall, in consultation with
the Department of State and other relevant
agencies, brief the Committees on efforts to
remove aliens encountered from countries
who currently refuse to accept returns. This
brief shall include the list of countries the
Department considers recalcitrant, as well
as the number of aliens from each of these
countries subject to final orders of removal,
including their detention status. The brief
shall be submitted in unclassified form but
may contain a classified annex.
Records Management.—The agreement directs the Department to maintain records
and respond to records requests, consistent
with the requirements of section 552 of title
5, United States Code, for information related to all detainees in the custody of the
Department, regardless of whether such detainees are housed in a Federal or non-Federal detention facility. The Department
should not withhold records from disclosure
unless the Department reasonably foresees
that disclosure would harm an interest protected by an exemption described in section
552(b) of title 5, United States Code or is otherwise prohibited by law.
Reporting Requirements.—The agreement
continues the directives under the headings
‘‘Policy on Legal Orientation and Access
Within all Department Facilities,’’ ‘‘Family
Separation from Parents and Legal Guardians,’’ ‘‘Separation of Family Units,’’ and
‘‘Family Reunification’’ in Senate Report
118–85.
Short-Term Holding Facilities.—The agreement reminds DHS of the outstanding recommendation from GAO–16–514 to develop
and issue guidance on how and which complaint mechanisms should be communicated
to individuals in custody at holding facilities. DHS shall provide monthly updates to
the Committees on its progress towards compliance in addition to the completed field
guidance once applicable.
State Police and Crime Labs.—Within 90 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, the Department shall report on its use of and partnerships with state crime labs, including
funds associated with such partnerships, and
should fully reimburse state crime labs for
the service they provide to the Department.
Surge Operations Reporting.—The agreement
directs the Department to report to the
Committees on the number of daily arrests
by field office on a biweekly basis in support
of surge immigration enforcement operations conducted by the Department in fiscal
years 2025 and 2026. The arrest data should
include the arresting agency as well as the
number of individuals who were arrested tied
to targeted, intelligence-driven operations
versus ancillary arrests, as well as arrest
data for those with known criminal convictions in the United States. The biweekly report should also include by operation:
(1) the number of personnel assigned to
each operation;
(2) the home agency and location of the
personnel;
(3) length of detail assignments; and
(4) the cumulative costs of the operation.
Terrorism Watch List.—The Department
shall notify the Committees within seven

PO 00000

Frm 00311

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

days if an individual on the Federal Bureau
of Investigation’s (FBI) Terrorist Screening
Dataset is encountered by the Department,
or another Federal agency supporting the
Department’s law enforcement mission at or
between a port of entry, or while conducting
immigration enforcement activities.
Transnational Repression.—Within 120 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, the Department shall brief the Committees on the
issue of transnational repression to include
awareness of reported incidents, interagency
coordination with the DOJ and other domestic Federal departments and agencies, and in
coordination with the Department of State,
and any related activities the Department
has taken within the United States.
Tribal Consultation.—Department personnel
interact with tribes and thousands of tribal
members every day. Some Department personnel do not have training on tribal issues,
which may lead to misunderstandings that
negatively impact tribes, tribal members,
and ultimately, the Department. The Department is required under Executive Order
13175 to consult and coordinate with tribal
governments. The Department shall continue to consult and work with tribes to improve the mandatory, base-level training
course for Department personnel, including
but not limited to FTE, part-time employees, and contractors, who have regular interactions with tribal members or are likely to
encounter tribal members at their duty station. This training should include education
on recognizing tribal identification documents as valid forms of identification. Within 180 days of the date of enactment of this
Act, the Department is directed to brief the
Committees on the status of such training
improvements.
Unaccompanied Minor Reporting.—Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
and monthly thereafter, the Secretary shall
provide the Committees with and make publicly available online a report which shall:
(1) include the number of individuals currently in ICE’s custody who were transferred
to ICE by the Office of Refugee Resettlement
(ORR) and a breakdown, delineated by ICE
area of responsibility, of the type of placement and accompanying justification for
such placement;
(2) the number of unaccompanied children
transferred by DHS (including DHS contractors) into ORR custody over the prior year,
disaggregated by month, transferring agency, justification for such transfers, and each
minor’s age, gender, and country of nationality; and
(3) the number of unaccompanied minors
removed or otherwise returned from the
United States by DHS (including DHS contractors) over the prior year, disaggregated
by month, returning agency, and each minor’s age, gender, country of nationality,
and country of return.
Women in Law Enforcement.—Within 90 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, the Department shall brief the Committees on current Department-wide efforts to recruit and
retain women in law enforcement. At a minimum, the briefing shall include information
of all law enforcement components detailing:
an overview of current recruitment and retention efforts of women by component with
base funding for such efforts; success of current efforts including identification of the
metrics of success by fiscal year; and the
current percentage, broken down by seniority, of women in law enforcement per component. The briefing shall also identify planned
recruitment and retention efforts by component for the next fiscal year, any funding requirements to improve the recruitment and
retention of women in law enforcement
fields by component with comparisons of
similar efforts by other Federal law enforcement agencies, including the DOJ, and provide recommendations by component for new

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.095

H22JAPT2

H1664

programs or efforts that would further support the recruitment and retention of women
in law enforcement.
Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
(CWMD) Policy Coordinator.—The agreement
includes the transfer of the Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and Explosives
(CBRNE) risk assessment functions and detection architecture within the Office of
Strategy, Policy, and Plans. To ensure proper coordination within the Department, the
Secretary is directed to appoint a Department-wide lead CBRNE coordinator, at the
Senior Executive Service level, out of the
funds transferred for this function. Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
the Secretary shall brief the Committees on
plans to ensure no degradation of the functions previously performed by the CWMD office.
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
Transfers.—The agreement transfers the
functions of the Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction office as described in the table
below.

COUNTERING WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
(in thousands of dollars)
Appropriation

Final Bill

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OSEM—Operations and Support:
CBRN Risk/Detection Architecture .........................................
National Biosurveillance Integration Center .........................
CBP—Operations and Support:
Radiation Portal Monitor Mission Support ............................
CBP—Procurement, Construction, and Improvements:
Radiation Portal Monitor Program ........................................
Radiation Portal Monitor Replacement Program ..................
International Rail (IRAIL) ......................................................
Handheld Radioisotope Identification Devices ......................
Portable Detection End Items ...............................................
TSA—Procurement, Construction, and Improvements:
Portable Detection End Items ...............................................
USCG—Procurement, Construction, and Improvements:
Handheld Radioisotope Identification Devices ......................
Portable Detection End Items ...............................................
USSS—Procurement, Construction, and Improvements:
Portable Detection End Items ...............................................
FEMA—Operations and Support:
Mission, Capability, and Operational Support ......................
FEMA—Federal Assistance:
CWMD Training, Exercises, and Readiness ...........................
Securing the Cities Program .................................................
Biological Support Program ..................................................
S&T—Operations and Support:
Mission Support for Research and Development .................
S&T—Research and Development:
Transformational Research and Development ......................
Technical Forensics ...............................................................
Detection Capability Development ........................................

33,182
24,036
4,356
20,478
13,900
1,300
750
1,290
1,290
750
1,290
1,290
78,995
19,559
34,465
83,657
4,353
26,540
2,000
21,460

Report on Crew-Served Weapons.—Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
the Department shall make publicly available the total number of ammunition and
weapons that are considered crew-served
weapons that are in the possession of a component, other than the Coast Guard or CBP’s
Air and Marine Operations.
Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties
Investigations Backlog.—Within 60 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, the Office
for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties (CRCL)
shall report to the Committees on the current status of its complaint investigations
backlog and the processes CRCL is implementing to reduce the backlog.
Language Access Programs.—Within 180 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, CRCL
shall conduct an analysis of existing language access plans for the Department. The
report shall include but not be limited to:
(1) an assessment of current language access plans;
(2) whether existing language access plans
meet applicable requirements; and
(3) whether any legal rights orientations
are provided in the appropriate language for
migrants participating in agency programs.
Any recommendations developed after review of the existing plans shall utilize the
four-factor analysis identified in section 4 of
the Department’s Master Language Access
plan.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Statutory Requirements.—Within 90 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, CRCL
shall report to the Committees, and publicly
post on its website, how it is fulfilling the
statutory requirements of the CRCL Office.
CRCL shall provide detailed reports on these
requirements, including the current staffing
levels that support these statutory functions. The report shall also include data for
the current fiscal year and the previous two
fiscal years, broken out by month, on the
number of complaints received by CRCL and
how they were handled as well as the number
of civil rights and civil liberties investigations open and closed during that time period. The report shall also include a description of any previous CRCL responsibility
that is no longer being performed and steps
CRCL is taking to comply with statutory requirements.
Office of Health Security
Child Well-Being Specialists.—The recommendation provides $18,050,000 for the
Child Well-Being Specialists program. The
agreement continues the reporting directive
under the heading, ‘‘Child Well-Being Professionals’’ in the explanatory statement accompanying Public Law 118–47. Additionally,
within 180 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, the Office of Health Security (OHS)
is directed to brief the Committees on the
status of implementing the Child Well-Being
Program.
Telemental Health and Employee Assistance
Pilot.—The agreement provides $1,500,000 to
continue the pilot efforts, as described in
House Report 118–123 accompanying Public
Law 118–47.
Workforce Wellness and Suicide Prevention.—
The agreement provides $2,000,000 to expand
Department-wide workforce wellness and
suicide prevention efforts. Not later than 60
days after the date of enactment of this Act,
OHS shall provide an update to the Committees on the status of these efforts and its
plans for this funding.
Privacy Office
Collected Personal Information.—Within 180
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
the Secretary shall submit to the Committees a report detailing the collection and use
of personal information by all components of
the Department. The report shall include information about the collection of personally
identifiable data of U.S. and non-U.S. persons by all components of the Department,
including data reflecting expressive or
associational activities, and including but
not limited to collection from social media
platforms, data brokers, electronic devices,
applications for services and accreditations
provided by components, encounters at
POEs, and other travel information. It shall
also include: how the data is stored, shared,
and accessed; which internal components it
is shared with; which partners inside and
outside the Federal Government it is shared
with, including but not limited to SLTT law
enforcement, foreign governments, and private businesses; the legal basis for its collection; and all civil rights, civil liberties and
privacy mechanisms that are used to protect
the rights of individuals whose data is
accessed, stored, or shared. Finally, the report shall address any mechanisms that
allow individuals to seek redress if they believe that they are erroneously included in
any of the lists maintained by the Department or erroneously subjected to additional
screening, scrutiny, or surveillance as a result of a Department risk assessment process. The report shall be provided in an unclassified manner that can be shared with
the public to the greatest extent possible and
with a classified annex as necessary.
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Backlog.—The agreement provides $10,000,000 to

PO 00000

Frm 00312

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

address the FOIA backlog. Within 90 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, the Department shall submit to the Committees a
report on the status of the FOIA backlog, its
efforts to ensure that FOIA reading room
and information requests continue, and how
the Privacy Office is using generative artificial intelligence and automation technologies to streamline the process and reduce the backlog.
Office of the Citizenship and Immigration
Services Ombudsman
Federal Employment Separation Data.—DHS
is directed to brief the Committees, not later
than 60 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, providing the full number of Federal civilian employees in service at the Office of the Citizenship and Immigration
Services Ombudsman (CISOMB) on January
20, 2025, including those in full and part-time
status, along with the full number of employees separated from service since January
20, 2025, through enactment. The brief will
further provide metrics for measuring performance of statutorily required functions at
a PPA level and the number of:
(1) terminated probationary employees
categorized as new to government or recently promoted;
(2) employees placed on administrative
leave;
(3) employees who participated in the Deferred Resignation Program;
(4) employees voluntarily separated and received separation incentives or early retirement payments;
(5) employees separated through formal
Reduction in Force plans; and
(6) employees utilizing optional immediate
retirement, categorized by department, pay
plan, grade, occupational classification and
duty-station location beginning January 20,
2025.
Citizenship and Immigration Services Ombudsman Reporting Requirements.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, and quarterly thereafter, the Department is directed to brief the Committees
on its hiring process including a breakdown
of how the office intends to allocate fiscal
year 2026 funds to each of the following divisions: Executive, Casework, Policy, Public
Engagement, Strategy, and Operations.
CISOMB is directed to include information
about progress made in appointing regional
representatives. The briefing shall also include the staffing levels for each of the divisions and regions mentioned above. The
briefing shall also include the following information on case requests from the date of
enactment up until the briefing:
(1) the total number of requests received;
(2) the number of requests received or sent
to USCIS within 30 days of receipt;
(3) the number of public stakeholder engagement events conducted;
(4) the total number of requests outstanding by CISOMB; and
(5) a detailed plan for replying to requests
for case assistance within a timely manner.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement provides $8,911,000 for the
Office of Health Security for the Medical Information Exchange.
MANAGEMENT DIRECTORATE
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $1,690,380,000 for
Operations and Support.
Congressional Requests for Information
Tracking Software.—The agreement provides
$1,000,000 for the procurement of a consolidated system to better equip the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) to track and provide
oversight of outstanding briefing or information requests that the Committees have

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.095

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

made to the Department or a component.
Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act and monthly thereafter,
the Department is directed to brief the Committees on the status of all outstanding responses to requests for information, briefings, and overdue reports and briefings stemming from statutory or report requirements.
This briefing shall include representatives
from each DHS component with outstanding
responses due to the Committees. Each representative shall provide detailed information on the current status of each overdue
requirement and the expected date of delivery.
Fiscal Year 2027 Budget Justification.—The
CFO is directed to ensure that fiscal year
2027 classified and unclassified budget justification materials for all components are
submitted concurrent with the President’s
budget submission to Congress. The agreement continues the requirements under
‘‘Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Justification’’ as
detailed in Senate Report 118–85 for fiscal
year 2027.
Hiring in Rural Communities.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, the Department shall provide a report to the Committees on the challenges of
recruiting and retaining Federal employees
in non-contiguous and rural states, and including discussion of Native American, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian populations.
The report shall also provide an assessment
of the effect these vacancies have on the
ability of components to accomplish their
statutory and administrative responsibilities
and shall specifically describe steps the Department has taken to address the identified
challenges.
Homeland Advanced Recognition Technology
(HART) System.— In addition to the requirements in the House Report under this heading, the Department shall provide the Committees with similar updates regarding the
Automated Biometric Identity System
(IDENT). The Department shall also continue the disclosure of technologies, data
collection mechanisms, and sharing agreements among Department agencies, other
Federal, state, local, and foreign law enforcement agencies, and fusion centers as it
relates to the development of the HART biometric database. In cases where the Department relies on information obtained through
the HART database or through Department
of State foreign intelligence sharing to separate a minor child from a parent, primary
caregiver, or close relative who is caring for
or traveling with that child, the Department
shall report this incident to the OIG and
CRCL within 24 hours of the separation, unless the separation was a result of an adult
posing a danger to a minor, the adult has serious criminal history, or if the parental or
custodial relationship cannot be verified.
Hiring Plans.—Within 60 days of the date of
enactment of this Act, the Chief Human Capital Officer, in consultation with the CFO, is
directed to brief the Committees on projections, by component, for hiring goals associated with funding from Public Law 119–21, to
include how new positions will be tracked
and transferred between appropriations provided by this Act and appropriations provided by Public Law 119–21.
Office of Biometric Identity Management
(OBIM).—The agreement includes $271,000,000
for OBIM. OBIM is directed to continue
briefing the Committees on a semiannual
basis on its workload, service levels, staffing, modernization efforts, and other operations. Any proposal to transfer the functions of OBIM shall include a detailed plan
accompanied by a briefing that demonstrates
how the Department will disburse OBIM
functions and provide a seamless transfer of
biometric identity functions in service of the
Department and its mission partners.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1665

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Office of Program Accountability and Risk
Management (PARM) Dissolution.—The agreement maintains funding for PARM and does
not include the proposed transfer of the Office to the Immediate Office of the Undersecretary for Management. If the Department
proposes dissolution of PARM in fiscal year
2027, the agreement directs the Department
to provide a plan that details the transfer of
the responsibilities performed by PARM to
other entities, including the oversight of
contracting activities. The written plan
shall be accompanied by a brief that confirms what entities will provide oversight for
each Major Acquisition Oversight List Level
One or Level Two program.
Public Reporting on Final Spend Plans.—
Within 60 days of the date of enactment of
this Act and quarterly thereafter, the Department shall publicly post spend plans. At
a minimum, the report shall include the purposes and amounts at the PPA level, identify
the sources of funds, and reflect final decisions from all reprogramming and transfer
actions executed under the authorities provided by section 503 of this Act.
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Hiring.—The agreement directs the Department to provide a briefing
not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act on actions taken to
streamline pathways for qualified STEM
graduates, including any updates to guidance, training, or public-facing materials.
Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (sUAS)
Procurement.—For any acquisition using
funds provided in this Act, the Department
is directed to require certification of review
of the industry alert and completion of a
risk assessment that considers the proposed
use of foreign-made UAS.
Technology Modernization Fund (TMF) Reporting.—The agreement directs the Department to provide notice to the Committees
when the Department or a component submits an initial project proposal to the Technology Modernization Board. If a proposal
from the Department or component is accepted, the Department shall provide the
Committees a briefing on the project and the
plan for reimbursing the TMF, including
identifying the projected cost savings, within 20 business days of acceptance.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement provides $58,106,000 for Procurement, Construction, and Improvements.
This includes $25,000,000 to support development efforts in OBIM, $16,000,000 for Financial Systems Modernization, $8,434,000 for
One Net, $3,400,000 for Counter Unmanned
Aerial Systems operations at National Special Security Events, $3,272,000 for the DHS
Data Framework, and $2,000,000 for Human
Resources Information Technology.
INTELLIGENCE, ANALYSIS, AND SITUATIONAL
AWARENESS
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $340,819,000 for Operations and Support, of which $121,274,000 is
made available until September 30, 2027. The
agreement includes $6,000,000 for 2026 FIFA
World Cup and America250 activities and
$8,417,000 for counter fentanyl activities.
Continuation of Reporting Requirements.—
For the next five years, the Department, in
coordination with the FBI, shall continue to
produce reports first required under section
5602 of Public Law 116–92. Each report shall
be provided to the Committees in addition to
any other committees receiving the report.
Cyber Harassment Threat Assessment.—Within 180 days of the date of enactment of this
Act, the Department shall develop and publicly disseminate a threat assessment on the
use of cyber harassment by terrorists and
foreign malign actors.

PO 00000

Frm 00313

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Intelligence Expenditure Plan.—The agreement continues the requirement under this
heading in Senate Report 118–85, to include
through fiscal year 2026.
State Judicial Security.—The agreement directs the Office of Intelligence and Analysis
(I&A) to work with fusion centers to draft
and implement a plan to increase outreach
to stakeholders, as appropriate, to ensure
that intelligence and threat information impacting Federal and state employees is
shared to the extent possible, and to brief
the Committees on such plan within 180 days
of the date of enactment of this Act.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $257,599,000 for Operations and Support, including: $5,430,000 for
Zero Trust Network Architecture, $20,000,000
for additional inspections and oversight of
detention facilities, and $12,814,000 for oversight of the execution of funds provided in
Public Law 119–21.
Deputization of Federal Law Enforcement for
Immigration.—The Inspector General shall report to the Committees within 60 days of the
date of enactment of this Act on collaboration with other Inspectors General on oversight of immigration enforcement including
with, but not limited to, DoD and DOJ. The
report shall include the number of law enforcement officers from each agency that
have been deputized, the immigration enforcement authorities they are operating
under, and the length of their details.
Supplemental Reconciliation and Detention
Funding.—The Inspector General shall brief
the Committees not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of this Act on oversight plans for detention and for funding provided in Public Law 119–21, including how the
resources provided in this Act will be executed in support of those oversight activities. The agreement further directs the Inspector General to provide to the Committees not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of this Act all unfunded requirements to conduct oversight of the funding
provided in Public Law 119–21.
TITLE I—ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Section 101. The agreement continues a
provision requiring the Inspector General to
review grants and contracts awarded by
means other than full and open competition
and report the results to the Committees.
Section 102. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision requiring the CFO to
submit monthly budget execution and staffing reports within 30 days after the close of
each month.
Section 103. The agreement continues a
provision requiring the Secretary, in conjunction with the Secretary of the Treasury,
to notify the Committees of any proposed
transfers from the Department of Treasury
Forfeiture Fund to any agency at DHS. No
funds may be obligated prior to such notification.
Section 104. The agreement continues a
provision related to official travel costs of
the Secretary and Deputy Secretary.
Section 105. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision requiring the Under
Secretary for Management to provide quarterly briefings on acquisition information to
the Committees.
Section 106. The agreement continues a
provision restricting the use of funding for
certain pilot programs unless the Secretary
submits specified information to the Committees related to the program’s goals,
metrics, and implementation plan.
Section 107. The agreement includes a new
provision related to the collection of intelligence.
Section 108. The agreement includes a new
provision related to Inspector General oversight.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.096

H22JAPT2

H1666

Section 109. The agreement includes a new
provision related to the procurement, deployment, and operations of body-worn cameras.
TITLE II—SECURITY, ENFORCEMENT,
AND INVESTIGATIONS
U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The agreement includes $17,727,974,000 and
within the total amount provided, the bill
makes $550,000,000 available until September
30, 2027, to provide limited flexibility for certain activities.
Compliance With National Standards on
Transport, Escort, Detention, and Search
(TEDS).—The agreement reaffirms and directs CBP to comply with the agency’s National Standards on TEDS policy when encountering an alien, including in the field
and prior to their processing at a holding
station or facility. The agreement further reaffirms and directs that aliens encountered
at the southwest border should be expeditiously processed and not forced to wait outside for extended periods of time. CBP shall
provide notice to CRCL within 24 hours if the
agency holds aliens outside for more than 12
hours. CBP shall provide adequate shelter,
water, food, sanitation, medical care, and
other necessities and prioritize expeditious
processing; the agency should take special
care to comply with this requirement when
aliens face severe weather or experience
medical emergencies in the field.
Developing and Using Predictive Analytics.—
The agreement directs CBP to provide, within 45 days of the date of enactment of this
Act, a list of all analytic and modeling capabilities at the agency, a description of the
data provided by those capabilities, how CBP
currently uses that data, and any plans to
expand that use. Further, CBP shall provide
a briefing within the same timeframe to the
Committees with a plan to incorporate the
data output from analytic and modeling investments into reporting requirements in fiscal year 2026 and budget justifications for fiscal year 2027.
Digital Forensics.—The agreement provides
$5,000,000 for enhanced digital forensics capabilities including on-site data extraction,
data recovery, decryption, and analysis. Not
later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, CBP is directed to brief the
Committees on the status of this effort.
Electronic Device Searches.—The agreement
continues to require CBP to publish annually
and make publicly available on its website
data pertaining to searches of electronic devices the number of instances, delineated by
the nationality (to include U.S. persons) and
initial country of departure, in which CBP
personnel:
(1) accessed the digital contents of any
electronic equipment belonging to or in the
possession of an individual;
(2) accessed the digital contents of an online account, including social media handles
and cloud-based accounts;
(3) requested consent to access the digital
contents of any electronic equipment belonging to or in the possession of a U.S. person,
delineated by whether permission was granted;
(4) requested a U.S. person to consensually
disclose a credential that would enable access to the digital contents of electronic
equipment of such person, delineated by
whether the credential was disclosed;
(5) detained an individual for refusing to
disclose or provide consent to access the digital contents of any electronic equipment belonging to them or in their possession, delineated by whether the individual was a U.S.
person and including the length of time the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

individual was detained, and aggregate data
regarding the race and ethnicity of individuals; and
(6) searched an electronic device at the request of a Federal, SLTT, or foreign governmental entity, including another component
of the Department, or disclosed to such entity information from any searched device.
Emergency Driving and Vehicular Pursuits.—
The agreement directs CBP to provide a report within 180 days of the date of enactment
of this Act, on the following:
(1) the number of vehicular pursuits over
the last three fiscal years, disaggregated by
component, reason for pursuit initiation,
reason for pursuit termination, pursuit disposition, location, duration, distance, maximum speed, use of force, involvement of
other agency/organization, injuries, and fatalities;
(2) a detailed description of all training
curriculum and materials relating to CBP
Directive No. 4510–026B, any updates or modifications thereto, and statistics on the training of personnel to date;
(3) a detailed description of the Vehicular
Pursuits Review Committee(s) including
membership, frequency of meetings, number
of incident reports reviewed to date
disaggregated by fiscal year, and outcomes
of the reviews;
(4) a detailed description of review and
compliance assessments by the National Use
of Force Review Board and Local Use of
Force Review Boards regarding vehicular
pursuit incident reports, including the number of incident reports reviewed in the previous fiscal year and outcomes of the reviews; and
(5) all final reports of investigations by the
CBP Office of Professional Responsibility relating to emergency driving or vehicular
pursuits. Each of these records shall be made
available to the public with appropriate
redactions not later than 90 days after the
date of submission to the Committees.
Independent
Verification
&
Validation
(IV&V).—Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of this Act, the Commissioner shall submit a plan to utilize IV&V resources for each level 1, 2 and 3 major acquisition program. Not later than 30 days after
each quarter, the Commissioner shall provide a briefing to the Committees that includes the following:
(1) a listing of each level 1, level 2, and
level 3 major acquisition program;
(2) acquisition programs that have IV&V
resources assigned; and
(3) a summary of the findings of any IV&V
activities or an explanation for why no such
verification and validation has been performed.
Integrating Budget Requests.—The agreement continues its direction to CBP to include with any requests for new funds a description of other programs the investment
is expected to impact and a description of
the anticipated impact. This should apply to
both internal CBP impacts and impacts
across other DHS components. The agreement directs CBP to provide a plan and a
briefing within 60 days of the date of enactment of this Act on how the agency will
comply with this requirement.
International Training and Assistance Programs.—CBP is directed to provide a briefing
to the Committees not later than 180 days
after the date of enactment of this Act, on
technical training and assistance to build
the border security and customs capacity of
foreign law enforcement agencies, including
which countries and law enforcement agencies CBP provided such training to and the
type of training provided.
Northern Border Strategy and Resources.—
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and quarterly there-

PO 00000

Frm 00314

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

after, Border Patrol and the Office of Field
Operations (OFO) are directed to brief the
Committees on efforts to address northern
border staffing issues, alien encounters, drug
seizures, and northern border operations. At
a minimum, the brief shall include information on staffing levels at each sector, a review of both Border Patrol and OFO’s table
of organization in light of changing levels of
activity along the northern border, and actual staffing levels compared to projected requirements. For Border Patrol, the brief
shall include border security technology requirements and investments made and
planned to include increased reliance on autonomous systems. Additionally, the brief
shall address challenges for telecommunications and signal transmission posed by
mountainous areas. Further, the agreement
directs CBP to assess the technological needs
across the northern border and provide a report within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act on its plan to address these
needs. For OFO, the brief shall include data
on any changes in hours of ports of entry, to
include an explanation for why those hours
were changed and how OFO assesses future
changes. Finally, the agreement continues
the requirement for CBP to notify the Committees should CBP determine that it is necessary to divert more than 10 percent of
staffing in any sector or field office along
the northern border to other assignments
along the southwest border or other ports of
entry. The notification shall occur within 15
days of deployment and include the number
and location of the personnel diverted, any
operational impacts on the sector, the duration of the diversion, and when the personnel
shall return to their posts.
Polygraph Flexibility and Law Enforcement
Suitability Analysis.—Not later than 180 days
after the date of enactment of this Act, CBP
shall brief the Committees on the number of
CBP Law Enforcement applicants eligible for
a polygraph waiver, the number of waivers
granted, and the impact on hiring. The
agreement also directs CBP to submit a report on the effectiveness of Law Enforcement Pre-Employment Test polygraph examinations within 90 days of the date of enactment of this Act. The report shall again
include data comparing CBP’s failure rates
to those of other Federal law enforcement
agencies; a list of admissions elicited during
polygraph tests since CBP implemented a
mandatory polygraph test requirement; details regarding the total and annualized
number of such admissions and types of admissions; and an assessment of this test
compared to the Law Enforcement Pre-Employment Test certified by the National Center for Credibility Assessment. This assessment shall include a detailed analysis of the
effectiveness of both tests.
Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA).—The
agreement directs CBP to post on its website
within 60 days of the date of enactment of
this Act a schedule for achieving 100 percent
compliance with PREA requirements. In addition, the agreement urges CBP to examine
options to provide PREA training to relevant agency staff and personnel during
their onboarding process and to maintain annual training.
Recruitment, Hiring, and Retention.—Within
90 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CBP shall brief the Committees on its efforts
to improve hiring and retention at all of its
law enforcement components, including existing and planned strategies and initiatives
to accomplish this goal. CBP shall prioritize
and continue efforts to use available incentives to recruit and retain employees in
rural and remote areas and explore other
strategies, such as innovative pilot programs
that include successful strategies from the
private sector, career path enhancements, alternative schedules, and workforce support

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.097

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

programs for employees who are willing to
choose such locations. CBP shall ensure that
staff are trained on recognizing signs of trauma exposure, understanding common behaviors of people exposed to trauma, and trauma-informed practices. The agreement directs CBP to review existing Federal assessment programs, such as USA Hire, for use
within the agency. Additionally, the agreement directs the Commissioner to submit a
report within 120 days of the date of enactment of this Act detailing the impact that
mental health hours, alternative work schedules, on-duty physical fitness, and other related incentives have on personnel morale,
recruitment, and retention. The report
should also include such policies’ impact on
CBP’s ability to achieve its national and economic security mission at 24-hour ports of
entry.
Reporting Requirements for Deaths in Custody.—CBP shall continue to provide the
data required in House Report 116–180 regarding deaths of individuals in custody.
Tracking the Use of Warrants in Arrests.—
The agreement directs CBP to report within
45 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
and quarterly thereafter, on the number of
warrantless arrests it conducts and in how
many of those arrests CBP had established
probable cause that the arrested individual
was in fact undocumented and determined
they pose a flight risk.
Transportation Checks and Roving Enforcement.—The agreement directs CBP to continue to collect and semiannually report to
the Committees data pertaining to Border
Patrol transportation and immigration
checkpoints. The report shall exclude law enforcement sensitive information and include
necessary redactions of all personal and
identifying information about specific individuals. The report shall include, at a minimum, the total number of patrol stops made
by CBP personnel during transportation
checks and a description of the boarding of
public conveyances by CBP personnel at air,
maritime, and land environments, including
ports and terminals. Additionally, the report
shall include the following information when
an arrest is made: the total number of arrests by location; the total number of use-offorce incidents during an arrest by location;
the citizenship status of any individual arrested; and the total amount of drugs, currency, and firearms seized as a result of
transportation checks. The report shall also
include the following information pertaining
to immigration checkpoints: the location of
all tactical and permanent checkpoints that
were in operation for any period of time; the
total number of arrests by location; the total
number of use-of-force incidents during an
arrest by location; the citizenship status of
subjects stopped or arrested following secondary inspection at checkpoints; and the
total amount of drugs, currency, and firearms seized at checkpoints.
Border Security Operations
Border Barrier Updates.—Not later than 60
days after the date of enactment of this Act,
and quarterly thereafter, the Commissioner
is directed to brief the Committees on the
status and plans for border barrier construction to include wall system attributes, other
tactical infrastructure including, but not
limited to, roads, lighting, and technology
associated with barrier construction. The report shall include:
(1) total funds obligated since January 2021
by project and Border Patrol sector;
(2) total funds planned for obligation by
project, including number of miles and type
of barrier, and Border Patrol sector;
(3) a description of the type of project, to
include, at a minimum, the amounts obligated and outcomes for each of the following:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1667

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(a) construction of new barriers, replacement of existing barriers, or closure of gaps;
(b) installation of gates;
(c) linear ground detection capabilities;
and
(d) activities necessary to address life,
safety, environmental, or other remediation
requirements; and
(4) data that describes the operational impact resulting from the border barrier and
related investments and how it impacts
other programs at CBP, e.g., border surveillance technology, air and marine capabilities, and personnel.
Border Patrol Hiring.—The agreement sustains 22,000 Border Patrol Agents. Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, CBP shall brief the Committees on
its plans to address hiring and retention
challenges, including academy attrition. Additionally, the brief should also address a
timeframe for bringing onboard the additional agents, how additional agents hired
will impact the total number of agents on
the northern border, and how CBP is changing policies to ensure appropriate oversight
of Border Patrol activities.
Border Patrol Supervisor Staffing.—The
agreement directs CBP to report quarterly
on:
(1) the number of supervisory agents assigned at headquarters, each sector, and each
station;
(2) the number of agents assigned to administrative and non-enforcement positions;
(3) the number of agents assigned to intelligence positions; and
(4) the number of agents assigned to task
forces.
Counter-UAS (cUAS) Operations.—CBP, in
coordination with I&A, shall provide a briefing to the Committees not later than 120
days after the date of enactment of this Act
outlining the current threats posed by the
use of drones by transnational criminal organizations along the border, the resources
necessary to deter this threat, and any authorities or resources that would allow for
CBP to better interdict and deter narcodrones, including consolidation of the existing concepts of operations (CONOPS) in
southwest border sectors into a single
CONOPS overlaying the entire southwest
land border.
Multiple-Use Public Lands on the Southwest
Border.—Within 120 days of the date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall provide a briefing to the Committees, in coordination with
DoD, on the multiple-use public lands along
the southern border that have been transferred to DoD. The briefing shall include:
(1) the level of collaboration between CBP
employees with law enforcement and immigration enforcement authorities and DoD;
(2) the division of responsibilities for patrolling the National Defense Area between
CBP and DoD personnel; and
(3) summaries of any encounters between
CBP employees in the National Defense Area
and U.S. citizens or any other individuals
lawfully present in the United States.
Non-Mission Duties.—Not later than 30 days
after the date of enactment of this Act, CBP
shall submit to the Committees a detailed
report which shall include:
(1) the total number of CBP agents or officers carrying out non-mission duties;
(2) identification of the funding source associated with non-mission duties;
(3) the rationale for CBP personnel to perform non-mission duties and the duration
they are expected to perform those duties;
(4) a detailed description of all training required for CBP agents and officers to carry
out the non-mission duties; and
(5) identification of any impacts to CBP’s
mission due to agents and officers carrying
out non-mission duties. The report does not

PO 00000

Frm 00315

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

need to include CBP personnel on temporary
duty (TDY) assignment within CBP but shall
include TDY assignments to other DHS components and executive branch departments.
Reporting on Prosecutions for Improper Entry
and Reentry.—Within 60 days of the date of
enactment of this Act, CBP in coordination
with ICE and USCIS, shall make publicly
available the following records and data on
improper entry and reentry prosecutions redacted only to the extent required by FOIA:
(1) policy guidance currently in use regarding referrals for prosecutions;
(2) numbers of individuals referred for
prosecution, broken down by sector; and
(3) numbers of individuals referred for
prosecutions who are charged and sentenced.
Data shall also include whether the individual has claimed asylum, country of origin, race, and justification for referring each
individual for prosecution for improper entry
and or reentry offenses. In addition, the Department shall provide the Committees with
CBP’s latest Consequence Delivery System
guidance, in both unredacted and redacted
(consistent with FOIA) versions, and promptly update with any changes made.
Short Term Detention.—CBP shall continue
to follow the directives in the explanatory
statement accompanying Public Law 116–260
related to Holding Facility Length of Stay
and Short-Term Detention, as well as the directives in House Report 116–458 on Initial
Health Screenings, High-Priority Populations, Medical Equipment and Personnel,
Access to Water and Food, Holding Facility
Standards, Consumables, Child Welfare Professionals, Families in Custody, Personnel
Training, Migrant Property, and MigrantsSafety. Additionally, within 90 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, the Commissioner shall provide a report to the Committees on infrastructure changes, training protocols, and other investments to ensure the
safe, humane, and orderly processing of single adults, families, and unaccompanied children in CBP custody, in compliance with the
TEDS as well as the Flores Settlement.
Workload Staffing Model for Between the
Ports.—Within 30 days of the date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall provide a briefing to the Committees on the status of their
work that demonstrates the impact, with
data, that existing and potential resources
are expected to have on personnel needs.
Further, the agreement directs CBP to
prioritize completion of the staffing model
within fiscal year 2026. CBP shall brief the
Committees within 60 days of the date of enactment of this Act on plans to meet this
deadline to develop and use such a model.
Within 90 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, CBP shall provide a report to the
Committees detailing the model and the
process that CBP used to create and validate
the model. The report shall include descriptions of:
(1) steps and associated timelines taken to
create the model and resources used to develop it;
(2) data sources and methodology used to
generate the model;
(3) actions taken to independently verify
the model, including on the following dimensions: data source analysis and findings;
variables and assumptions; processes, information, distribution, and reporting; advanced analytics; and probability and risk
analysis;
(4) an inventory of Border Patrol technology assets and how those assets and their
capabilities inform workload staffing requirements; and
(5) a plan for periodically updating and improving upon the model, including a plan for
incorporating planned technology investments and associated, including changes in
programs and processes, air and marine assets, and deployment of additional surveillance technologies.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.098

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1668

Trade and Travel Operations
Access to Counsel at Ports of Entry.—Within
90 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
the agreement directs CBP to provide a
briefing on the requirements to ensure that
individuals with lawful travel documents are
given a meaningful opportunity to consult
with counsel and/or an interested party within one hour after entering CBP’s secondary
or deferred inspection. In identifying the requirements, CBP should assume that the
counsel and interested party shall be allowed
to advocate on behalf of the individual and,
to the greatest extent practicable, be allowed to appear in person at the secondary
or deferred inspection site. Individuals for
the purpose of this section shall include a
national of the U.S.; an immigrant lawfully
admitted for permanent residence who is returning from a temporary visit abroad; an
individual seeking admission as an immigrant in possession of a valid unexpired immigrant visa; an individual seeking admission as a nonimmigrant in possession of a
valid unexpired nonimmigrant visa; a refugee; a returning asylee; or an individual
who has been approved for parole.
Advanced Electronic Data (AED).—Within
180 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CBP shall provide a report to the Committees on the implementation of the AED initiative. This report must include:
(1) total volume received by United States
Postal Service (USPS) and volume containing AED;
(2) the volume received by country containing AED;
(3) number of packages CBP requests to
screen and the number actually tendered by
USPS;
(4) reports on the number of goods seized
during blitzes on Mail Facilities; and
(5) volume received from countries exempted from AED by CBP.
Agricultural Inspections.—CBP shall continue working with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) to better leverage existing staff in addressing the agricultural inspection workload, such as through the authorization of additional work hours or dual
certification.
Assessing Options for Fishing Vessels Crew.—
To mitigate the impacts from restricting
crewmen entry associated with the federally
managed longline fishing fleet based out of
Hawaii, as well as countering illegal, underreported, and unregulated fishing by foreign
fleets including China, the agreement directs
CBP to assess options for a limited or temporary use of authority to allow for the
entry of designated crewman via air travel
and transfer to their place of employment
onboard longline fishing vessels and provide
a list of options to the Committees within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act.
Border
Security
Deployment
Program
(BSDP).—The agreement includes not less
than $33,600,000 to maintain and modernize
the BSDP system infrastructure. The agreement directs CBP to provide a briefing within 90 days of the date of enactment of this
Act on efforts to modernize and expand this
system at land ports of entry (LPOEs).
Cannabis Seizures.—Within 120 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall provide to the Committees a briefing on cannabis seizures to include products containing
cannabis or related paraphernalia that are
possessed, sold, or transferred by a cannabis
distributor in compliance with applicable
state or tribal law and regulations.
CBP Home Mobile Application.—Within 120
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
the agreement directs CBP to provide the
following information on the use of the CBP
Home mobile application:
(1) current uses of the application to include purpose, users, and data collected and/
or shared through the application;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(2) a list of the agencies and programs that
have access to the data (including sharing of
data) and the reason the data is shared with
that agency; and
(3) plans for any changes to the use of the
application. Any such changes shall be reported to the Committees prior to execution
of such change.
Combatting Forced Labor.—The agreement
directs CBP to allocate not less than fiscal
year 2025 levels to forced labor enforcement
capabilities and to continue to support implementation of the Uyghur Forced Labor
Prevention Act (UFLPA) (Public Law 117–78)
and support additional personnel, technological capability, training, and other activities to faithfully implement the law and protect U.S. consumers from products tainted
by forced labor and reduce unintended impacts on supply chains. Within 60 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall provide a briefing to the Committees on implementation of the UFLPA, including an update on addressing the challenge of transshipment of Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous
Region-related goods, the tools and technology CBP deploys to enhance enforcement
of the law, steps to coordinate international
engagement to prevent bifurcated supply
chains or dumping grounds for the products
of forced labor, the obstacles to enforcing
UFLPA in cases of rail, road, and air transportation, and CBP engagement with shippers to ensure timely but full review of shipments flagged for review.
Data on Asylum Seekers.—The agreement directs OFO to continue to produce a monthly
report detailing for each preceding month:
the POEs along the southwest border at
which queue management or metering practices have been employed; the number of asylum seekers processed at each such POE; and
the number of asylum seekers turned away.
The report shall include whether CBP is engaging in queue management and if so, are
capacity and resource constraints leading to
or requiring the implementation of queue
management recommendations for alleviating such capacity and resource constraints at POEs; and any agreements or arrangements between CBP, or the Federal
Government, and Government of Mexico authorities involving efforts to restrict the
number of potential asylum seekers that can
access a POE prior to entering the United
States. Further, the agreement directs CBP
to include within its monthly southwest migration reports data detailing the number of
individuals claiming fear or attempting to
claim a fear of return to their home country,
in addition to, and separate from, its monthly apprehension and inadmissible statistics.
The data should include individuals presenting at both POEs and between POEs
claiming credible fear as a separate, distinct
category from either the monthly ‘‘apprehensions’’ or ‘‘inadmissibles’’ statistics.
E–Cigarettes.—The agreement directs CBP
to allocate not less than $5,000,000 to improve
coordination between OFO and the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) with respect to
the multi-agency work on illegal e-cigarettes. Specifically, the agreement directs
CBP to:
(1) improve its coordination with the FDA,
as part of the multi-agency task force on illegal e-cigarettes;
(2) increase the number of random joint inspections at POEs and targeted inspections
of entries by known manufacturers, brokers,
and importers of illicit e-cigarettes;
(3) increase the number of field examinations at POEs with high import volumes to
target manufacturers, importers, and brokers known to engage in illicit activity; and
(4) improve screening systems, including
risk-based analytics tools, including through
additional training for field staff, to detect
mis-declared e-cigarette imports.

PO 00000

Frm 00316

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Environmental Crimes Enforcement.—Within
120 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CBP shall provide a briefing to the Committees on the activities and resources applied
towards the enforcement of the Lacey Act
amendments of 2008, which help address
international deforestation and combat the
trade of illegal wildlife and timber products.
The briefing shall include efforts by CBP to
assist USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service with the electronic collection of data as well as continued consultations with trading partners, importers, exporters, and other interested groups as the
provisions of the Act are fully implemented.
Additionally, CBP shall provide the Committees a briefing within 90 days of the date of
enactment of this Act on actions and funding
to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing-related activities relating to
the illegal timber trade.
Foreign Trade Zones (FTZ).—The agreement
provides $1,000,000 for FTZ-dedicated regional
staffing. Within 120 days of the date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall provide a briefing on the current state of FTZs, the number
and type of CBP personnel supporting FTZ
work, and their subsequent time allocations
spent on FTZ operations, including activation and ongoing compliance checks, the performance measures used to evaluate the impact of FTZs, the level of support provided
by CBP, and plans for expanding FTZs. Additionally, CBP shall include with the briefing
a plan for incorporating requirements relating to FTZs in the OFO Workforce Staffing
Model.
Identifying Fentanyl Analogues and Related
Substances at the Southwest Border.—CBP
shall identify the specific types of fentanyl
analogues and fentanyl-related substances,
as defined by Public Law 116–114, it encounters at POEs. The Commissioner shall include the totals of fentanyl analogues and
fentanyl-related substances, in addition to
the other controlled substances for which it
reports data in its drug seizure statistics,
and make such information publicly available not less than monthly. The agreement
directs CBP to continue to pursue and rapidly deploy innovative and proven border
technology to detect, interdict, and deter the
flow of illicit drugs, including fentanyl,
carfentanil, and heroin. Within 120 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall
provide a briefing to the Committees on how
the agency tracks fentanyl data with the
Drug Enforcement Administration and
whether current capabilities allow for a comprehensive fentanyl tracking system, which
includes documentation of seizure location,
chemical composition, probable or known
manufacturing location, and probable or
known point of entry into the United States,
if applicable.
Imported Wood Products.—The agreement
directs CBP to provide a report to the Committees not later than 180 days after the date
of enactment of this Act detailing CBP’s current role in the wood importation declaration process, how it interacts with other
agencies, and concrete steps the agencies can
take to expedite shipments that are delayed.
International Mail and Express Consignment
Facilities.—Previously provided funds and
funds provided in this Act shall be made
available to reduce the entry of scheduled
narcotics and other illicit and restricted
drugs (and their precursor materials) for facility improvements, detection and testing
equipment upgrades, increased capacity for
testing and storing illegal and regulated substances, interoperability improvements with
FDA detection equipment, and innovative
technologies that apply advanced analytics
and machine learning capabilities.
International Tourism.—Within 90 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.099

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

provide a briefing to the Committees on
travel data to the United States that covers
fiscal years 2023 to 2025 and includes total
number of visitors, mode of entry (air, land,
sea POE) and total amount of immigration
and customs fees collected. The Committees
direct GAO, within 120 days of the date of enactment of this Act, to issue a report studying changes in travel to the United States
and impacts on national, regional, and local
economies and the tourism industry.
Locality Payscale Flexibility.—The explanatory statement accompanying Public Law
117–328 directed CBP to provide a report, in
coordination with the Office of Personnel
Management, on:
(1) an analysis of local pay scales and how
those pay brackets impact recruitment and
retention;
(2) an overview of agency authorities for
adjusting pay; and
(3) recommendations to better align local
pay with the costs of living to improve recruitment and retention. The agreement directs CBP to complete the aforementioned
report not later than 30 days after the date
of enactment of this Act.
Port Baseline Service Level.—Not later than
30 days after the date of enactment of this
Act, the agreement directs CBP to provide
each air, land, and sea port operator, including cruise terminals, with information on
baseline service levels and take those service
levels into consideration when acting on requests for facility and security improvements. CBP shall provide all future reports
on a semi-annual basis. CBP shall brief the
Committees not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of this Act on staffing
shortages, requirements for facility and security upgrades, plans for technology recapitalization, and how CBP will negotiate with
port operators and incorporate their feedback into the development of plans to address future facility and security needs. CBP
shall work in partnership with seaports and
refrain from imposing requirements on seaports in a unilateral fashion. Within the
funds provided for Operations and Support,
CBP shall ensure adequate staffing at new
and expanded maritime POEs in order to
meet peak passenger wait time goals.
Port Hours of Operation.—Within 90 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall
brief the Committees on all POEs operating
under reduced hours due to COVID–19 restrictions, impacts on border security efforts, cross-border economic activity, and
public safety, as a result of the reduced
hours, actions taken to return to pre-COVID–
19 levels of operation, and an assessment the
feasibility of returning to pre-COVID–19 levels of operation. The briefing shall also include operating hours at all northern border
LPOEs, and describe how CBP plans to improve the recruitment and retention of CBP
personnel at remote northern border LPOEs
to sustain those operating hours and to consider restoring them to pre-COVID hours.
Additionally, to assist with the challenges
relating to operating hours, the Committees
direct CBP to establish a pilot program for
the co-location of CBP and Canada Border
Services Agency border agents at remote
LPOEs to maintain border security and reduce costs. Finally, the agreement directs
CBP to consult with elected officials at all
levels, community members, and industry
prior to making changes to hours of operation. CBP shall refrain from reducing the
hours of operation at any LPOE unless CBP
can demonstrate, after consultations with
local elected officials, that the reduction in
hours will not impede local or regional commerce or unduly impede local resident traffic.
Port Runners.—The recommendation provides $3,000,000 to continue demonstrations

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1669

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

of less-than-lethal, energy-absorbing active
vehicle barrier systems designed to deter,
safely stop, and contain ‘‘port runner’’ vehicles at CBP POEs that have a history of port
running to determine the scalability of the
technology. Within 90 days of the date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall brief the
Committees on plans to expand this effort.
Preclearance.—The agreement directs CBP
to report to the Committees within 120 days
of the date of enactment of this Act on the
ongoing efforts to establish a customs and
immigration pre-clearance facility at Montreal’s Central Station to facilitate passenger
rail
service
along
Amtrak’s
Vermonter route, including by directly engaging State Departments of Transportation
and providing biannual progress reports to
relevant stakeholders and interested parties.
The agreement expects CBP to re-engage in
negotiations with international airports on
expansions to the existing preclearance program by prioritizing airports that were previously identified for possible preclearance
locations in 2015 and 2016 and that have the
highest number of travelers arriving in the
U.S. each year as an opportunity for increased traveler volume, increased revenue,
and new flight routes are dependent on the
success of the program.
Prevent Abduction Program.—The International Child Prevention and Abduction
Prevention and Return Act (P. L. 113–150) required CBP, in coordination with other Federal agencies, to establish a program to ensure children were not un-lawfully removed
from the United States in violation of a valid
state court order. Within 180 days of the date
of enactment of this Act, CBP is directed to
report to the Committees on the status of
the Prevent Abduction Program, created in
support of Federal law that prohibits any
one parent from removing a child from the
United States with intent to obstruct another parent’s custodial rights. The report
shall include:
(1) the total hours of training CBP officers
receive on the issue of international parental
child abduction;
(2) the accumulative number of children
enrolled in the program and the number of
children enrolled in the preceding fiscal
year;
(3) the number of children enrolled in the
program who, despite their enrollment in the
program, were removed at an air POE, if
any; and
(4) identification of resources CBP might
need to ensure children are not removed
from the United States in violation of a valid
state court order.
Resource Allocation and OFO Workload Staffing Models.—Any modifications to the Resource Allocation Model (RAM) shall be described at the field and office level in future
budget submissions. Additionally, not later
than 60 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, CBP shall brief the Committees on
resource and staffing shortfalls on the northern and southern borders compared to levels
prescribed by the RAM for rail crossings and
air, land, and sea POEs, including cruise ship
terminals. Within 90 days of the date of enactment of this Act, the agreement directs
CBP to report on an OFO workload staffing
model to mitigate the impacts, including
loss of economic output and jobs, and vehicular wait times at the busiest LPOEs. The
agreement directs CBP to coordinate with
the Department of Transportation to improve forecasting for staffing at U.S. ports
and to consider both cargo and passenger
screening requirements at maritime POE.
CBP shall provide a briefing to the Committees within 120 days of the date of enactment
of this Act on the projected ‘‘retirement
cliff,’’ steps the agency is taking to manage
the risks associated with this loss in the

PO 00000

Frm 00317

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

workforce, and consequences to the agency’s
operational capabilities, including data on
impacts to trade, travel, and economic and
security impacts.
Sugar Inspection.—The agreement directs
CBP to coordinate with USDA’s Agricultural
Marketing Service as it implements directives contained in Senate Report 118–193.
Within 60 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, and quarterly thereafter, CBP shall
brief the Committees on this effort, including any enforcement actions taken as a result of the aforementioned directives.
Tariff Evasion.—The agreement provides
$5,000,000 to conduct operational demonstrations to further leverage private sector driven solutions that may aid with improving
supply chain tracing, the classification of
goods, trade revenue collection, and segmentation of shipments with high-risk for
fraudulent customs declarations, tariff evasion, tariff fraud, or other violations of U.S.
trade and customs laws. This may include
supply chain traceability solutions that increase visibility into production supply
chains explored under the Global Business
Identifier (GBI) Test as well as other solutions that streamline operations, promote
cargo security and compliance, and secure
revenue owed. Not later than 180 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall
brief the Committees on the results of this
operational demonstration to expand the use
of data analytics in tandem with GBI and
other tests or pilots that CBP is conducting
to counter trade-related violations.
Integrated Operations
Air and Marine Operations Flight Hours.—
Not later than 90 days after the date of the
enactment of this Act, CBP Air and Marine
Operations (AMO) shall provide the Committees updated flight hour targets, by fiscal
year, that account for the increased fixed
and rotary-wing assets investments made by
Public Law 119–21.
Center for Air and Marine Drone Exploitation.—The agreement provides $5,000,000 to
sustain and expand a drone exploitation program within CBP AMO to counter threats
posed by hostile Small Unmanned Aerial
Systems (sUAS). The funds shall be used for
data analysis, cybersecurity vulnerability
assessments,
and
appropriate
countermeasures. Within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act, CBP, in coordination
with the Science and Technology Directorate, shall brief the Committees on the
program’s progress.
DHC–8 Multi-Mission, Fixed-Wing Aircraft.—
The agreement provides $42,000,000 to accelerate the upgrade of DHC–8 aircraft to replace obsolete equipment with new digital
avionics, mission radios, an integrated communication system, and an enhanced software package.
Long-Endurance Unmanned Aircraft Systems
(UAS).—The agreement provides $5,000,000 for
technical and operational demonstrations of
additional unmanned aircraft with capabilities equivalent to Group 4 and 5, including
multi-mode radar surveillance payloads and
the necessary support equipment for integration into the national airspace system for
CBP operations to enhance interdiction efforts, reduce operational costs, and increase
continuous aerial surveillance of high-risk
areas. CBP AMO is directed to provide a
briefing not later than 180 days after the
date of enactment of this Act on the deployment plan, cost-benefit analysis, and performance metrics associated with the operational demonstration.
Northern Border Mission Center.—The agreement provides $6,000,000 for the Northern
Border Mission Center to improve northern
border air and maritime domain awareness
and coordinate with key partners across
DHS and other Federal agencies.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.100

H22JAPT2

H1670

Persistent
Maritime
Domain
Awareness
(MDA).—The agreement directs AMO to continue to work with the CBP Innovation
Team (INVNT) and with industry partners to
conduct a persistent, long-duration MDA
demonstration in an area where illicit maritime activity is known to be concentrated.
Enterprise Services
Artificial Intelligence (AI).—Not later than
120 days after the date of enactment of this
Act, CBP is directed to brief the Committees
on the potential use of commercially available purpose-built cybersecurity for AI. The
brief shall address the use of generative AI
or large language models and what, if any,
new challenges to cybersecurity these new
capabilities introduce into CBP operations.
Within 180 days of enactment of this Act and
semi-annually thereafter, the CIO and Chief
Artificial Intelligence Officer of CBP shall
brief on the current AI inventory and its resource requirements, costs associated with
operating and maintaining AI technology,
and the operational impacts those technologies have helped realize across all of
CBP. Not later than 270 days after the date
of enactment of this Act, CBP shall brief the
Committees on the potential to use AI while
processing data at the edge to enhance border security operations, including enhancements for small object detection and motion
detection to improve situational awareness.
Encryption.—The
agreement
provides
$3,500,000 to expand the use of Post-Quantum
Cryptography (PQC) for operational use, to
include
testing
one-time
pad-based
encryption system utilizing true random entropy generation and changing symmetric
keys to defend against quantum computerdriven hacking and intrusion threats.
Workforce Care.—The agreement provides a
total of $84,293,000 for the sustainment of existing program operations and personnel, onsite clinicians, family support programs,
CBP support networks, the expansion of employee holistic health support centers, and
the deployment of Field Resilience teams
consisting of Operational Psychologists and
Field Resilience Specialists. Not later than
60 days after the date of enactment of this
Act, CBP, in coordination with OHS, shall
brief the Committees on an obligation plan
for this funding. The report shall also provide an update on wellness and suicide prevention efforts, including existing and
planned strategies and initiatives, and the
accessibility of the Department’s telemental
health and employee assistance pilot.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement recommends $222,886,000 for
Procurement, Construction, and Improvements (PC&I), as included in the table below.

U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND IMPROVEMENTS
(in thousands of dollars)

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Final Bill
Border Security Assets and Infrastructure:
Innovative Technology ...........................................................
Border Enforcement Coordination Network-ES ......................
Small Unmanned Aircraft System (sUAS) .............................
Counter Unmanned Aircraft Systems (C–UAS) .....................
Trade and Travel Assets and Infrastructure:
Non-Intrusive Inspection Fentanyl Initiative—Outbound .....
Electronic Export Manifest Capability—Outbound ...............
Integrated Operations Assets and Infrastructure:
Aircraft Sensor Upgrades ......................................................
U.S. Border Patrol V–Hull ......................................................
All-Weather Interceptor ..........................................................
Construction and Facility Improvements:
Office of Field Operations Facilities .....................................
Mission Support Assets and Infrastructure:
Revenue Modernization ..........................................................
Financial Systems Enhancements .........................................
Employee Lifecycle Program ..................................................
Radiological Detection Systems:
International Rail ..................................................................
Radiation Portal Monitor Replacement Program ..................
Radiation Portal Monitor Programs .......................................

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

20,000
12,014
10,000
10,000
30,000
10,000
6,500
2,400
6,000
65,281
4,973
5,000
3,000
1,300
13,900
20,478

U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION—Continued
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND IMPROVEMENTS
(in thousands of dollars)
Final Bill
Basic Handheld Radioisotope Identification Devices ...........
Portable Detection Systems End Items/Equipment ..............

750
1,290

Advanced Training Center (ATC).—Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CBP shall brief the Committees on progress
made on construction of ATC’s Instructional
Design Center/Distance Learning Center
with the use of previously appropriated
funds.
Border Security Technology.—The agreement directs CBP to: (1) re-allocate funding
as appropriate to ensure technology is deployed at the locations where it will have
the greatest impact on CBP’s ability to identify and interdict illicit activity; (2) ensure
that the appropriate amount of technology is
piloted, tested, and deployed along the
northern border, in addition to the southern
border; and (3) notify the Committees quarterly on the operational availability of all
fixed, relocatable, and mobile surveillance
systems deployed by CBP throughout the
United States, including maintenance needs
of such systems and the agency’s maintenance plan for keeping the systems operational, including recapitalization or replacement of systems. Additionally, the
Commissioner is directed to prioritize procurement of the most cost-effective technologies based on lifecycle costs, system
availability, reduced requirements for personnel, and input from sector leadership.
Within 180 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, CBP shall brief the Committees on
its efforts to improve border security technology development and acquisition.
Construction and Facility Improvements.—
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall submit a report to the Committees that includes:
(1) the details of the design and construction process for new or renovated Border Patrol facilities, including stations, processing
centers, and checkpoints;
(2) detailed requirements for each facility
currently funded or proposed for funding, including buildings, parking facilities, sally
ports, vehicle maintenance facilities, fueling
stations, temporary detainee holding facilities, and kennels;
(3) for each currently funded facility:
(a) the total amount funded, obligated, and
expended, by fiscal year; and
(b) if funds were obligated to an outside
agency (e.g., General Services Administration (GSA) and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers), the obligation and expenditure status
of those funds;
(4) for each currently funded facility and
for proposed facilities, a construction schedule and associated expenditure plan broken
out by quarter (to include funds appropriated
through other agencies);
(5) for each requirement described in (2):
(a) the severability of each requirement
that is specific to the location;
(b) confirmation that each requirement is
an independently awardable option for all
contracts currently funded;
(c) the requirements for facilities that are
unfunded; and
(d) the requirements for facilities described
in (2) that are unfunded; and (6)the number
of personnel to be assigned at each location,
with confirmation the design is scoped to address current and anticipated future staffing
needs.
The report shall also include a detailed
plan to improve CBP’s cost estimating capability for these facilities.
Counter Unmanned Aerial Systems.—The
agreement provides $10,000,000 to detect and

PO 00000

Frm 00318

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

mitigate the persistent drone threat along
the northern and southern borders. Not later
than 120 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, CBP shall brief the Committees on
its efforts to counter UAS.
Expanding Outbound Operations at Ports of
Entry.—The agreement provides $30,000,000 to
expand the number of locations equipped for
outbound operations at LPOEs. Within 60
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CBP shall provide the Committees a spend
plan with timeframes for the execution of
these funds and projected performance impacts to operational capabilities as a result
of these funds. CBP shall update the Committees monthly on the use of these funds
and provide actual performance impacts
against projections, including measures to
assess disruption to cartel activities. Furthermore, not later than 180 days after the
date of enactment of this Act, CBP shall submit a report that analyzes the necessary requirements that would ensure 100 percent
outbound inspection for all LPOE passenger
vehicles.
Identifying Impact of Border Security Investments.—As part of CBP’s briefing for the fiscal year 2027 budget request, CBP shall provide the Committees sufficient data that is
informed by robust, cost-benefit analysis
that incorporates all types of border security
assets and is tied to identified capability
gaps.
Land Port of Entry Infrastructure Capital
Plan.—Not later than 30 days after the submission of the budget request for fiscal year
2027, the Commissioner shall submit a report
that details its prioritization of LPOE infrastructure capital investment projects, the
methods and models used to determine
prioritization, and an overview of public-private partnership agreements. The agreement
directs CBP to take appropriate steps to ensure submission of the report in a timely
manner. CBP shall work with the GSA and
the Office of Management and Budget on the
annual five-year LPOEs modernization plan,
which is based on CBP’s operational priorities. Specific attention should be paid to the
health, safety, and welfare needs of CBP Officers. Special consideration shall also be
made for facilities where reconfiguration or
upgrades will improve the flow of local traffic and allow local residents to move freely
in their communities. Additionally, within
90 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CBP shall provide a detailed report and
timeline outlining completion of the Blue
Water Bridge Plaza expansion project and
any steps taken in the last fiscal year toward project completion. The report shall
align with the annual LPOE priority list,
outline projected CBP costs, explain how
CBP will engage with state and local entities, and detail the specific milestones and
timeline for the project completion. Within
120 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CBP, working with GSA, shall provide the
Committees with a briefing on plans to execute the funds provided in the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58)
and whether there are any significant
changes involving the 26 LPOE projects supported in that Act. The agreement expects
CBP to work expeditiously with GSA to
prioritize modernization and expansion on
its five-year Capital Investment Plan while
adhering to the proposals in the completed
feasibility study. As part of this briefing,
CBP shall also provide the Committees an
update on steps to ‘‘rebuild’’ the annual fiveyear LPOE plan.
Maritime Patrol Aircraft (MPA) Support.—
Within 120 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, CBP shall brief the Committees on
existing capabilities to test complex hardware, software configurations, and intercomponent/international partner tactical

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.101

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

data communications systems essential to
the CBP MPA mission. The briefing shall
identify existing requirements for such capabilities and options, including accessing
other DHS component facilities, to meet requirements.
Non-Intrusive Inspection (NII) Technology.—
CBP is directed to brief the Committees not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act on the status and results of
their NII–Integration program. Not later
than 180 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, CBP shall provide a report on the
current status of mobile NII technology and
proposals for enhancing it.
Non-Intrusive Inspection at Ports of Entry.—
CBP shall continue to provide monthly updates to the Committees on the obligation of
all funds for NII equipment along with actual and projected performance gains as a result of deployments for NII funded in this or
prior appropriations, including funding provided through Public Law 119–21. Those updates shall include progress on incorporating
AI/Machine Learning capabilities to aid in
faster detection of anomalies. Within 90 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, CBP
shall provide a briefing to the Committees
on the status of NII coverage in pre-primary
lanes along the southwest border and report
on whether the increase in pre-primary
screening will create additional alarms at
POEs, impacting current secondary inspection capacity and possibly the workflow of
other Federal agencies that may not have
sufficient opportunity to plan for additional
resource needs.
Small Unmanned Aerial Systems.—The agreement provides $10,000,000 for the acquisition
of small unmanned aerial systems to support
border security operations.
Transitioning Innovative Technologies and
Equipment Into CBP Operations.—The agreement directs CBP to provide a briefing within 90 days of the date of enactment of this
Act and quarterly thereafter on: the current
rate of pilots that have transitioned to operations; the performance impact to operations
as a result of the transition; a plan to evaluate whether there are common indicators for
unsuccessful pilots; and recommendations to
incentivize CBP programs to participate and
ultimately execute promising capabilities.
Further, the agreement directs CBP to provide a briefing within 30 days of the date of
enactment of this Act on the outreach to
frontline personnel that informs decisions on
piloting innovative capabilities.
U.S. IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS
ENFORCEMENT

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $10,036,362,000 for
Operations and Support. Within the total
amount, the agreement makes $46,696,000
available until September 30, 2027.
Contract
Notifications.—The
agreement
modifies existing reporting requirements
under this heading in the explanatory statement accompanying Public Law 118–47. ICE
shall notify the Committees not less than
five days prior to substantively changing
any contract with a total value greater than
$5,000,000. This requirement shall apply to all
PPAs and includes, but is not limited to,
modifications, renegotiations, recompetes,
extensions, and terminations. The agreement
directs that any notification provided to the
Committees that does not comply with the
five day requirement must include a robust
justification that includes: the number of
days the contract was in any review or approval processes within the component or at
the Department level, delineated by reviewing office; the number of days the Office of
Acquisition Management awaited funds from
the program office; and the immediate needs
rationale justifying the urgency of the con-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1671

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

tract, including any national security or
operational implications. The notifications
should be transmitted to the Committees in
a downloadable, sortable format and consolidated into one daily delivery.
Previous
Requirements.—The
agreement
continues the requirements found within
Senate Report 118–85 under the following
headings:
(1) Annual ICE Report;
(2) Detention Standards and Inspections;
(3) Full Title 21 Authority for HSI;
(4) Hunger Strikes;
(5) Language Access;
(6) Parental Interests Directive;
(7) Pregnant, Postpartum, and Lactating
Women;
(8) Protecting Vulnerable Children;
(9) Reporting Requirements;
(10) Sensitive Locations and Protected
Areas, to include locations that have been
identified as sensitive in any of the prior
three fiscal years; and
(11) Sex Offender Release Notifications.
Homeland Security Investigations
Advanced Analytics.—The agreement includes an increase of $1,000,000 to expand the
advanced analytics work of the Homeland
Security Investigations’ (HSI) Counterproliferation Mission Center.
Center for Countering Human Trafficking
(CCHT).—The agreement provides an additional $2,500,000 for activities within the
CCHT.
Child Exploitation and Forced Labor.—The
agreement includes an increase of $8,000,000
to provide additional forensic and analytical
support for child exploitation and forced
labor investigations.
Counterfeit Semiconductors.—The agreement
includes $1,000,000 for the creation of a task
force to investigate counterfeit semiconductor materials in the marketplace and in
global supply chains. The task force shall include other Federal, SLTT, and industry
stakeholders to establish policies and procedures for combating counterfeit semiconductors. Within 270 days of the date of enactment of this Act, HSI shall brief the Committees on the creation of such task force
and any relevant challenges; additional resource requirements needed for further implementation; and best practices for validating approved counterfeit semiconductor
mitigation services.
Counter-Fentanyl Initiatives.—The agreement includes an additional $5,000,000 to increase staffing for Border Enforcement Security Task Force teams to enhance investigations related to fentanyl smuggling operations, other illicit opioids, and counterfeit
pharmaceutical ingredients, including synthetic semaglutide; $5,000,000 for the procurement of technologies, including those that
leverage artificial intelligence, to enhance
traditional methods of investigations; and
$3,000,000 to enhance HSI’s analytical ability
to identify and compile all nomenclature associated with fentanyl precursor chemicals,
interrupt online operations, map distribution networks, and obtain express consignment shipment data to interdict these
chemicals. Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of this Act, HSI shall provide to the Committees a briefing on an execution plan for the personnel and technologies funded under this heading, including
procurement
and
implementation
progress where applicable. The briefing shall
also include the Office of the Chief Information Officer and the Chief Artificial Intelligence Officer and address projected impacts
of these investments.
Cross-Border Financial Crime Center.—The
agreement includes an additional $4,000,000
for the Cross-Border Financial Crime Center.
HSI is directed to provide a briefing within

PO 00000

Frm 00319

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

90 days of the date of enactment of this Act
detailing the current scope of operations,
any major achievements, and any significant
resource gaps that are hindering investigations. The agreement allows for up to
$2,000,000 of this funding to be used for the
establishment of an Organized Retail and
Supply Chain Crime section within the
Cross-Border Financial Crime Center to ensure a coordinated, prosecutor-led, multiagency approach to identifying, disrupting,
and dismantling transnational criminal organizations (TCO) engaging in such activities. This section should collect and analyze
data from various stakeholders to identify
regions in the United States, modes of transportation, and specific distribution and retail networks that are experiencing high volumes of organized crime. The agreement directs HSI to brief the Committees within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act on
the status of the implementation of this section, any challenges in its establishment,
and an overview of the unmet resource needs
and future resource requirements.
International Forensic Science Research.—
Within 120 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, HSI shall provide to the Committees a briefing on collaboration with external academic partners aiming to grow existing efforts on international forensic science
research. The briefing shall include any efforts to build holistic approaches to combating TCOs.
International Operations.—Within 90 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, HSI is directed to provide to the Committees a strategic plan for HSI’s expansion of its international presence over the next five fiscal
years. The plan shall incorporate the details
required under this heading in the explanatory statement accompanying Public Law
117–328.
International Trade.—The agreement includes $5,000,000 for additional investigative
capacity related to international trade
crimes. HSI shall provide quarterly updates
to the Committees detailing the number of
referrals made to the Department of Justice
Trade Fraud Task Force as a result of this
additional capacity.
Missing and Murdered Indigenous People.—
The agreement provides an additional
$1,000,000 for human trafficking investigative
capacity for indigenous people, including for
the Shadow Wolves program. Within 90 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, HSI
shall provide a briefing to the Committees
on coordination efforts with the Bureau of
Indian Affairs’ Office of Justice Services to
enhance investigative capacity.
Name, Image, Likeness.—The Department
shall brief the Committees within 120 days of
the date of enactment of this Act on potential administrative, policy, regulatory, and
statutory changes to further international
athletes’ abilities to continue their schooling and sports careers in the United States,
including potential changes to 8 CFR 214.1(e).
National Academy for Advanced Training and
Leadership (NAATL).—ICE, in collaboration
with the General Services Administration, is
directed to provide a briefing on progress
made at the NAATL facility within 90 days
of the date of enactment of this Act and
quarterly thereafter. The first briefing shall
include a summary and timeline of efforts
made to complete work at this facility, as
well as lessons learned from any process
issues that have caused a delay.
National Intellectual Property Rights Coordination Center (IPR Center).—HSI is directed
to appropriately staff the IPR Center to facilitate continued enforcement actions
against theft of U.S. intellectual property,
particularly online. Additionally, the agreement includes $5,000,000 for increased criminal investigative capacity within the IPR

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.102

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1672

Center with respect to misdeclarations of illicit e-vapor products and illegal e-cigarette
importation.
National Special Security Events (NSSEs)
Support.—The agreement provides an additional $25,000,000 for travel and overtime expenses related to NSSEs occurring throughout the fiscal year.
Non-Intrusive and Outbound Inspections.—
The agreement provides an additional
$8,626,000 for 60 new HSI Criminal Investigators to be used exclusively for investigations
stemming from inbound or outbound CBP
seizures or interdictions. HSI is directed to
brief the Committees within 60 days of the
date of enactment of this Act on the planned
deployment of these Criminal Investigators,
by location, as well as the measures of effectiveness that HSI will use to assess the impact of this investment.
Office of Intelligence.—Within 60 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, the Office of
Intelligence shall provide to the Committees
an assessment of: TCO activity and current
trends, particularly related to fentanyl
smuggling; how intelligence informs ICE operations; and any capability gaps and associated resource requirements within the Office.
Repository for Analytics in a Virtualized Environment (RAVEn).—The agreement reiterates the direction found in the House Report
under this heading and reminds HSI of the
outstanding briefing requirements and requests related to RAVEn development and
deployment that are overdue by more than
one year.
Trade-Based Money Laundering (TBML)
Schemes.—HSI shall provide a briefing on endeavors to combat TBML schemes and resources that may be required to enhance
these efforts within 90 days of the date of enactment of this Act.
Enforcement and Removal Operations
287(g) Agreements.—In addition to the direction provided in the House Report under the
heading ‘‘287(g) Training’’, ICE shall provide
a report to the Committees within 60 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, and
monthly thereafter, with the following data
for the 287(g) program: all sources of funding;
funding obligations of the 287(g) program, delineated by pay and non-pay requirements
and funding source; number of law enforcement entities with 287(g) agreements that
were provided training in the prior month;
model for each 287(g) agreement and associated jurisdiction; number of arrests effectuated per 287(g) agreement; and personnel
dedicated to training activities for new or
existing 287(g) agreements.
Additionally, ICE shall continue publishing on its website applications for new or
renewed 287(g) agreements. ICE shall also
continue thoroughly vetting 287(g) applicants and ensure that detention conditions
within 287(g) agreement jurisdictions fully
comply with current standards, including
with Prison Rape Elimination Act (P.L. 108–
79). Within 60 days of the enactment of this
Act, ICE is directed to provide an evaluation
for every existing 287(g) agreement analyzing
the operational capacity realized through
such agreement, the costs associated with
executing the agreement, and the operational impacts if such agreement were not
in existence. ICE shall perform the same
evaluation for every new 287(g) agreement
and provide the analysis to the Committees
not later than 15 days after entering into
each new agreement.
Alternatives to Detention (ATD) Metrics.—In
addition to the direction found in the House
Report and the direction under the heading
‘‘ATD Metrics Reporting’’ found within Senate Report 118–85 regarding briefings and
data requirements for ATD, the agreement

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

directs ICE to provide a briefing to the Committees on consequence options for noncompliance currently available within the
ATD program. The briefing shall include
data on each time such consequences were
utilized in the prior fiscal year, whether deescalation or escalation was in accordance
with existing policy, and whether any such
individuals who are determined to be noncompliant are escalated to a higher level of
supervision, including the basis for such escalation and the noncompliant act.
ATD Technology.—ICE is directed to explore the feasibility of utilizing wearable,
cost-effective technologies for ATD that
achieve law enforcement objectives and shall
provide a briefing to the Committees within
90 days of the date of enactment of this Act
on potential external vendors, cost estimates, and the number of individuals on the
non-detained docket for whom such technologies could be used. ICE is directed to
confer with the Committees prior to the
briefing.
Contract Competition.—ICE is directed to
ensure a fair and competitive procurement
and contracting process for all awards in fiscal year 2026. ICE shall provide responses to
the Committees’ inquiries regarding contracts within five business days of receipt of
such inquiries.
Detained Population Statistics.—ICE shall
continue to submit the report required under
section 216 of the Department of Homeland
Security Appropriations Act, 2021 (division F
of P.L. 116–260) with respect to the period beginning 15 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and semimonthly thereafter, and include the following additional
requirements:
(1) the number of detainees by race, ethnicity, age, and nationality over the previous three fiscal years;
(2) the number of detainees who are minors, including whether they are unaccompanied;
(3) the number of detainees by number of
criminal convictions and by number of pending criminal charges over multiple fiscal
years, broken out by whether those convictions and charges are for violent crimes or
felonies;
(4) the number of individuals enrolled in
the Alternatives to Detention program and
the criteria for escalation and de-escalation
and application of such criteria;
(5) categories of detention-related complaints and grievances submitted to ICE by
those in custody;
(6) categories of detention-related complaints and grievances submitted to ICE by
members of the public; and
(7) detention by country of citizenship and
criminal history.
Detainee Transfers.—Within 90 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, ICE shall submit to the Committees a report detailing
compliance with all sections of Policy 11022.1
or any successor policy. The report shall also
include barriers to achieving full compliance
with the policy.
Detention and Solitary Confinement of Special Populations.—The agreement continues
the reporting requirements as directed under
this heading in Senate Report 118–85.
Detention of Stateless Aliens.—ICE shall
identify individuals in its custody who are
stateless and shall, in conjunction with the
Department of State, work to secure a travel
document for the individual’s removal to a
third country, including one where the individual has family ties, had previously held
residence, or has some other connection.
Within 60 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, and quarterly thereafter, ICE is directed to report to the Committees on the
number of stateless individuals in detention,
the number of stateless individuals removed,

PO 00000

Frm 00320

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and the number of stateless individuals released from detention. For those stateless individuals in detention for whom there is no
significant likelihood of removal in the foreseeable future, the report shall identify ICE’s
criteria and other considerations weighed
when making prospective custody determinations.
Detention Oversight.—ICE is directed to ensure that individuals in custody have the opportunity to confidentially contact oversight
entities without retaliation, at no cost to
the individual in custody. Within 60 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, ICE shall
brief the Committees at the facility-specific
level on the existing methods of outreach to
oversight entities and whether such outreach
is monitored by ICE or contracted personnel.
Additionally, ICE shall provide a summary
of efforts in place to deter retaliation should
outreach occur.
Detention Partnerships.—Not later than 15
days after the date of enactment of this Act
and monthly thereafter, ICE shall brief the
Committees on executed partnership agreements for federally-funded, state-operated
immigration detention facilities, such as the
facilities located at the Dade-Collier Training and Transition Airport or the Miami Correctional Center. The briefing should include
information on the following, by facility: the
funding source(s); out-year plans and projected costs; current and future capacity estimations; and associated operational impacts and costs of maintaining partnerships
with such facilities. The briefing should also
include information on intragovernmental
agreements including with the Departments
of Defense and Justice. The agreement directs ICE to coordinate with all partners effectuating immigration detention to ensure
facilities’ personnel are aware of legislative
requirements related to custody operations
and are in compliance with section 547 of
this Act.
Detention Segregation.—Within 90 days of
the date of enactment of this Act and quarterly thereafter, ICE shall report to the
Committees on the use of segregation in ICE
facilities and in facilities that contract with
ICE for detention purposes during the preceding fiscal year. The report shall include
an overview of all placements in segregation
by facility, the duration of such placements,
and the rationale for such placements.
Enforcement Surrounding Emergency Shelters.—Not later than 90 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, ICE shall brief the
Committees on enforcement operations surrounding emergency shelters and other evacuation-related facilities during and following
a disaster.
Facilities Maintenance and Repair.—Not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, ICE shall provide a report
to the Committees identifying local or state
leased facilities with known minor construction or minor leasehold improvement needs
to ensure appropriate conditions and required detention and care standards for all
ICE detainees, including a facilities investment plan to address such needs. Within all
funding available to ICE for detention capacity, pursuant to the limitations in section
525 of this Act, ICE shall prioritize effectuating such minor construction or leasehold
improvements of leased facilities to ensure
appropriate conditions and required detention and care standards.
Family Expedited Removal Management
(FERM) Reporting.—In addition to the reporting requirements found under this heading in
House Report 118–553, the report shall include the preferred language of each enrolled
family unit and the number of families in
FERM subject to final orders of removal.
Health and Safety in Immigration Detention.—The agreement directs ICE to ensure

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.103

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

medical access for ICE detention beds operated in Bureau of Prisons or Department of
Defense facilities, state and local jails, and
any other detention facility. Within 90 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, ICE
shall submit a report to the Committees on
plans to improve the provision of medical
services for all detained aliens in ICE custody. Additionally, ICE shall ensure that individuals in any form of segregation, including medical segregation, are provided required recreation time.
Intensive Supervision Appearance Program.—
The agreement directs ICE to provide a report to the Committees on a monthly basis
with a description of the steps taken to close
the recommendations made in ‘‘Alternatives
to Detention: ICE Needs to Better Assess
Program Performance and Improve Oversight’’ (GAO–22–104529) until such recommendations have been closed.
Law Enforcement Support Center (LESC).—
ICE shall ensure that the LESC has the resources and approvals necessary to fully utilize its recruitment incentives program. The
agreement further directs ICE to ensure that
current operations performed by the LESC
remain centralized at the LESC facility in
Williston, Vermont, and that these operations are not unnecessarily duplicated elsewhere.
Public Reporting.—ICE shall update its public website monthly with the following information:
(1) arrests by country of citizenship and
criminal history;
(2) arrests disaggregated by single adults
and members of family units; the agency
conducting the initial arrest delineated by
type of immigration violation; whether the
arrest was made on tribal land; and the number of arrests disaggregated by fugitive arrest or custodial arrest; and
(3) arrests by Area of Responsibility.
Removal Decisions.—Within 60 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, ICE is directed to brief the Committees on its policies and procedures related to individuals determined to be wrongfully removed from the
United States, including procedures for expeditiously implementing court-directed returns of individuals to the United States.
The briefing shall also include the procedures in place for individuals seeking to return to the United States to submit applications for such purposes, the review and processing of such applications, reviews of final
orders of removal, final decisions regarding
such applications, and effectuating the return of such individuals to the United States
pursuant to such decisions. ICE shall also
brief the Committees within 120 days of the
date of enactment of this Act and quarterly
thereafter on the number of applications received and reviewed, the number granted,
the number of individuals returned to the
United States, and the timelines in which
such returns were effectuated. Within 180
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
ICE shall brief the Committees on the steps
it has taken to eliminate future wrongful removals.
Removal Flight Reporting.—Within 60 days
of the date of enactment of this Act and
quarterly thereafter, ICE shall provide a report to the Committees that includes:
(1) the monthly number of removal flights
conducted during the reporting period;
(2) the number of individuals removed on
each flight;
(3) the citizenship of the individuals removed;
(4) the statutory authority for each removal;
(5) the number of removals within each
criminality category, as defined in the integrated
decision
support
system,
disaggregated by gender;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1673

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(6) the number of migrants removed with
removal orders, including the agency that
issued the removal order; and
(7) the average cost per removal flight.
Within 60 days of the date of enactment of
this Act and monthly thereafter, ICE shall
make available on a publicly accessible
website the number of flights to transfer
aliens to Naval Station Guantanamo Bay;
the cost of each flight, delineated by funding
agency; the number of aliens on each flight;
and the cost to ICE and each other Federal
agency and Department to detain an alien on
Naval Station Guantanamo Bay. The website
must also list from which congressionally
appropriated account the money is being
drawn. The first report shall also include
such information for fiscal year 2025, delineated by month.
Removal Orders Reporting.—The agreement
continues the direction found under this
heading in the explanatory statement accompanying Public Law 118–47. Additionally,
the briefing shall include the total number of
non-executable final orders of removal.
Veterans Subject to Removal.—In addition to
the direction found under this heading in the
House Report, ICE is further directed to report the number of individuals removed from
the United States who are service members
or veterans, their length of service in the
Armed Forces, their branch of service, any
receipt of medals or military decorations,
any criminal convictions, whether the individual appealed the removal order to the
Board of Immigration Appeals, and their removal destination. This report shall be made
available on a publicly accessible website.
Virtual Attorney Visitation (VAV).—In addition to the requirements found under the
heading ‘‘Access to Legal Counsel’’ in Senate
Report 118–85, the agreement directs that existing VAV booths be utilized for legal access
purposes. Further, ICE is directed to improve
existing law libraries by updating legal materials and providing online legal access. Additionally, Legal Orientation Programs shall
continue without interruption to the maximum extent possible. ICE shall establish
consistent policies across all facilities for
scheduling access for VAV meetings. ICE
shall provide a briefing to the Committees
on these efforts within 90 days of the date of
enactment of this Act and quarterly thereafter. The briefing shall include resource requirements for ensuring legal access, any ongoing challenges brought forth by field offices regarding certain facilities, the number
of Legal Orientation Programs taking place
at each facility, and the VAV utilization
rate.
Mission Support
Personnel Well-Being.—The agreement provides an additional $5,000,000 to support
workforce readiness efforts. Within 60 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, ICE
shall brief the Committees on their plans to
execute this funding, other investment opportunities, and the feasibility of establishing an office modeled after the Workforce
Care Division of U.S. Customs and Border
Protection.
Staffing
Augmentation.—The
agreement
provides an additional $425,000 to augment
the Appropriations Liaison team within the
Office of the Chief Financial Officer. ICE is
directed to ensure that these new positions
are filled through an open, competitive
interview process. Within 15 days of the date
of enactment of this Act and monthly thereafter, the Appropriations Liaison team is directed to brief the Committees on the status
of all outstanding items owed to the Committees, including outstanding requests for
information, briefings that are overdue or
due within the next 20 business days, and reports that are overdue or due within the next
20 business days.

PO 00000

Frm 00321

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Tactical Communications (TACCOM).—Within 90 days of the date of enactment of this
Act, ICE shall submit a detailed plan for initiating and completing additional TACCOM
equipment and infrastructure upgrades and
expansion projects. The plan shall specify regional modernization priorities, including
any geographic areas that may require upgrades, budget projections, and a timeline
for initiating and completing these site expansion priorities. The agreement provides
an additional $10,000,000 for TACCOM equipment modernization for personnel funded by
this Act.
Office of the Principal Legal Advisor
Office of the Principal Legal Advisor (OPLA)
Hiring.—Within 60 days of the date of enactment of this Act, ICE shall submit a report
to the Committees on a strategy for OPLA
hiring over the next five years, ongoing retention efforts, recruitment goals, and litigation team augmentation requirements to
match the operational tempo and capacity of
the Executive Office for Immigration Review.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement provides $5,000,000 for the
Consolidated ICE Financial Solution.
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $10,635,434,000 for
Operations and Support and includes
$98,523,000 for exit lane staffing; $45,868,000
for
law
enforcement
reimbursement;
$34,088,000
for
canine
reimbursements;
$27,392,000 for the Federal Flight Deck Officer (FFDO) program; $20,000,000 for interconnected airports; and $3,000,000 for artificial intelligence (AI) multi-modal language
translation technology.
Category-X Interconnection Program.—The
Administrator shall provide a briefing to the
Committees not later than 180 days after the
date of enactment of this Act on the status
of this program and an expansion plan for all
Transportation
Security
Administration
(TSA)-serviced airports.
Explosive Detection System Optimization and
Maintenance.—The
agreement
provides
$4,000,000 for TSA to continue providing costeffective ways to improve the reliability of
explosive detection systems.
Federal Flight Deck Officer Program.—Within 90 days of the date of enactment of this
Act, TSA shall brief the Committees on the
FFDO Program. The briefing shall include,
at a minimum, current backlogs of candidates awaiting initial training, utilization
rates for FFDO recurrent training, FFDO
firearms recertification training, plans to
address the training backlog, and the status
of the full-time Atlanta FFDO Recurrent
Training Program facility.
UAS Beyond Visual Line of Sight Operations.—During promulgation of the final
rule for the rulemaking entitled ‘‘Normalizing Unmanned Aircraft Systems Beyond
Visual Line of Sight Operations’’ in 90 Fed.
Reg. 38212, TSA shall ensure that any security requirements are commensurate with
the risk of the proposed activity.
Screening Locations.—The Committees emphasize that TSA may continue screening at
Reimbursable Screening Services Program
(RSSP) locations in the event of a future
lapse of authorization.
Throughput and Wait Times at TSA Checkpoints.—Not later than 90 days after the date
of enactment of this Act and quarterly
thereafter, TSA shall provide a briefing to
the Committees on how staffing levels, including any anticipated or proposed reductions, and investments in screening equipment and technology are projected to affect
passenger throughput and wait times. The

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.104

H22JAPT2

H1674

briefing shall include analysis of current
staffing models, deployment timelines for
new technologies such as computed tomography (CT) machines, and the anticipated effects of these changes on operational efficiency and passenger wait times at checkpoints.
Visible Intermodal Prevention and Response
(VIPR) Teams.—The agreement does not provide funding for VIPR teams or for any of
the functions typically performed by VIPR
teams.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement provides $330,230,000 for
Procurement, Construction, and Improvements, including $300,000,000 for Checkpoint
Property Security Screening (CPSS) and
$15,000,000 for Credential Authentication
Technology.
Checkpoint Property Security Screening.—
The agreement provides funding to allow
TSA to accelerate the modernization of
CPSS equipment and directs TSA to brief
the
Committees
semiannually
on
its
progress.
Identity Risk and Security Management.—
The agreement directs TSA to continue support of the pilot deployment of biometric
identity validation tools at key airports to
further advance the necessary infrastructure
and investment to support these operations.
TSA shall ensure such systems protect the
biometric information of passengers and
shall ensure that such systems adhere to all
applicable statutes, regulations and guidelines relating to civil liberties and privacy.
TSA is further directed to report to the Committees not later than 180 days after the date
of enactment of this Act on the pilot deployments initiated and the ways in which TSA’s
pilot deployments are safeguarding the privacy rights of the traveling public.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

The agreement provides $24,000,000 for Research and Development.
On Person Detection/Next Gen Advanced Imaging Technology.—The agreement provides
$12,000,000 to further develop and certify AIenhanced screening equipment.
COAST GUARD
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The agreement provides $11,272,401,000 for
Operations and Support.
The agreement includes funding increases
for the following: $116,405,000 for IndoPacific
expansion; $97,922,000 for the 2026 military
pay
raise;
$40,000,000
for
autonomous
uncrewed surface vessels; $40,000,000 for shore
maintenance; $30,000,000 for surface maintenance; $23,000,000 for sexual assault and sexual harassment prevention and response;
$26,000,000 for large unmanned aerial systems
operations; $14,000,000 for medium unmanned
aerial systems; $13,000,000 for the Technology
Optimization and Modernization Fund;
$10,000,000 for additional childcare subsidies;
$10,000,000 for uncrewed acoustic monitoring
system pilot; $6,000,000 for fishing safety
grants; $4,500,000 for unmanned air intercept;
$3,000,000 for the maritime Transportation
System Sector Risk Management Agency;
$2,500,000 for marine inspections and standards for innovative vessels; $2,000,000 to
study the impact of seismic activity on
Coast Guard facilities; $1,750,000 for visit,
board, search, and seizure equipment;
$1,000,000 for environmental compliance and
remediation; $250,000 for a study on illegal,
unreported, and unregulated fishing; $150,000
to continue a cetacean desk; and $100,000 for
a contracting officer for Training Center
Cape May.
For the fiscal year 2027 budget justification, the request shall contain the same subPPA level of detail as provided in fiscal year
2026.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Aerial Maritime Domain Awareness.—The
agreement directs the Coast Guard to test,
train, and deploy unmanned aerial systems
to support its statutory missions and to expand domain awareness. Within 180 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, the Coast
Guard shall brief the Committees on its efforts.
Child Care Subsidy.—Within 90 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, the Coast
Guard shall provide a briefing on the implementation of this program.
Coast Guard Command Centers.—The Coast
Guard shall provide a report and briefing to
the Committees on the state of Coast Guard
command centers, including technology
gaps, top challenges, and options for improvements within 120 days of the date of enactment of this Act.
Coast Guard Missions.—The agreement directs the Coast Guard to continue conducting its missions as described in 6 U.S.C.
468. The Committees remind the Coast Guard
and the Department of the prohibition to the
significant or substantial reduction to Coast
Guard missions or its capability to perform
such missions for more than 90 days without
a waiver and directs the Department to fulfill the requirements of 6 U.S.C. 468(e) within
30 days of the date of enactment of this Act.
Coast Guard Oversight.—The agreement directs the Coast Guard to fully comply with
all oversight inquiries, including into its Operation Fouled Anchor investigation. Within
30 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
the Coast Guard shall provide the Committees with a specific list of impediments to responsiveness, as well as potential mitigation
opportunities.
Combatting Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing.—The Coast Guard shall
collaborate with state and academic partners
that will quantify the impact and explore
the factors influencing increased IUU fishing
activity.
Counternarcotics Efforts.—Within 60 days of
the date of enactment of this Act and
monthly thereafter, the Coast Guard shall
report to the Committees the amounts and
types of narcotics intercepted across each of
its Districts. Within 180 days of the date of
enactment of this Act, the Coast Guard shall
brief the Committees on options for heightening drug interdiction efforts, particularly
in the Pacific, including collaboration with
foreign partners. The briefing shall detail
the additional resources, intelligence, and
other support the Coast Guard requires to
more fully meet the demands of countering
the drug smuggling across the Pacific.
Fishing Safety Grants.—The Coast Guard is
directed to provide a briefing to the Committees within 90 days of the date of enactment
of this Act on the execution of the Fishing
Safety Training and Fishing Safety Research
Grant Programs. If the Administration believes funding for this activity should be provided directly to NIOSH in fiscal year 2027,
the briefing shall provide that justification
and such a change shall be articulated in the
next budget request.
Funding Efforts to End Sexual Assault and
Harassment.—Of the increased funding provided for the Coast Guard’s prevention of and
response to sexual assault and harassment,
$1,000,000 shall be to hire 10 new staff to implement the best and most current sexual assault and harassment prevention practices;
$12,000,000 shall be to fund the directed actions of the former Commandant related to
the Accountability Transparency Review
(ATR) to address workforce support through
a new recruit preparatory course, increased
leadership courses, Integrated Primary Prevention, a victim mentor program, and core
values updates and communication; and
$10,000,000 shall be for legal support and oversight, including travel and expert witness

PO 00000

Frm 00322

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

support for courts martial, training and coordination, recruiting, reserve support, licensure requirements, technology modernization, and advice related to prevention
and prosecution of sexual assault and sexual
harassment in the maritime industry.
Impacts on the U.S. Coast Guard Academy.—
The Coast Guard is directed to provide a report and briefing to the Committees within
120 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
detailing the full extent of changes to Academy curricula, policies, and organization, as
well as impacts, if any, on campus culture,
cadets’ morale, and the Academy’s overall
mission.
Indo-Pacific Expansion.—Within 90 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, the Coast
Guard shall provide to the Committees a
spend plan for the additional funds provided,
including costs for personnel and operations,
timelines for implementation, and planned
activities and operations.
Increased Initial Entry Training.—The Committees provide $3,000,000 for the Coast
Guard to evaluate and plan for the acquisition of an additional initial entry training
facility.
Implementation of Efforts to End Sexual Assault and Harassment.—The agreement directs the Department to provide the overdue
independent review of the Coast Guard’s efforts to reduce and respond to sexual assault
and sexual harassment, as required in the
Further Consolidated Appropriations Act,
2024 (P.L. 118–47). The agreement directs the
Coast Guard to provide a briefing within 30
days of the date of enactment of this Act on
what has been done to implement the former
Commandant’s directives following the ATR
Team Report, detailing its efforts to reduce
and respond to sexual assault and specific resources the Service is dedicating to each line
of effort. The briefing shall also detail the
steps taken to enhance survivor advocacy
and support and efforts of the Sexual Assault, Prevention, Response, and Recovery
(SAPRR) Office. Beginning in fiscal year
2027, future Coast Guard budget requests
shall provide a full accounting of all personnel, funding, training, curriculum, and
other efforts to end sexual assault and sexual
harassment within the Service; measurable
outcomes of such efforts; lessons learned;
and descriptions of efforts proposed within
each budget request to eliminate sexual assault and sexual harassment.
Long Range Command and Control Aircraft.—
Not later than 15 days after the last day of
each month, the Coast Guard shall submit to
the Committees, in a searchable and sortable
format, for the previous month:
(1) the flight manifests and itinerary for
all Long-Range Command and Control Aircraft flights, including the airframe used for
each flight;
(2) any alcoholic beverages consumed on
the flight and the source of such beverages;
(3) for official travel, the nexus to a statutory Department of Homeland Security mission and justification for trip; and
(4) the total cost of each flight.
Maritime Industry Cybersecurity Sector Risk
Management.—Within 90 days of the date of
enactment of this Act, the Coast Guard shall
provide a briefing to the Committees on the
integration of additional cybersecurity risk
mitigation activities funded by the funding
increase.
Merchant Mariner Credential Program.—The
Coast Guard shall provide a briefing to the
Committees within 60 days of the date of enactment of this Act on progress to date of
implementing the new program, including an
overview of the features that are intended to
improve the efficiency of the credentialing
process.
Recruitment and Retention.—Within 60 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.105

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

Coast Guard shall provide a briefing on efforts to recruit and retain sufficient personnel and any resulting plans, with
timelines, to return stations to their previous operational status.
Restoration of Capabilities.—The Coast
Guard shall brief the Committees within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act on
plans to restore operational capabilities at
locations with degraded capabilities as a result of damages resulting from major storms
and other disasters.
Seismic Problem Study.—The agreement provides $2,000,000 for the Coast Guard to conduct a comprehensive study of seismic risks
to its facilities, including but not limited to
operational centers, housing units, and mission-critical assets located in regions prone
to seismic activity. This study should identify infrastructure most at risk, assess potential operational impacts of seismic
events, and propose mitigation strategies to
improve resilience. The Coast Guard shall
submit a report to the Committees not later
than three years after the date of enactment
of this Act, detailing findings and recommendations for mitigation measures.
Within 180 days of the date of enactment of
this Act and semiannually thereafter, Coast
Guard shall brief the Committees on the
progress of the study.
Short-Range Reconnaissance Program.—The
agreement directs the Coast Guard to brief
the Committees within 180 days of the date
of enactment of this Act on its plan to replenish its small unmanned aircraft fleet.
Small Arms Simulation and Cognitive Training Capability Improvements.—Within 180 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, the
Coast Guard shall provide a briefing on its
current capabilities and practices to improve
cognitive skills, operator situational awareness, judgment, and proficiency in high-risk
operations that involve the carry and use of
small arms.
State Boating Fees.—The agreement directs
the Coast Guard to provide a briefing within
90 days of the date of enactment of this Act
detailing any statutes, regulations, and policies which govern the ability of states to collect fees related to boating safety, search
and rescue operations, and management of
aquatic invasive species as part of a process
for numbering undocumented vessels under
chapter 123 of title 46, United States Code.
Surface and Shore Maintenance.—Within 120
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
the Coast Guard shall provide a briefing to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate; the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives;
and the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation of the Senate on the status of infrastructure repairs, dredging, and
long-term operability plans for Coast Guard
Station Cape Disappointment and the National Motor Lifeboat School in Ilwaco, WA.
Tracking Missions.—In lieu of the direction
provided under this heading in the House Report, the agreement directs the Coast Guard
to report on actions taken since the beginning of fiscal year 2025 to reallocate assets,
resources, and personnel to border security
and immigration enforcement activities, including plans for future reallocations. The
report shall detail, delineated by month, specific assets, units, and other resources diverted, as well as impacts on other Coast
Guard mission statistics, metrics, and measures. The Coast Guard shall provide this report, as well as a briefing on said report, to
the Committees within 90 days of the date of
enactment of this Act.
Uncrewed
Acoustic
Monitoring
System
Pilot.—The agreement includes funding for a
pilot of autonomous, wave and solar powered, persistent, passive acoustic large-aper-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1675

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ture towed sonar arrays. The pilot shall
prioritize functions including monitoring
transit routes, enhancing port and maritime
security, and detecting narcotic trafficking
vessels, particularly semi-submersibles in
the Eastern Pacific and Caribbean Sea.
Unfunded Priorities List (UPL).—The agreement directs the Coast Guard to provide to
the Committees a list of approved but unfunded Coast Guard priorities and the funding needs for each priority not later than 30
days after submission of the fiscal year 2027
budget request.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement provides $991,872,000 for
Procurement, Construction, and Improvements. This includes $152,000,000 for In-Service Vessel Sustainment; $54,900,000 for Cutter
Boats; $98,000,000 for Waterways Commerce
Cutter, $43,500,000 for Polar Security Cutter
III; $25,000,000 for a Great Lakes Icebreaker;
$12,000,000
for
HC–144
Conversion/
Sustainment;
$151,600,000
for
MH–60T
Sustainment; $99,340,000 for Other Acquisition Programs; $75,000,000 for the Coast
Guard Academy; $15,000,000 for a National
Security Cutter and Ocean Going Buoy Tender Homeport; $15,000,000 for Station Lake
Tahoe; $6,000,000 for Mobile Medical Teams;
$30,000,000 for a Hanger at St. Paul, Alaska;
$30,732,000
for
Alaska
Housing;
and
$160,000,000 for Seattle Polar Security Cutter
Homeport.
Fleet Mix Analysis.—Within 30 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, the Coast
Guard shall submit the Fleet Mix Analysis
required in the explanatory statement accompanying Public Law 117–103. The agreement reiterates that the analysis be comprehensive and include all classes of vessels,
even those whose mission might not have a
direct bearing on the workload of other vessel classes.
Full-Funding Policy.—The agreement again
directs the Coast Guard to provide an exception to the current acquisition policy that
requires the Coast Guard to attain the total
acquisition cost for a vessel, including long
lead time materials (LLTM), production
costs, and post-production costs, before a
production contract can be awarded. The
Coast Guard should position itself to acquire
vessels in the most efficient manner within
the guidelines of strict governance measures.
Funded Projects.—Projects funded by the
agreement shall be executed expeditiously
and responsibly. Within 90 days of the date of
enactment of this Act and quarterly thereafter, the Coast Guard shall brief the Committees on any projects experiencing significant cost increases, executability concerns,
or any other issues that increase the risk
profile of a project. Coast Guard shall provide the Committees sufficient time to consider such increased risk profiles and respond
in an appropriate manner.
Vessels
Commercially Available Polar Icebreaker
(USCGC Storis).—The agreement directs
Coast Guard to provide a description of the
actions required to fully missionize the Storis
and to provide a detailed cost estimate of
such actions delineated by year for the next
five years in its fiscal year 2027 budget request.
Cutter Boats.—The amount for Cutter Boats
includes $24,000,000 to support the procurement of two Heavy Weather Boat (SPC–
HWX) replacements and program costs related to the acquisition program.
Great Lakes Icebreaker.—The Coast Guard
shall provide a briefing on the Great Lakes
Icebreaker Program within 180 days of the
date of enactment of this Act.
Polar Security Cutter (PSC).—Within 90 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, the

PO 00000

Frm 00323

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Coast Guard shall brief the Committees on
the program’s progress and shall provide a
timeline and spend plan for the completion
and delivery of each fully or partially funded
PSC. The Coast Guard is directed to continue keeping the Committees fully informed
of the PSC program’s progress both with regular quarterly updates and, in the case of
emergency or time-sensitive issues, notifications as soon as possible.
Aircraft
Long-Range Unmanned Aircraft (LR–UAS).—
The agreement directs the Coast Guard to
acquire aircraft for the LR–UAS program
consistent with the spend plan briefed to the
Committees on September 2, 2025. If the
Coast Guard deviates from the briefed spend
plan, not later than 15 days after any deviation, the Coast Guard shall brief the Committees on the justification for the change
and certify in writing that the changes were
in the best interest of the Coast Guard and
the American taxpayer. Additionally, the
agreement provides $98,000,000 for the purchase of MQ–9 long-range unmanned aircraft
and associated base stations, equipment related to such aircraft and base stations, and
associated program management.
Review
of
MH–60
Acquisition
and
Missionization.—Within 60 days of the date of
enactment of this Act, the Coast Guard shall
brief the Committees on options for streamlining the acquisition and missionization of
MH–60 rotary wing aircraft, including potential utilization of similar design specifications and production lines used for the
Navy’s MH–60R or establishing a commercial
production line of the MH–60T. The Coast
Guard shall brief the Committees on the program’s progress and shall provide a timeline
and spend plan for the completion of fleet expansion. The Coast Guard is directed to continue to keep the Committees fully informed
of the program’s progress both with regular
quarterly updates and, in the case of emergency or time-sensitive issues, as soon as
possible.
Shore and Aids to Navigation Facilities
Coast Guard Academy Infrastructure.—Within 120 days of the date of enactment of this
Act, the Coast Guard shall brief the Committees on an initial plan for Academy improvements using funds appropriated in this Act.
Coast Guard Cutter Homeports.—Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
the agreement directs the Coast Guard to
provide a report for each homeport where an
asset is in active status, but its designated
permanent homeport is not complete. The
report shall include the detailed timeline for
and projected costs associated with land acquisition, permitting, planning, engineering,
design, and construction.
Engineering and Design.—The Coast Guard
must improve its approach to informing Congress of its priorities for major shore construction projects, housing, aids to navigation, and Major Acquisition Systems Infrastructure (MASI). Accordingly, beginning
with the fiscal year 2028 budget submission,
the Coast Guard shall provide in its justification a specific list of construction projects to
be implemented if the budget request for
each project in the Shore Facilities and Aids
to Navigation PPA were to be funded at the
request level and the total projected future
years’ costs of each such project, delineated
by year. For fiscal year 2027, Coast Guard
shall provide this information in a briefing
to the Committees not later than 90 days
after submission of the budget request. Additionally, within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act, Coast Guard shall provide
a report on past construction projects that
received appropriated funding within the
past 10 years that did not proceed to construction for failure to properly factor in

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.105

H22JAPT2

H1676

preconstruction and engineering and design
needs.
Facilities Plans.—Within 180 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, the Coast
Guard shall provide to the Committees longterm master facilities plans for the modernization and upgrading of the Training
Center Cape May and the Coast Guard Academy campuses, which are necessary to facilitate additional personnel accessions to accommodate the growing mission demands on
the Coast Guard. Each plan shall include a
Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) that includes capital project budgets, an inventory
of deferred maintenance items necessary to
sustain campus operations through completion of the CIP, and schedule and sequencing
estimates based upon funding assumptions.
Polar Security Cutter (PSC) Homeport Base
Seattle.—The agreement provides $160,000,000
to prepare for PSC Homeport Base Seattle,
as identified in the fiscal year 2026 UPL.
Within 90 days of the date of enactment of
this Act and quarterly thereafter, the Coast
Guard shall provide a brief updating the
progress, timelines, and funding execution of
the project to date, as well as updates on future planning and deliverables to facilitate
Base Seattle’s expansion. Coast Guard shall
also brief the Committees within 180 days of
the date of enactment of this Act on the
total cost estimate for Base Seattle modernization to allow homeport completion and
support for the three PSCs, the CGC Healy,
and up to four additional major cutters.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

The agreement provides $6,763,000 for Research and Development.
UNITED STATES SECRET SERVICE
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The agreement provides $3,128,304,000 for
Operations and Support, including increases
of $46,116,000 for hiring of certain positions;
$36,701,000 for expanded protection of
protectees; $20,000,000 to support the use of
autonomous robotic targets in firearm and
tactical training; $5,400,000 for modernizing
situational awareness, communications, and
sensor automation across protective and law
enforcement operations through edge processing; and $1,226,000 for enhancing protective intelligence operations.
Within
the
total
amount
provided,
$96,299,000 is available until September 30,
2027 and $20,000,000 is available until September 30, 2028, as a one-time allowance to
support advanced preparation for the 2028
Summer Olympic and Paralympic Games.
2026 FIFA World Cup and America250.—The
agreement provides $24,623,000 for activities
related to 2026 FIFA World Cup and
America250 events. USSS is directed to provide a briefing to the Committees on a quarterly basis outlining their planning and coordination efforts with SLTT ahead of these
events.
Employee Resiliency Programs.—USSS shall
brief the Committees on efforts to improve
employee resiliency programming and initiatives, including the impact of current employee resiliency programs on retention, not
later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act. The briefing shall also include ongoing retention efforts for senior
agents to reduce reliance on and the utilization of supermax pay.
Geospatial Technology.—The agreement provides $2,000,000 for the procurement of
geospatial technology that enhances the
Service’s ability to access, utilize, and analyze commercial space-based data and imagery products for the protective mission.
National Special Security Events (NSSEs).—
The agreement includes $44,623,000 for USSS
to prepare for and execute future NSSEs, including the 2026 FIFA World Cup. Not later

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

than 90 days after the enactment of this Act,
USSS shall provide a quarterly briefing to
the Committees detailing obligation and execution of funds, planning and coordination
efforts with SLTT law enforcement, and projected resource requirements for NSSEs in
fiscal year 2027 and outyears.
Previous
Requirements.—The
agreement
continues the directives found within Senate
Report 118–85 under the headings ‘‘Secret
Service Overtime’’ and ‘‘Strategic Human
Capital Plan’’.
Protective Mission.—Within 60 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, USSS shall
submit a report to the Committees that examines the efforts to identify and communicate threats with law enforcement partners during protective events and includes
an evaluation of the lessons learned in light
of the events of July 13, 2024.
Secret Service Hiring.—Within 180 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, USSS
shall brief the Committees on updated hiring
projections for all law enforcement positions
from fiscal year 2026 to fiscal year 2030 and
detail resource requirements to meet such
projections. The briefing shall also include
ongoing efforts to decrease the time to hire
and increase yield rates from applicants to
hires, as well as the impact that these hiring
efforts will have on overtime costs.
Support for Computer Forensics Training.—
The agreement provides $64,777,000 to continue training in computer forensics, to enhance academic certification efforts, and to
expand subject matter expert contracts to
fulfill unmet training needs. The agreement
includes an additional $5,000,000 for expansion of the curriculum at the National Computer Forensics Institute to include forensic
analysis of small unmanned aerial systems.
Recruitment and Retention Initiatives.—
USSS is directed to brief the Committees
not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act on plans to appropriately resource recruitment and retention
initiatives in fiscal years 2026 through 2029.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement provides $118,517,000 for
Procurement, Construction, and Improvements.
Long Term Acquisition and Refresh Cycles.—
USSS is directed to brief the Committees
within 120 days on all ongoing and anticipated projects that operate on a sliding refresh cycle. The briefing should include current and anticipated costs, including outyear
projections through fiscal year 2030.
TITLE II—ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Section 201. The agreement continues a
provision regarding overtime compensation.
Section 202. The agreement continues a
provision allowing CBP to sustain or increase operations in Puerto Rico and the
U.S. Virgin Islands with appropriated funds.
Section 203. The agreement continues a
provision regarding the availability of passenger fees collected from certain countries.
Section 204. The agreement continues a
provision allowing CBP access to certain reimbursements for preclearance activities.
Section 205. The agreement continues a
provision regarding the importation of prescription drugs from Canada.
Section 206. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision regarding the waiver of
certain navigation and vessel-inspection
laws.
Section 207. The agreement continues a
provision preventing the establishment of
new border crossing fees at LPOEs.
Section 208. The agreement continues a
provision requiring the Commissioner of
CBP to submit an expenditure plan for funds
made available under the heading, ‘‘U.S. Customs and Border Protection—Procurement,
Construction, and Improvements’’.

PO 00000

Frm 00324

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Section 209. The agreement continues a
provision on vetting operations at existing
locations.
Section 210. The agreement includes a new
provision regarding a requirement for surveillance technology to be autonomous, consistent with the definition found in P.L. 119–
21.
Section 211. The agreement includes a new
provision regarding the standard of treatment for certain individuals in CBP custody.
Section 212. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting the use of funds provided under the heading, ‘‘U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement—Operations and
Support’’ to continue a delegation of authority under the 287(g) program if the terms of
an agreement governing such delegation
have been materially violated.
Section 213. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting the use of funds provided under the heading ‘‘U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement—Operations and
Support’’ to contract for detention services
if the facility receives less than ‘‘adequate’’
ratings in two consecutive performance evaluations and requires that such evaluations
be conducted by the ICE OPR.
Section 214. The agreement continues a
provision allowing the Secretary to reprogram funds within and transfer funds to
‘‘U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement—Operations and Support’’ to ensure
the detention of noncitizens prioritized for
removal.
Section 215. The agreement continues a
provision that requires ICE to provide statistics about its detention population.
Section 216. The agreement continues a
provision related to reporting on 287(g)
agreements.
Section 217. The agreement includes a new
provision requiring ICE to submit a monthly
obligation plan.
Section 218. The agreement includes a new
provision requiring an execution plan for detention facilities funded by P.L. 119–21.
Section 219. The agreement includes a new
provision related to ICE international
attachés and liaisons.
Section 220. The agreement continues a
provision clarifying that certain elected and
appointed officials are not exempt from Federal passenger and baggage screening.
Section 221. The agreement continues a
provision authorizing TSA to use funds from
the Aviation Security Capital Fund for the
procurement and installation of explosive
detection systems or for other purposes authorized by law.
Section 222. The agreement continues a
provision requiring TSA to provide a report
that includes the Capital Investment Plan,
the five-year technology investment plan,
and information on Advanced Integrated
Passenger Screening Technologies.
Section 223. The agreement includes a new
provision requiring briefings on unclaimed
money at TSA checkpoints.
Section 224. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds made available
by this Act under the heading ‘‘Coast
Guard—Operations and Support’’ for recreational vessel expenses, except to the extent fees are collected from owners of yachts
and credited to this appropriation.
Section 225. The agreement continues a
provision requiring the Commandant of the
Coast Guard to submit a future-years capital
investment plan.
Section 226. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds to reduce the
staff or mission at the Coast Guard’s legacy
Operations System Center.
Section 227. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds to conduct a
competition for activities related to the
Coast Guard National Vessel Documentation
Center.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.106

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

Section 228. The agreement continues a
provision allowing the use of funds to alter,
but not reduce, operations within the Civil
Engineering program of the Coast Guard.
Section 229. The agreement continues a
provision allowing for use of the Coast Guard
Housing Fund.
Section 230. The agreement includes a new
provision
appropriating
an
additional
amount for the USCG to purchase MQ–9 systems.
Section 231. The agreement includes a new
provision regarding Force Design 2028.
Section 232. The agreement continues a
provision allowing the Secret Service to obligate funds in anticipation of reimbursement for personnel receiving training.
Section 233. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds made available
to the Secret Service from being used for the
protection of the head of a Federal agency
other than the Secretary of Homeland Security, except when the Director has entered
into a reimbursable agreement for such protection services.
Section 234. The agreement continues a
provision allowing the reprogramming of
funds within ‘‘United States Secret Service—
Operations and Support’’.
Section 235. The agreement continues a
provision allowing funds provided under the
heading ‘‘United States Secret Service—Operations and Support’’ to be available for
travel of employees on protective missions
without regard to the limitations on such expenditures.
Section 236. The agreement includes a new
provision
for
the
National
Computer
Forensics Institute.
Section 237. The agreement includes a new
provision providing for additional overtime
payments for certain United States Secret
Service personnel.
Section 238. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting the construction of
border security barriers in specified areas.
TITLE
III—PROTECTION,
PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE, AND RECOVERY
CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
SECURITY AGENCY

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $2,218,634,000 for
Operations and Support. The agreement does
not adopt the consolidation of PPAs within
Cybersecurity, as proposed in the budget request.
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency (CISA) Hiring.—The Committees provide $20,000,000 to hire additional Federal
staff to critical positions, of which $4,000,000
is provided to each of the following PPAs for
these purposes: Threat Hunting; Vulnerability Management; Continuous Diagnostics
and Mitigation; Security Programs; and Security Advisors. Within 60 days of the date of
enactment of this Act, CISA shall brief the
Committees on a hiring plan for these positions.
CISA Workforce.—CISA shall maintain a
workforce consistent with the personnel and
FTE funded by the pay and non-pay amounts
provided in this Act. CISA shall not reduce
staffing in such a way that it lacks sufficient
staff to effectively carry out its statutory
missions, including cybersecurity and infrastructure security for the Federal Civilian
Executive Branch agencies, SLTT partners,
Sector Risk Management Agencies, international partners, and other stakeholders.
Further, CISA is directed to maintain no
fewer than 10 regional field offices around
the country and is directed to ensure that
CISA employs no fewer than one expert
‘‘Cyber Security Advisor’’ per state or territory devoted exclusively to assisting such
state or territory.
Election Security.—The agreement provides
$39,610,000 to continue Election Security Pro-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1677

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

gram activities funded in fiscal year 2024, including Election Security Advisors in each
CISA Region and the continuation of the
Elections Infrastructure Information Sharing and Analysis Center (EI–ISAC).
Triannual Classified Briefings.—In addition
to the briefings required under this heading
in the House Report, CISA shall provide
timely classified briefings on emergent
issues.
Cybersecurity
Attack Surface Management (ASM) Program.—In addition to the requirements found
in the House Report under this heading, the
briefing must also include the cost estimate
of administering ASM as a shared service.
CISA is further directed to continue enhancing its ability to centrally verify and manage asset and vulnerability data on internetfacing cyber terrain for Federal, critical infrastructure, and SLTT partner networks.
CISA shall sustain efforts funded in fiscal
years 2022–2024 for ASM. Within 180 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, CISA shall
brief the Committees on progress made deploying its ASM capabilities. The briefing
shall include a detailed description of fiscal
year
2022–2025
funds
execution
and
deliverables provided; a plan and milestones
for execution of fiscal year 2026 funds; a demonstration of asset and vulnerability identification capability currently deployed; and a
discussion of how CISA uses this capability
to verify and manage Federal, critical infrastructure, and SLTT asset and vulnerability
data, as well as helps these partners
prioritize
and
remediate
critical
vulnerabilities.
Cyber Workforce Development Activities.—
Within 180 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, CISA shall brief the Committees on
the TryCyber, Threat Sandbox Challenges,
and other cyber workforce development programs. The briefing shall include a discussion of such programs’ integration of artificial intelligence tools and other emerging
technologies.
Cybersecurity Grant Program.—Within 60
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CISA shall report to and brief the Committees on any request in the budget to establish a cybersecurity grant program aimed at
private and public water, transportation, and
energy providers to implement risk reduction strategies.
Data Security Vulnerability Improvements.—
Within 180 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, CISA shall submit a report to the
Committees that examines existing security
vulnerabilities of Federal civilian executive
branch (FCEB) agencies’ IT systems. The report shall include an examination of emerging technologies that could improve the
FCEB’s data security and protection, such as
immutable logging of suspect activity by default, intrusion detection and prevention of
mechanisms, automation of asset management, and behavioral indicators.
Federal Cyber Skilling Academy.—Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CISA is directed to provide a briefing on the
steps taken to grow the pipeline of the Federal cybersecurity workforce and the
progress made, including the number of personnel who have been trained and been
placed into a cybersecurity-related position
since the inception of the Academy.
Federal Network Security Reporting.—Within
180 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CISA shall provide to the Committees a
progress report on the success of each Federal agency and department to implement
the established program goals. The report
shall also include an accounting of non-CISA
resources used for implementation. Finally,
the report shall include a description of implementation plans through fiscal year 2028,

PO 00000

Frm 00325

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

including desired target completion goals,
methods for updating lifecycle costs, acquisition program schedules, and details on how
innovation and evolving technology, such as
end point detection, could improve Federal
network and data security. If necessary, this
report may be submitted in a classified format with an unclassified summary.
Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) Initiative.—The Committees direct CISA to continue its PQC Initiative to prepare for cybersecurity challenges stemming from the capability of quantum computing algorithms to
break traditional encryption methods.
Space Systems.—Within 90 days of the date
of enactment of this Act, CISA shall brief
the Committees on its cybersecurity efforts
related to commercial space systems. The
briefing shall include the feasibility and
costs of implementing a pilot program in coordination with the Office of the National
Cyber Director (ONCD), National Space
Council, and heads of other agencies as appropriate to develop an online, publicly
available clearinghouse of information specifically aimed at assisting small business
concerns with the secure development, operation, and maintenance of commercial satellite systems.
State Court Electronic Data.—The Committees direct CISA to maintain and expand
upon prior year outreach to the state courts
through national level associations to drive
participation and understanding of services
available to prevent, protect against, and respond to cyberattacks on state court electronic data systems.
Infrastructure Security
Artificial Intelligence (AI) Emergency Preparedness and Continuity Planning.—Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
CISA shall brief the Committees on its efforts to strengthen AI emergency preparedness and continuity planning activities
across critical infrastructure sectors that
implement AI in their operations. This includes enhanced regional coordination, technical assistance to state and local governments, risk assessments, and pre-incident
operational planning. The briefing shall include initiatives to prioritize support to
high-risk communities and sectors vulnerable to natural disasters, cyber incidents,
and complex emergencies.
Bomb Disposal Technician Training and
Technology Events (TTEs).—CISA shall utilize
the Office of Bombing Prevention resources
to hold a minimum of four technician TTEs
across the Nation bringing together Federal
and SLTT agencies and industry partners.
Within 120 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, CISA shall brief the Committees on
efforts to conduct these annual TTEs across
the Nation. This briefing shall include schedules to conduct a minimum of four TTEs per
fiscal year and the total program cost.
Bombing Prevention.—Within 90 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, CISA is directed to brief the Committees on its fiscal
year 2026 plans to support the bomb technician community to include continuing education, post graduate proficiency, and advanced training.
School Safety.—The agreement provides
$3,341,000 to maintain the fiscal year 2024
level for Federal school safety programs.
Risk Management Operations
National Risk Management Center (NRMC)
Strategic Engagement.—Within 180 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, CISA shall
provide a briefing on the NRMC’s strategic
engagement with election stakeholders, including engagement progress to date, future
engagement plans and priorities, and information regarding any identified election security risks and shortfalls that should be
mitigated in the near-, mid-, and long-terms.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.107

H22JAPT2

H1678

Stakeholder Engagement and Requirements
International Cybersecurity Engagement.—
CISA shall coordinate with the Department
of State and other entities as appropriate to
assess ongoing and recently-completed cybersecurity engagement activities with
international partners, including requests
for cybersecurity support, technical assistance, or expertise provided to foreign governments and foreign owners and operators
of critical infrastructure. The assessment
shall include details on the processes for,
barriers to providing, and the average time
and cost of providing such support or assistance. Within 270 days of the date of enactment of this Act, CISA shall submit a report
to the Committees on the assessment and
how it will inform new engagement strategies, including a classified annex if appropriate.
Tribal Engagement.—CISA shall brief the
Committees within 180 days of the date of
enactment of this Act on its engagement
with federally recognized tribes. The briefing
shall identify how CISA promotes the effective delivery of agency programs, resources,
and services to Alaska Native, American Indian, and Native Hawaiian communities
within the United States.
Mission Support
Open-Source Software.—Within 90 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, CISA shall
brief the Committees on the feasibility, benefits, and costs of establishing an OpenSource Software Management function modeled after open-source program offices, such
as those in the private sector, the nonprofit
sector, academia, and other non-Federal entities. The analysis shall consider the secure
usage of open-source software at CISA, policies and process for contributions to and releases of open-source software at the agency,
interfaces with the open-source software
community, and manages and reduces risks
of using open-source software at the agency.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The agreement provides $386,464,000 for
Procurement, Construction, and Improvements (PC&I). Of the total, $367,821,000 is provided for Cybersecurity Assets and Infrastructure, including $302,649,000 for Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation; $60,172,000
for the Cyber Analytics Data System; and
$5,000,000 for Threat Hunting for cyber defense operations with CyberSentry. Additionally, $18,643,000 is provided for Emergency Communications Assets and Infrastructure, which includes Next Generation
Networks Priority Services Phase 2.
Cybersecurity
Continuous
Diagnostics
and
Mitigation
(CDM).—Within 120 days of the date of enactment of this Act, CISA shall brief the Committees on its implementation of the CDM
program, including agencies’ CDM activities
previously or currently supported with CISA
funding, the duration of such funding support for each agency—including durations
for those that are no longer supported with
CISA funds—and when such agencies will
begin fully funding their CDM activities.
Spend Plan.—Within 60 days of the date of
enactment of this Act, CISA shall provide
the Committees with a spend plan for the
funds provided under PC&I.
Threat Hunting.—As a part of the quarterly
budget and staffing briefing requirements,
CISA shall brief the Committees on the
progress made under the CyberSentry program.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $1,667,038,000 for
Operations and Support, including increases

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

of: $47,000,000 for activities within the Mt.
Weather Emergency Operations Center;
$35,765,000 for restoration of positions eliminated in fiscal year 2025; $14,208,000 for
Grants
Management
Modernization;
$15,168,000 to support enhanced equipment for
Urban Search and Rescue Task Forces;
$5,137,000 for continuity of communications;
$3,000,000 to support FIFA World Cup and
America250 events; $3,000,000 for the expansion of innovative technologies in coordinated disaster response; $1,796,000 for Region
II facilities; and $1,000,000 for the administration of the Next Generation Warning System.
Community
Disaster
Resilience
Zones
(CDRZ).—Within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA shall brief the
Committees on best practices from the development and rollout of CDRZ and how such
practices will be incorporated into future
zone selection criteria. FEMA is directed to
engage SLTT stakeholders prior to briefing
the Committees.
Community Project Funding/Congressionally
Directed Spending (CPF/CDS) Grants Administration.—The agreement provides $3,200,000
for the administration of CPF/CDS grants.
Not later than 60 days after the release of a
Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) for
CPF/CDS projects and monthly thereafter,
FEMA shall provide a list of projects deemed
ineligible—including ineligibility related to
Hazard Mitigation Plans—or at risk of being
deemed as such, to include amounts for each
project. The report shall cover fiscal years
2022–2026.
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
(CWMD) Activities.—In conjunction with the
fiscal year 2027 budget request submission,
FEMA is directed to provide a proposed distribution of funds provided in Mission Support to oversee activities and programs
transferred from CWMD. FEMA may also
submit any recommendations for efficiencies
or reductions to these programs.
Disaster-Impacted Renters and Rental Markets.—Within 30 days of the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA, in coordination
with the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, shall support a National Academy of Public Administration study examining how renters and rental markets have
recovered from recent major disasters, with
a focus on disasters involving long displacement times for significant numbers of renter
households.
Emergency Management Assistance Compact
(EMAC).—The agreement directs FEMA to
ensure that the level of funding for EMAC is
specified in the budget request for fiscal year
2027.
FEMA Advisory Committee.—Within 30 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA
shall report to the Committees on the status
of the National Advisory Council, the National Dam Safety Review Board, and the
Technical Mapping Advisory Council and
provide a timeline for appointing members
to unfilled positions.
FEMA Workforce.— FEMA shall maintain
staffing levels, including a reservist workforce and its Cadre of Response/Recovery
Employees, necessary to fulfill the missions
required under the Homeland Security Act of
2002 (Public Law 107–296; 115 Stat. 2135; 6
U.S.C. 101 et seq.); the Robert T. Stafford
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance
Act (Public Law 100–707; 102 Stat. 4689; 42
U.S.C. 5121 et seq.); the Disaster Mitigation
Act of 2000 (P.L. 106–390, 114 Stat. 1552); the
Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006 (title VI of Public Law 109–
295; 120 Stat. 1394); the Sandy Recovery Improvement Act of 2013 (division B of Public
Law 113–2; 127 Stat. 39); the Disaster Recovery Reform Act of 2018 (division D of Public
Law 115–254; 132 Stat. 3438); and other FEMA

PO 00000

Frm 00326

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

authorities. For example, FEMA’s activities
related to its federal assistance mission shall
include issuing guidance, reviewing disaster
and non-disaster grant applications, obligating and outlaying awards, and providing
technical assistance and operational support
to grantees in a timely manner; reviewing
and approving plans for obligating and expending Federal funds; reviewing expenditures and reports for waste, fraud, and abuse;
and performing all other necessary duties to
allow recipients to proceed without unnecessary interruption. Within 30 days of the date
of enactment of this Act, and monthly thereafter, FEMA shall provide a briefing to the
Committees on staffing levels and workload
requirements, as detailed above, delineated
by PPA and program office. Such briefings
shall also include projected staffing levels
for the remainder of the fiscal year in light
of the agreement’s rejection of the position
reductions implemented in fiscal year 2025.
FEMA and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(FWS) Dam Removal.—Within 180 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, FEMA and
FWS shall provide a joint briefing to the
Committees on plans to increase interagency
coordination around dam removal and flood
map updates and provide a timeline for the
updating of flood maps for states where dam
removals have taken place within the past 10
years.
FEMA Regional Offices.—FEMA shall not
close, eliminate, or consolidate its regional
offices in a manner that violates current
statute.
FEMA Review Council.—FEMA shall not
implement an elimination or reorganization
plan for the Agency or any proposal to inhibit the performance of the Agency’s functions and activities funded by this Act without an act of Congress permitting such measures.
Flood Early Warning Systems.—Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA shall brief the Committees on its assessment of the operational reliability of
flood early warning systems.
Hail.—FEMA shall report to the Committees within 180 days of the date of enactment
of this Act on identification of cost-effective
and widely-deployable solutions to reduce
damage caused by severe weather events involving hail.
Hazard Mitigation Grant Program.—Within
30 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA shall brief the Committees on execution of the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program.
Nation-State Actor Threats.—FEMA, in conjunction with CISA and other relevant DHS
stakeholders, is directed to develop an outreach plan amongst emergency management
leadership to provide regular updates on potential nation-state actor threats, identify
ways in which existing programs can be updated and utilized to enhance preparedness,
and communicate strategies to increase public awareness. FEMA shall brief the Committees on such a plan within 270 days of the
date of enactment of this Act.
Next Generation Warning System (NGWS) Administration.—FEMA is directed to provide a
briefing to the Committees within 30 days of
the date of enactment of this Act on plans
for administration of the NGWS grant program for fiscal year 2026, as well as details of
the administration of fiscal year 2025 funds.
Safeguarding Tomorrow through Ongoing
Risk Mitigation (STORM) Act.—The agreement continues $1,000,000 and associated personnel to continue the fiscal year 2024 service level to manage and administer such
grants.
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) SatelliteDriven Hazard Monitoring.—The agreement
provides an additional $4,000,000 to support
continuous SAR satellite-driven hazard monitoring technology. Not later than 120 days

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.108

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

after the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA shall provide a spend plan to the Committees for these enhanced funds. Additionally, within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA is directed to brief
the Committees on efforts to integrate this
technology into current disaster response efforts.
Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) Training.—
The agreement provides an additional
$5,000,000 for UAS training efforts and directs
FEMA to collaborate with the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) Center of Excellence for UAS and other subject matter experts to build a federated ecosystem to
teach, train, educate, certify, and credential
first responders to employ UAS skills during
emergency management events.
Urban Flood Mapping Pilot Program.—Within 60 days of the date of enactment of this
Act, FEMA shall brief the Committees on
progress in developing the previously-enacted Urban Flood Mapping pilot program,
which received $1,200,000 through Public Law
116–93.
Wildland Fire Mitigation and Management
Commission Recommendations.—FEMA is directed to brief the Committees within 180
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
and semi-annually thereafter, on efforts to
implement relevant Wildland Fire Mitigation and Management Commission recommendations. Such briefings shall include
efforts to conduct stakeholder engagement,
identification of recommendations that are
regulatory in nature or require congressional
action, and resources to aid in implementation.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement provides $156,419,000 for
Procurement, Construction, and Improvements. Of this amount, $63,625,000 is for improvements at Mt. Weather Emergency Operations Center; $52,375,000 is for national continuity programs; and $12,000,000 is for the
Integrated Public Alert and Warning System.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

FEDERAL ASSISTANCE

The agreement includes $3,836,748,513 for
Federal Assistance.
Continuing Training Grants.—Within the
total amount provided for Continuing Training Grants, $1,900,000 shall be for FEMA to
partner with the FAA Center of Excellence
for UAS to conduct a regional training program on utilizing UAS for disaster preparedness and response for SLTT responders;
$7,600,000 shall be for activities of the National Cybersecurity Preparedness Consortium (NCPC); and not less than $2,850,000
shall be competitively awarded for FEMAcertified rural and tribal training.
Flood Hazard Mapping and Risk Analysis
Program (RiskMAP).—Within 180 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, FEMA shall
brief the Committees on progress in implementing RiskMAP.
Grant Award Considerations.—When awarding grants, the Administrator shall consider
the needs of cybersecurity preparedness and
planning, state court cybersecurity, 911 call
capability, alert and warning capabilities,
and implementation of the REAL ID Act (P.
L. 109–13).
Grants Reporting.—Within 30 days of the
date of enactment of this Act and not later
than the fifth business day of each month
thereafter, FEMA shall provide to the Committees a report identifying the current expected NOFO release dates for each Federal
assistance program for which funding is provided or was otherwise made available in fiscal year 2025 and fiscal year 2026 by this or
any other Act. The report shall identify the
current expected application, review, and
award schedules. Following the awarding of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1679

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Federal assistance for each program, each report shall include the amounts expended
under such program’s awards. The report
shall include the status of all prior year Federal assistance funding, including whether
and for what amounts any such funds have
been reprogrammed, transferred, obligated,
expended, or lapsed. Additionally, within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA shall provide a report to the Committees detailing the rationale for each individual award termination and the amount
terminated.
Improving Rural Access to Assistance to Firefighters Grants (AFG) and Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER).—
FEMA is directed to review the AFG and
SAFER grant programs and identify potential improvements. Within 270 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, FEMA shall
brief the Committees on recommendations
to improve access and distribution of AFG
and SAFER grants to rural fire departments.
Law Enforcement Terrorism Prevention Activities (LETPA) Set-Aside for State Homeland
Security Program (SHSP) and Urban Area Security Initiative (UASI).—Prior to establishing
the LETPA set-aside for the SHSP and UASI
grant programs, FEMA is directed to brief
the Committees on the threat environment.
FEMA shall include a discussion of any
stakeholder engagement conducted to date
in such briefing.
National Domestic Preparedness Consortium
(NDPC).—Within the funds provided for
NDPC, $3,000,000 shall be used to improve domestic preparedness and provide training to
emergency responders and event personnel
involved in large spectator sports or special
events, and $5,000,000 shall be used to provide
training for rural county emergency response officials.
Next Generation Warning System (NGWS).—
FEMA shall use funds provided for the
NGWS for technical assistance, infrastructure replacement, infrastructure hardening,
cybersecurity, technology infrastructure,
improving access to alerts, and operational
continuity support.
Operation Stonegarden.—Within 180 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA is
directed to submit to the Committees data
from the last three fiscal years detailing Operation Stonegarden awards by state and recipient and the process used to determine
such awards and recipients. Additionally,
FEMA shall brief the Committees on the
data and justifications for Operation
Stonegarden awards 15 days before such
awards are publicly announced.
Reporting on Lithium-ion Battery Related
Fires.—The U.S. Fire Administration (USFA)
shall form a cadre of Fire Data Leaders nationwide to provide technical expertise and
assistance to local fire departments in need,
and the agreement provides an additional
$500,000 for the development of a National
Fire Data Corps to support fire and emergency services in their adoption and use of
National Emergency Response Information
System (NERIS). Additionally, the agreement provides an increase of $5,000,000 in
support of USFA’s user training on NERIS,
including training on reporting lithium-ion
battery-related fires.
Temporary Housing and Non-Congregate
Sheltering.—The agreement directs GAO to
conduct an assessment of current temporary
housing and non-congregate sheltering options, including non-congregate structures,
that are available on the market and whether FEMA utilized the most cost-effective,
viable solutions following major disaster
declarations in fiscal years 2022–2025. GAO
shall brief the Committees within 270 days of
the date of enactment of this Act on the
costs, benefits, disadvantages, feasibility,
and utility of the creation of a national

PO 00000

Frm 00327

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

stockpile of rapid response, cost-effective
temporary shelter solutions.
U.S. Fire Administration.—The agreement
provides an additional $5,000,000 for NERIS
modernization. FEMA is directed to continue
its traditional funding for the congressionally-mandated National Fallen Firefighters
Memorial. Additionally, FEMA shall provide
a briefing to the Committees within 180 days
of the date of enactment of this Act regarding any plans to revise Emergency Support
Function #4—Firefighting to clarify or
change USFA’s role in responding to structural fires and wildland fires that burn into
the wildland urban interface.
Urban Area Security Initiative.—Within 90
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA shall provide a briefing to the Committees detailing the current risk and threat
assessment methodology used for UASI, any
geographic-related factors used to assess the
risk of urban areas applying for funding, and
how such geographic-related factors are used
in developing urban areas’ risk and threats.
Further, FEMA shall provide to the Committees a report on fiscal year 2022–2025 UASI
funding awards, the number of grant applicants in those years, and any quantitative or
qualitative results or other outcomes related
to such awards within 180 days of the date of
enactment of this Act. Additionally, FEMA
is directed to examine the enhanced use of
the FBI’s Threat Review and Prioritization
program in the development of Metropolitan
Statistical Area Risk Profiles.
DISASTER RELIEF FUND

The agreement provides $26,367,000,000 for
the Disaster Relief Fund (DRF).
Building Resilient Infrastructure and Communities (BRIC).—Within 30 days of the date of
enactment of this Act and monthly thereafter, FEMA shall brief the Committees on
the status of BRIC, including projected funding levels. Within 90 days of the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA shall brief the
Committees on the abilities of states and
local jurisdictions to qualify for access to
BRIC. The briefing shall include, but not be
limited to, an analysis of the applicants’
abilities to meet the program’s building code
requirements, their options outside of the
program to assist communities with needed
predisaster mitigation, and other challenges
in addressing predisaster mitigation. The
briefing shall also include a discussion of the
feasibility of modifying the existing technical scoring criteria in the NOFO to provide
local jurisdictions with full application
points for the building codes implemented by
municipalities within the boundary of a
county, as well as for other mechanisms to
protect property such as advanced floodplain
regulations and drainage criteria carried out
by a county. Additionally, within 180 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA is
directed to brief the Committees on the steps
taken to address applicants’ concerns regarding building codes.
BRIC Termination Reporting.—Within 180
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA is directed to brief the Committees on
the specific BRIC grants terminated by
FEMA. At a minimum, the briefing shall include a table for each terminated BRIC grant
detailing: the previous grant award amount;
the percentage of the award disbursed prior
to termination; the amount of the award
that the grantee returned as a result of the
BRIC award termination; a description of
work completed under the BRIC award prior
to termination; and a description of work
unable to be completed due to BRIC award
termination. Additionally, within 60 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, the Department shall brief the Committees on its
rationale for terminating the BRIC program,
including justifying forgoing long-term savings associated with investing in predisaster

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.109

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1680

mitigation. The briefing shall include comprehensive empirical data related to claims
of waste, fraud, and abuse, to the extent that
any exists.
Debris Removal.—Within 90 days of the date
of enactment of this Act, FEMA is directed
to submit to the Committees a report clarifying debris removal and public safety policies across all types of communities with established community associations. Additionally, within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA shall brief the Committees on the number and type of discrimination incidents related to debris removal
reported to FEMA since October 1, 2022, as
well as a summary of related public comments received during the drafting of the
most recent version of FEMA’s Public Assistance
Program
and
Policy
Guide
(PAPPG).
Declaration of a Disaster.—Within 30 days of
the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA
shall provide a briefing and submit to the
Committees current or updated written evaluation factors, thresholds, and any other
written or unwritten criteria used to determine eligibility requirements when making
final recommendations related to emergency
or major disaster declarations. The briefing
shall include how each declaration request
received by the Executive Branch in the previous fiscal quarter measures against the
specific factors, thresholds, and criteria
identified. The briefing shall also include the
specific reason(s) for any delays in findings
of eligibility or ineligibility of more than 20
days from the receipt of each outstanding
emergency declaration request or 30 days
from the receipt of each outstanding major
disaster declaration request. Additionally,
updated factors, thresholds, and criteria
shall be provided to the Committees not
later than the day on which any such update
takes effect.
DRF Monthly Report.—In addition to the
information required in the monthly report,
FEMA is directed to provide a projection of
obligations from the DRF for the twelvemonth period following the date of submission of the current month’s report to the
Committees.
Housing Assistance Delivery.—GAO shall
provide a report and briefing to the Committees within 270 days of the date of enactment
of this Act analyzing the economic impacts
of FEMA’s financial housing assistance on
communities that have housing shortages.
Immediate Needs Funding (INF).—Within 30
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA shall brief the Committees on current
policies and procedures for INF implementation, including the analysis of DRF balances
and obligation projections used to inform
implementation decisions, and the categories of work for which FEMA would likely delay reimbursements of otherwise eligible costs during implementation. Additionally, the briefing shall include an analysis of
the benefits and costs of utilizing a strategic
approach to the deployment of INF as opposed to an overall cessation of reimbursements. Further, FEMA shall brief the Committees monthly regarding any ongoing utilization of INF, including the analysis and
metrics used to make an implementation decision, and the projected date by which INF
implementation will end. Finally, during
any implementation of INF, FEMA shall provide to the Committees a weekly report of
delayed eligible reimbursements delineated
by declared disaster, state, and categories of
work.
Indirect Costs Reimbursement.—Until FEMA
establishes management cost rates for the
Disaster Case Management (DCM) program,
FEMA shall provide an annual report to Congress on the effect of failing to establish
management cost rates on DCM capacity,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

particularly with respect to nonprofit DCM
providers.
Natural Infrastructure Activities.—Within 180
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA shall provide a report to the Committees on the number, total requested funding,
and percentage of fiscal years 2023 and 2024
BRIC applications for natural infrastructure
projects, as well as a comparison of such
data points to each of the fiscal years 2020
through 2022 grant cycles. The report shall
be disaggregated by successful and unsuccessful applications and detail the types of
natural infrastructure activities funded.
Preservation of Surveyors Marks.—Within 180
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA shall provide a briefing to the Committees on the potential benefits of including surveying mark preservation performed
by land surveyors as a core activity for disaster planning, emergency response, disaster
cleanup, and disaster recovery efforts.
Public and Individual Assistance.—Section
313 of this Act includes language requiring
FEMA to produce an interactive dashboard
on its publicly accessible website showing
the status of certain requests for reimbursement. The dashboard shall include the following information:
(1) the damage category code;
(2) for each proposed grant award, information on each cost estimate, applicant ID, the
date of each submission, the descriptions for
each project, and the cost of each project delineated by the Federal and non-Federal
cost-share;
(3) the status of FEMA’s review and approval of each cost estimate submitted, including the date on which a project is approved and the date on which the grant is
issued;
(4) an explanation for any cost estimate
that is not approved, or if the grant is not
provided in the timeline as required, and any
corrective action taken by FEMA;
(5) project-level progress updates;
(6) requests for assistance submitted, including dates and amounts of each request,
timelines for submissions of required information, and dates of approval and disbursement of awards; and
(7) any other information the Administrator determines to be appropriate to ensure transparency and accountability in the
administration of public assistance.
Reimbursements.—FEMA is directed to complete a review of outstanding reimbursements expeditiously and to provide a report
to the Committees within 60 days of the date
of enactment of this Act, and monthly thereafter, outlining any previous or ongoing
challenges to reviewing reimbursement
claims in a timely manner. Each report shall
include the current number of disaster reimbursement requests currently pending FEMA
review, delineated by state and funding
amount, and a plan and timeline for reducing
the number of open requests.
Reimbursement for Interest.—Within 180 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, FEMA
shall provide a report to the Committees detailing reimbursement for interest accumulated on qualifying disaster relief loans pursuant to the most recent version of the
PAPPG. The report shall include details on
the process through which entities can apply
for interest reimbursement and information
or examples about how interest reimbursement has been provided.
Snowstorms.—The
agreement
reaffirms
Congress’ intent, pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
5122(2), that snowstorms shall be eligible for
Federal relief under major disaster declarations and notes that a major disaster declaration shall not be withheld simply due to
that disaster’s classification as a snowstorm.
Temporary Shelters and Emergency Housing.—FEMA is directed to brief the Commit-

PO 00000

Frm 00328

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tees within 270 days of the date of enactment
of this Act on the current utilization restrictions and categorical eligibility regarding
temporary transportable housing units and
alternative temporary transportable housing
units, the reasons such restrictions are in
place, and potential future adjustments.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE FUND

The agreement includes $226,000,000 for the
National Flood Insurance Fund (NFIF).
FEMA is directed to conduct quarterly reporting on the NFIF in a public and transparent manner while complying with other
reporting requirements in statute. Should
FEMA fail to meet the quarterly reporting
requirement, the Administrator is required
to provide a documented reason for the delay
and a status update every 30 days to the
Committees until the report is issued. If the
Administrator fails to produce a quarterly
report, the Administrator or their designee
is required to provide a briefing to the Committees within five business days on the National Flood Insurance Programs debt repayment plan.
Habitat Restoration Permitting.—Within 60
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
FEMA shall brief the Committees on the
steps taken to streamline habitat restoration permitting and a timeline for future related actions.
Swift Current Program.—The Committees
direct FEMA to provide additional time for
eligible states, territories, and tribes to
apply for Swift Current Program funding
through a process determined by the Administrator. Within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act and not less than 15 days
prior to implementation of such process,
FEMA shall brief the Committees on the
planned implementation of such process.
TITLE III—ADMINISTRATIVE
PROVISIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

Section 301. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision making ‘‘Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency—Operations and Support’’ funding available for
procuring and providing cybersecurity threat
feeds to CISA stakeholders and partners.
Section 302. The agreement continues a
provision limiting expenses for administration of grants.
Section 303. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision specifying timeframes
for information on certain grant awards.
Section 304. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision requiring a five-day advance notification for certain grant awards
under ‘‘Federal Emergency Management
Agency—Federal Assistance’’.
Section 305. The agreement continues a
provision that addresses the availability of
certain grant funds for the installation of
communications towers.
Section 306. The agreement continues a
provision requiring a report on the expenditures of the DRF.
Section 307. The agreement continues a
provision permitting waivers to certain
SAFER grant program requirements.
Section 308. The agreement continues a
provision providing for the receipt and expenditure of fees collected for the Radiological Emergency Preparedness Program, as
authorized by Public Law 105–276.
Section 309. The agreement continues a
provision permitting waivers to certain Assistance to Firefighter Grants program requirements.
Section 310. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision regarding the transfer
of unobligated balances under the National
Predisaster Mitigation Fund.
Section 311. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision regarding the transfer

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.110

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

of unobligated balances under the Flood Hazard Mapping and Risk Analysis Program.
Section 312. The agreement includes a new
provision that provides a minimum and maximum for grant periods of performance.
Section 313. The agreement includes a new
provision requiring a dashboard for reimbursements made pursuant to a major disaster declaration under the Stafford Act.
Section 314. The agreement includes a new
provision prohibiting the pausing of training
or grants funded under FEMA Federal Assistance.
TITLE IV—RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT,
TRAINING, AND SERVICES
UNITED STATES CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION
SERVICES

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $122,941,000 for Operations and Support, including $10,375,000
for backlog reduction.
Administrative Holds.—Within 90 days of the
date of enactment of this Act and quarterly
thereafter, USCIS shall provide information
related to USCIS’ administrative holds or
suspension of processing on the adjudication
of several benefits requests as a result of Executive Orders 14161 or 14157. The report shall
include: the number of applicants or beneficiaries whose form processing is on administrative hold or otherwise suspended, including the form type and filing category;
the number of days each form has been pending from the time of filing; the number of applications subject to administrative holds or
suspensions, disaggregated by form type and
filing category for which a fee was paid and
processed or a fee waiver was granted; and
the number of days each form has been pending from the date the administrative hold or
suspension on processing was placed.
Affirmative Asylum Backlog and Asylum Officer Staffing.—The agreement continues the
reporting requirements in the explanatory
statement accompanying Public Law 118–47
and further directs USCIS to submit a report
to the Committees within 90 days of the date
of enactment of this Act regarding the status of the affirmative asylum backlog, including how funds in fiscal year 2025 were
used to reduce the backlog, the number of affirmative asylum cases still pending by year
of application date, whether the cases have
received an interview, the number of personnel dedicated to reducing the backlog,
and any additional financial resources necessary to reduce the backlog. Additionally,
USCIS is directed to publish publicly the
number of asylum officers, the offices each
asylum officer is assigned to, the number of
asylum officers dedicated to backlog cases,
and the number of asylum officers deployed
to the southwest border within 120 days of
the date of enactment of this Act.
Application Processing.—USCIS is directed
to make available on a publicly accessible
website an interactive dashboard detailing
for all USCIS forms, the number of forms received, processed, approved, denied, and
pending by month, along with the average
processing time and the number of forms
pending for more than six months. USCIS
shall update the Committees on the status of
this requirement during the quarterly budget and productivity briefings required by
House Report 118–123. The dashboard shall be
updated monthly but not later than the
tenth business day following the end of each
month and permit the downloading of the
underlying data in a searchable and sortable
spreadsheet format. Additionally, not later
than 45 days after the date of the close of the
fiscal year, USCIS shall publicly post data
related to a fear of intimate partner violence
in the applicants’ home country reflecting:
the number of people claiming to have a
credible or reasonable fear under Section 235

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1681

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

of the Immigration and Nationality Act
(INA); the number of principal asylum applications filed affirmatively with USCIS under
Section 208 of the INA based in whole or in
part of such fear, delineated by whether such
applications were based in whole or in part;
the number of principal asylum applications
USCIS granted wholly or in part on account
of the applicant’s fear of intimate partner violence in their home country, delineated by
whether such applications were granted
based in whole or in part; and the country of
origin for each applicant, whether they were
represented by an attorney, accredited representative, or other individual, and whether
there was an interpreter present for the credible fear and asylum interviews.
Audio and Video Interviews.—Within 90 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, USCIS
shall provide a report on the number of
interviews conducted remotely or by video,
what infrastructure was created to do so
while preserving a fair and impartial process, and what USCIS needs to efficiently use
remote interview capabilities. The report
should also include challenges and best practices in conducting remote interviews and
factors that informed the Department’s decisions around which applicants were eligible
for a remote interview, as well as statistics
outlining the rates of outcomes between an
in-person and remote interview modality for
each of the last three fiscal years.
Biometrics Collection.—USCIS, in consultation with CBP, is directed to provide a report
within 180 days of the date of enactment of
this Act on the feasibility and associated resource cost of biometrics collection, for use
by USCIS, at CBP locations where there is
no USCIS office and where the closest USCIS
office is only accessible by airplane, vessel,
or is more than 500 miles away from the CBP
location.
Central American Minors (CAM) Program.—
Within 90 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, USCIS, in coordination with partner agencies, shall publicly publish data including the number of CAM applications; approval and denial rates; interviews conducted and whether legal representation was
provided; CAM arrivals, disaggregated by
refugee and parole arrivals; and average
processing times, disaggregated by country
and by refugee and parole arrivals.
Child Applicant Interviews.—Within 90 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, USCIS
shall brief the Committees on the current
policies and procedures in place concerning
interviews that occur when children are the
applicant/beneficiary or when children are
present in the interview. At a minimum, the
briefing shall cover when any child wellbeing professionals were consulted in the formulation of the policies and procedures, how
frequently adjudicators are trained on such
policies, and any best practices for conducting interviews when there are children
present.
Coordination with the Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR).—Within 180 days of the
date of enactment of this Act, USCIS is directed to provide a report to the Committees
on the coordination efforts with ORR, including any areas that require improvement
regarding the referral process for newly
granted asylees.
Cost Recovery.—In lieu of the House language under this heading, the agreement directs USCIS to continue to provide fee waiver data in the quarterly budget and staffing
briefings required by House Report 117–396
and to provide the briefing required under
the heading ‘‘Fee Waivers and Application
Deadlines’’ included in the explanatory
statement accompanying Public Law 118–47.
Employment Authorization Backlog Reporting.—The agreement continues to direct
USCIS to make employment authorization

PO 00000

Frm 00329

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

backlog statistics available on a publicly accessible website on a quarterly basis with
the following modifications: the total number of filed employment authorization applications pending; the total number of such
applications that have been pending for: 30
or fewer days; 31–60 days; 61–90 days; 91–120
days; 121–179 days; 180–540 days; 541 or more
days; and a summary, on an annual basis, of
all existing processing time goals, the source
of the time goal, and whether the agency
met the time goal for the prior fiscal year.
The agreement further directs USCIS to
brief the Committees within 120 days of the
date of enactment of this Act on the number
of reported mistakes on employment authorization documents issued by the agency,
timelines associated with remedying such
mistakes, and the resources required to issue
corrected employment authorization documents within 90 days of receipts.
Fee Collection Transparency.—Within 30
days of the date of enactment of this Act,
and every 30 days thereafter, USCIS shall
publicly report whether any fees collected by
USCIS have been utilized for immigration
enforcement purposes and the statutory authority for such utilization. Such report
shall include the purpose and amount of such
uses and shall indicate the original source of
fees based on form type of such collected fee.
Fee Waivers Under Federal Poverty Guidelines.—USCIS is directed to continue its current policy regarding fee waivers, both full
and partial, for certain eligible applicants
and shall continue accepting current eligible
items as proof, aligned with prevailing policy.
H–2A Visas.—In consultation with the Department of Labor (DOL) and within 120 days
of the date of enactment of this Act, USCIS
is directed to provide to the Committees a
report on the impacts of exempting dairy industry activities from the temporary or seasonal requirements of the H–2A program. Additionally, the agreement continues the direction in the explanatory statement accompanying Public Law 118–47 under the ‘‘Prevention of Abuses in the H–2A Program’’
heading.
H–2B Visas.—The agreement directs USCIS,
in consultation with DOL and other relevant
departments:
(1) to examine the impacts of the current
H–2B visa semiannual distribution on employers, employees, and agency operations
and to provide the Committees with a briefing on the conclusions within 180 days of the
date of enactment of this Act;
(2) to provide a report to the Committees
within 180 days of the date of enactment of
this Act on the following: data on the economic impact of the H–2B visa program on a
state-by-state and national level; the estimated number of H–2B visas that would have
been required to meet demand in fiscal year
2025 on a state-by-state and national level,
absent any restrictions on the number of H–
2B visas issued; and any economic impact
that resulted from the inability to issue
visas that would meet the estimated demand; and
(3) to provide a report within 120 days of
the date of enactment of this Act making
recommendations to ensure that the integrity of the program is safeguarded and that
the limited number of H–2B visas are reserved for law-abiding employers. The report
shall include the effects on prohibitions on
implementation of DOL regulations relating
to corresponding employment, the threequarter guarantee, and prevailing wages and
working conditions for individuals and U.S.
workers; and the number of H–2B visas, including the number of supplemental visas
issued in each of the past three years to entities and individuals who in the past five
years were found to have committed H–2A or

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.111

H22JAPT2

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1682

H–2B violations, which include the number of
visas allocated to violators who at any point
have committed egregious H–2A or H–2B violations such as visa fraud and wage theft,
and indicating the dates of the violations
and visa issuance.
Implementation of Grant Funding.—USCIS is
reminded of its statutory requirement to
execute funds that Congress has previously
appropriated. USCIS is directed to brief the
Committees within 45 days on execution of
prior years’ Federal Assistance funding.
USCIS shall provide the Committees with its
legal justification for terminating any grant
program and associated funding within 45
days of the date of enactment of this Act.
Naturalization at Basic Training.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, USCIS shall brief the Committees
on plans to expand Naturalization at Basic
Training and ensure eligible military recruits and servicemembers have necessary
assistance to complete the process, including
attending interviews and appointments.
P–3 Refugee Processing.— The agreement
continues the requirements found under this
heading in Senate Report 118–85.
Policy Changes.—USCIS is directed to brief
the Committees three business days before
implementation of significant changes to
any current policy. Additionally, USCIS
shall continue to make all policy memos
publicly available immediately upon implementation of significant change to any current policy.
Special Immigration Juvenile (SIJ) Visas
Backlog.—The agreement continues the directive found under this heading in Senate
Report 118–85, including the directive to publish copies of SIJ Visa backlog reports publicly within five days of submission to the
Committees.
Status for Certain Individuals.—The agreement reiterates the directives found in the
House Report regarding the required consideration, analysis, and evaluation of the status designation of individuals from certain
countries, as well as the required briefing to
the Committees.
USCIS Backlog and Frontlog Reporting.—The
agreement continues the directives found
under this heading in Senate Report 118–85.
USCIS Field Offices.—Not later than 60 days
after the date of enactment of this Act,
USCIS is directed to brief the Committees on
the current budgetary impact of field offices
in major metropolitan areas, whether these
offices have personnel assigned to backlog
reduction efforts, and the impact on staffing
should these offices move locations to a less
populated area. If USCIS has moved a field
office location from an area with a population of 500,000 people or greater to an area
of less than 100,000 people in the past two
years, USCIS shall ensure the availability of
services in the prior major metropolitan location.
United States Refugee Admissions Program.—
Within 90 days of the date of enactment of
this Act, and quarterly thereafter, USCIS
shall submit a report to the Committees and
make available to the public on its website
the information described on the United
States
Refugee
Admissions
Program
(USRAP) with the following information:
(1) for each fiscal year 2020 through 2025,
the average duration of each step of the refugee screening process; the number of interviews, approvals, and denials of refugee applications; the number of cases placed on
hold or that are pending; and the use of waivers or other flexibilities to expedite the process;
(2) for the current fiscal year, the number
of refugees in the USRAP pipeline,
disaggregated by status;
(3) the total number of Afghan nationals
referred to the USRAP, disaggregated by P–

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

1, P–2, P–3, P–4, and I–730; the total number
of Afghan SIV applicants; and the number of
Afghan nationals with pending Humanitarian Parole applications; and
(4) the number of Iraqi P–2 Direct Access
Program adjudications since the resumption
of the program on March 1, 2022. Such report
shall also include information on the suitability of extending Priority 2 status to
Uyghurs and Hong Kong residents.
Visa Application Processing.—USCIS is directed to provide a briefing to the Committees within 180 days of the date of enactment
of this Act on possible visa application processing efficiencies that can be implemented,
including an assessment of the feasibility of
executing processes at both USCIS and
DOL’s Office of Foreign Labor Certification
processes concurrently to reduce wait times.
FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING
CENTERS
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $379,837,000 for Operations and Support.
The agreement directs Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers (FLETC) to provide a cost analysis detailing, at minimum,
each training center’s maximum instructional capacity by course and measured
against its annual student occupancy not
later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Human Trafficking Awareness Training.—
The agreement provides $1,000,000 for Human
Trafficking Awareness Training.
Law Enforcement Training.—FLETC is directed to ensure training of CBP and ICE law
enforcement personnel includes de-escalation tactics. The agreement provides
$2,000,000 to FLETC to ensure training of
DHS law enforcement personnel includes deescalation tactics. Not less than 30 days
after the date of enactment of this Act,
FLETC shall brief the Committees on the
training curriculum regarding de-escalation
and community engagement standards provided to DHS law enforcement personnel.
The Department shall provide a quarterly report to the Committees on the number of law
enforcement
personnel,
by
component,
trained in de-escalation tactics.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement provides $18,300,000 to address the most critical of FLETC’s major deferred maintenance projects that would improve delivery of training or the health and
welfare of students.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY DIRECTORATE
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

The agreement provides $352,802,000 for Operations and Support. Of the total amount
provided for this account, $201,183,000 is
available until September 30, 2027 for Laboratory Facilities and Acquisition and Operations Analysis.
Partnership Intermediary Agreements.—The
agreement sustains base funding for Partnership Intermediary Agreements to enable
components across the Department to engage immediately on technology transfer
and transition activities.
SAFETY Act.—The agreement directs S&T
to eliminate the backlog of renewal certifications of qualified anti-terrorism technologies to complete all future renewal certifications within 90 days of the date of application.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement provides $51,500,000 for Procurement, Construction, and Improvements,
including $41,500,000 for Plum Island Closure
and Support and $10,000,000 for Critical Repair/Replacement Requirement.

PO 00000

Frm 00330

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Plum Island Closure and Support (PICS) Program.—Not later than 90 days after the date
of enactment of this Act, DHS and USDA
shall provide a joint briefing to the Committees. The briefing shall identify the root
causes that delayed the transition from
PIADC to NBAF, the remaining barriers to
the transition, and the joint plan to overcome those barriers. The briefing shall include a revised timeline and detailed budget
requirements to finalize the transition. Further, S&T is directed to continue providing
semi-annual briefings on the progress of
these activities.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

The agreement provides $426,904,000 for Research and Development.
Research, Development, and Innovation
The agreement provides $379,904,000 for Research, Development, and Innovation. Within
60 days of the date of enactment of this Act,
S&T shall provide a spend plan for Research
and Development.
Bi-National Cooperative Program.—Within
the funds provided, the agreement directs
S&T to continue its engagement in the Binational Research and Development program
and work with partners to develop innovative technology solutions for homeland security needs.
Next-Generation Biosurveillance Systems.—
Within 90 days, S&T, in consultation with
academia, industry, and SLTT partners, is
directed to provide a funding plan by fiscal
year and transition plans for the development of the next generation Biosurveillance
System, including how MALDI–TOF MS will
be employed.
Opioid and Fentanyl Detection.—The agreement directs S&T to provide a briefing within 90 days of the date of enactment of this
Act on any research or development to incorporate rapid scanning into screening methods for drug interdiction.
University Programs
Centers of Excellence (COE) Program.—In
lieu of the House language under this heading, the agreement provides $47,000,000 for
COEs and directs S&T to restore and fund,
within 30 days of enactment of this Act,
partnerships with all COEs that had option
years remaining at the time of termination.
The Committees further direct S&T to brief
the Committees within 60 days of the date of
enactment of this Act on its plan for restoring partnerships with all affected institutions. The agreement also directs DHS to include funding for nine Centers of Excellence
in its Fiscal Year 2027 budget submission.
TITLE IV—ADMINISTRATIVE
PROVISIONS
Section 401. The agreement continues a
provision allowing USCIS to acquire, operate, equip, and dispose of up to five vehicles
under certain scenarios.
Section 402. The agreement continues a
provision limiting the use of A–76 competitions by USCIS.
Section 403. The agreement continues a
provision related to the collection and use of
biometrics.
Section 404. The agreement continues a
provision authorizing the Director of FLETC
to distribute funds for expenses incurred in
training accreditation.
Section 405. The agreement continues a
provision directing the FLETC Accreditation
Board to lead the Federal law enforcement
training accreditation process to measure
and assess Federal law enforcement training
programs, facilities, and instructors.
Section 406. The agreement continues a
provision allowing the acceptance of transfers from government agencies into ‘‘Federal
Law Enforcement Training Centers—Procurement,
Construction,
and
Improvements’’.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.112

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

Section 407. The agreement continues a
provision classifying FLETC instructor staff
as inherently governmental for certain considerations.
TITLE V—GENERAL PROVISIONS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

(INCLUDING TRANSFERS AND RESCISSIONS OF
FUNDS)

Section 501. The agreement continues a
provision directing that no part of any appropriation shall remain available for obligation beyond the current year unless expressly provided.
Section 502. The agreement continues a
provision providing authority to merge unexpended balances of prior appropriations with
new appropriation accounts, to be used for
the same purpose, subject to reprogramming
guidelines.
Section 503. The agreement continues a
provision related to reprogramming limitations and transfer authority.
The Department must notify the Committees on Appropriations at least 30 days in advance of each reprogramming of funds that
would: (1) reduce programs, projects, and activities, or personnel, by 10 percent or more;
or (2) increase a program, project, or activity
by more than $5,000,000 or 10 percent, whichever is less.
The term ‘‘program, project, and activity’’
(PPA) is defined as each functional category
listed under an account heading in the funding table at the back of this explanatory
statement, along with each funding amount
designated for a particular purpose within
the statement narrative, exclusive of simple
references to increases or reductions below
the budget request. Funding for each PPA
should not be used for the purposes of any
other PPA.
For purposes of reprogramming notifications, the creation of a new program,
project, or activity is defined as any significant new activity that has not been explicitly justified to the Congress in budget justification material and for which funds have
not been appropriated by the Congress.
Limited transfer authority is provided to
give the Department flexibility in responding to emerging requirements and significant changes in circumstances, but is not intended to facilitate the implementation of
new programs, projects, or activities that
were not proposed in a formal budget submission. Transfers may not reduce accounts
by more than five percent or augment appropriations by more than 10 percent. The Department must notify the Committees on
Appropriations not fewer than 30 days in advance of any transfer.
To avoid violations of the Anti-Deficiency
Act, the Secretary shall ensure that any
transfer of funds is carried out in compliance
with the limitations and requirements of
section 503(c). In particular, the Secretary
should ensure that any such transfers adhere
to the opinion of the Comptroller General’s
decision in the Matter of: John D. Webster, Director, Financial Services, Library of Congress,
dated November 7, 1997, with regard to the definition of an appropriation subject to transfer limitations.
Notifications should provide complete explanations of proposed funding reallocations,
including detailed justifications for increases and offsets; any specific impact the
proposed changes are expected to have on future-year appropriations requirements; a
table showing the proposed revisions to funding and FTE—at the account and PPA levels—for the current fiscal year; and any expected funding and FTE impacts during the
budget year.
The Department shall manage its PPAs
within the levels appropriated and should
only submit reprogramming or transfer notifications in cases of unforeseeable and com-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1683

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

pelling circumstances that could not have
been predicted when formulating the budget
request for the current fiscal year. When the
Department becomes aware of an emerging
requirement after the President’s budget has
been submitted to Congress but prior to the
enactment of a full-year funding Act for the
budget year, it is incumbent on the Office of
the Chief Financial Officer to timely notify
the Committees. When the Department submits a reprogramming or transfer notification and does not receive identical responses
from the House and Senate Committees, it is
expected to work with the Committees to
reconcile the differences before proceeding.
Section 504. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds appropriated or
otherwise made available to the Department
to make payment to the Working Capital
Fund, except for activities and amounts allowed in the President’s fiscal year 2026
budget request.
Section 505. The agreement continues a
provision providing that not to exceed 50 percent of unobligated balances from prior-year
appropriations for each Operations and Support appropriation shall remain available
through fiscal year 2026, subject to section
503 reprogramming requirements.
Section 506. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision that deems intelligence
activities to be specifically authorized during fiscal year 2026 until the enactment of an
Act authorizing intelligence activities for
fiscal year 2026.
Section 507. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision requiring notification
to the Committees at least three days before
DHS executes or announces grant allocations
or grant awards totaling $1,000,000 or more;
an award or contract, other transaction
agreement; a grant from the Disaster Relief
Fund greater than $100,000; or task order on
a multiple award agreement, or to issue a
letter of intent of greater than $2,000,000;
task or delivery orders greater than
$5,000,000 from DHS multi-year funds; or
sole-source grant awards. Notifications shall
include a description of the projects or activities to be funded and the location, including city, county, and state.
Section 508. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting all agencies from purchasing, constructing, or leasing additional
facilities for Federal law enforcement training without advance notification to the Committees.
Section 509. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting the use of funds for any
construction, repair, alteration, or acquisition project for which a prospectus, if required under chapter 33 of title 40, United
States Code, has not been approved.
Section 510. The agreement continues a
provision that includes and consolidates by
reference prior-year statutory provisions related to sensitive security information and
the use of funds in conformance with section
303 of the Energy Policy Act of 1992.
Section 511. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting the use of funds in contravention of the Buy American Act.
Section 512. The agreement continues a
provision regarding the oath of allegiance required by section 337 of the Immigration and
Nationality Act.
Section 513. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision that precludes DHS
from using funds in this Act to use reorganization authority, with the exception of the
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office consistent with the table in this explanatory statement.
Section 514. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds for planning,
testing, piloting, or developing a national
identification card.
Section 515. The agreement continues a
provision directing that any official required

PO 00000

Frm 00331

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

by this Act to report or certify to the Committees on Appropriations may not delegate
such authority unless expressly authorized
to do so in this Act.
Section 516. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds in this Act to be
used for first-class travel.
Section 517. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting the use of funds to employ illegal workers as described in Section
274A(h)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Section 518. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this Act to pay
for award or incentive fees for contractors
with below satisfactory performance or performance that fails to meet the basic requirements of the contract.
Section 519. The agreement continues a
provision requiring DHS computer systems
to block electronic access to pornography,
except for law enforcement purposes.
Section 520. The agreement continues a
provision regarding the transfer of firearms
by Federal law enforcement personnel.
Section 521. The agreement continues a
provision regarding funding restrictions and
reporting requirements related to conferences occurring outside of the United
States.
Section 522. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds to reimburse any
Federal department or agency for its participation in a National Special Security Event.
Section 523. The agreement continues a
provision requiring a notification, including
justification materials, prior to implementing any structural pay reform or instituting a new position classification that affects more than 100 FTP or costs more than
$5,000,000.
Section 524. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision directing the Department to post, on a public website, reports required by the Committees unless public posting compromises homeland or national security or contains proprietary information.
Section 525. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision authorizing minor procurement, construction, and improvements
under ‘‘Operations and Support’’ appropriations, as specified.
Section 526. The agreement continues, by
reference, a provision authorizing DHS to
use discretionary appropriations for the primary and secondary schooling of eligible dependents of DHS personnel stationed in areas
of U.S. territories that meet certain criteria.
Section 527. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting the use of restraints on
pregnant detainees in DHS custody, except
in certain circumstances.
Section 528. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision prohibiting the use of
funds for the destruction of records related
to detainees in custody.
Section 529. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting funds for a Principal
Federal Official during a declared disaster or
emergency under the Stafford Act, with certain exceptions.
Section 530. The agreement continues a
provision requiring the Under Secretary for
Management to submit a component-level
report on unfunded priorities classified as
budget function 050.
Section 531. The agreement continues a
provision requiring notifications when the
President designates a former or retired Federal official or employee for protection and
reporting regarding the costs of such protection.
Section 532. The agreement continues a
provision requiring notifications and reporting on DHS submissions of proposals to the
Technology Modernization Fund.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.113

H22JAPT2

H1684

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Section 533. The agreement continues a
provision requiring the identification of discretionary offsets when fee increase proposals to support current activities assume
the enactment of such proposals prior to the
beginning of the budget year.
Section 534. The agreement continues a
provision related to the Arms Trade Treaty.
Section 535. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting the use of funds related
to certain entities identified under section
1260H of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021.
Section 536. The agreement continues a
provision prohibiting the use of funds for the
transfer or release of individuals detained at
United States Naval Station, Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba into or within the United States.
Section 537. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision directing the Secretary
of Homeland Security to develop, use, and
share estimates of arrivals of individuals at
the southwest border.
Section 538. The agreement includes a new
provision directing the Secretary of Homeland Security to develop, use, and share estimates of individuals anticipated to be detained in and removed from the United
States.
Section 539. The agreement continues a
provision that requires the Secretary of
Homeland Security to conduct alternatives
and cost-benefit analysis prior to requesting
assistance from the Department of Defense.
Section 540. The agreement continues a
provision allowing the use of funds provided
by this Act for Emergency Backup Care.

Section 541. The agreement continues a
provision providing DHS the ability to transfer funds throughout the Department into
ICE to support the Blue Campaign.
Section 542. The agreement includes a new
provision that reduces funds from the Office
of the Secretary if the monthly DRF report
is not delivered consistent with Section 306,
or reviews for DRF reimbursements exceed
60 days and exceed 500 projects under review.
Section 543. The agreement includes a new
provision that extends medical licensure
across state lines for Department medical
professionals.
Section 544. The agreement includes a new
provision related to classified programs and
a classified annex.
Section 545. The agreement includes a new
provision subjecting transfers of National Intelligence Program funding to section 503 requirements.
Section 546. The agreement includes a new
provision requiring obligation plans for funding provided in P.L. 119–21 from all sources,
including fee collections.
Section 547. The agreement continues a
provision regarding access to detention facilities by members of Congress or their designated staff.
Section 548. The agreement includes a new
provision that provides additional funding
for Supreme Court Justice security.
Section 549. The agreement includes a new
provision that provides a rate of pay increase
for those employees who participate in air
traffic control activities as defined within
the ‘‘Department of Transportation-Federal
Aviation
Administration-Operations-Air
Traffic Organization’’.

Section 550. The agreement includes a new
provision deriving by transfer unobligated
balances from a specified source.
Section 551. The agreement includes a new
provision rescinding unobligated balances
from various sources.
Section 552. The agreement continues and
modifies a provision rescinding unobligated
balances pursuant to section 505.
Section 553. The agreement continues a
provision rescinding unobligated balances
from the DHS Nonrecurring Expenses Fund.
DISCLOSURE OF EARMARKS AND
CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING ITEMS

Following is a list of congressional earmarks and congressionally directed spending
items (as defined in clause 9 of rule XXI of
the Rules of the House of Representatives
and rule XLIV of the Standing Rules of the
Senate, respectively) included in the bill or
this explanatory statement, along with the
name of each House Member, Senator, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner who submitted a request to the Committee of jurisdiction for each item so identified. For each
item, a Member is required to provide a certification that neither the Member nor the
Member’s immediate family has a financial
interest, and each Senator is required to provide a certification that neither the Senator
nor the Senator’s immediate family has a pecuniary interest in such congressionally directed spending item. Neither the bill nor
the explanatory statement contains any limited tax benefits or limited tariff benefits as
defined in the applicable House and Senate
rules.

HOMELAND SECURITY
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)
Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Acushnet Office of Emergency Management

Acushnet Office of Emergency Management

MA

$2,140,000

Markey, Warren

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hazard Monitoring and Wildfire Detection System

Agribusiness Development Corporation

HI

1,125,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Historic Whitehall Shoreline

Anne Arundel County

MD

226,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Columbia Beach Resilience Project

Anne Arundel County

MD

1,175,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Gunners Brook Floodplain Restoration and Debris Catcher Reconfiguration

Barre City

VT

591,000

Sanders, Welch

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Beckley-Raleigh County EOC HVAC
Upgrades

Beckley-Raleigh County Convention
Center

WV

3,206,000

Capito, Justice

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Town of Berkley Emergency Operations Center

Berkley Police Department

MA

105,000

Markey, Warren

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Boone County Emergency Operations
Center

Boone County Illinois Emergency
Management Agency

IL

800,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Portable Generator for Critical Infrastructure

Borough of Hamburg

NJ

220,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Metuchen Borough Emergency Services Center Building Project

Borough of Metuchen

NJ

1,034,487

Pallone

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Mountainside Emergency Operations
Center

Borough of Mountainside

NJ

365,000

Kean

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Boynton Beach Harbor Marina Seawall Replacement

Boynton Beach Community Redevelopment Agency

FL

1,145,144

Frankel

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Callaway County Emergency Operations Center Relocation

Callaway County

MO

2,606,000

Onder

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

CORE3 ECC/Admin Building

Central Oregon Intergovernmental
Council

OR

1,034,487

Bynum

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Klukwan Landslide Protection Project

Chilkat Indian Village

AK

1,234,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Glacial Lake Outburst Flood Disaster
Mitigation—Flood Resilience on
the Mendenhall River

City and Borough of Juneau

AK

3,253,000

Begich

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Artesia Emergency Operations Center

City of Artesia

CA

925,000

Tran

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Atascadero Emergency Operations Center Technology Project

City of Atascadero

CA

1,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Atmore Storm Drainage Improvements

City of Atmore

AL

1,250,000

Britt

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00332

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.114

Foster

H22JAPT2

H
Kim

S

Booker, Kim

H

Murkowski

S

Murkowski

H/S

H

January 22, 2026

H1685

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)

Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Emergency Disaster Energy Hubs

City of Austin

TX

1,145,144

Doggett

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Beaumont Underpass Flooding Early Warning System Improvements

City of Beaumont

TX

827,000

Babin

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Cypress Ditch Improvement Project

City of Bellaire

TX

1,145,144

Fletcher

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Village Creek Stormwater Park Floodplain Restoration

City of Birmingham

AL

2,645,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Boyd Lining Project

City of Bloomfield

NM

750,000

Heinrich

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Brighton Emergency Operations Center Software

City of Brighton/Brighton Fire

CO

15,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Brisbane Glen Park Pump Station
Replacement

City of Brisbane

CA

1,145,144

Mullin

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Camarillo Hybrid Microgrid
Standby Power Resiliency Project

City of Camarillo

CA

1,145,144

Brownley

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

3rd Avenue SE Downtown Pump Station Backup Generator

City of Cedar Rapids

IA

1,407,000

Hinson

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Chino Hills Fire Risk Reduction
Project

City of Chino Hills

CA

1,628,000

Kim (CA)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Otay Valley Regional Park (OVRP)
Wildfire Hazardous Fuels Reduction

City of Chula Vista

CA

837,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Bradley County Emergency Operations Center

City of Cleveland

TN

1,328,000

Fleischmann

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Upgrades Project

City of Concord

CA

1,034,487

DeSaulnier

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Technology and Equipment

City of Concord

NC

326,000

McDowell

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Davenport Water Pollution
Control Plant Flood Mitigation
Project

City of Davenport

IA

2,996,000

Miller-Meeks

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

San Francisquito Creek Floodway
Study

City of East Palo Alto

CA

600,000

Mullin

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hillside Natural Area Hazardous
Fuels Management

City of El Cerrito

CA

1,145,144

Garamendi

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Pump Station Upgrade Project

City of El Segundo

CA

1,145,144

Lieu

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Back-Up Generator Procurement

City of Englewood

KS

44,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Erie Emergency Operations
Command Center

City of Erie

PA

2,606,000

Kelly (PA)

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Locks Creek and Sessoms Drainage
Improvements

City of Fayetteville

NC

4,212,000

Rouzer

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Flagstaff—Fanning Wash
Flood Mitigations

City of Flagstaff

AZ

1,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Strategic Placement of City of Foley
Utilities Underground

City of Foley

AL

2,063,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Frankfort Riverbank Stabilization

City of Frankfort

KY

5,800,000

Comer

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

West Patrick Street at Maryvale
Ditch Flood Mitigation Project

City of Frederick, Maryland

MD

1,145,144

McClain Delaney

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Gladewater High Hazard Dam

City of Gladewater

TX

1,563,000

Moran

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Flood Control Levee Improvements

City of Glasgow

MT

2,487,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Greeley—Gold Hill Pipeline

City of Greeley

CO

8,685,000

Evans (CO)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Greenacres Emergency Operations Center

City of Greenacres

FL

1,034,487

Frankel

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hampton NH Coastal Resiliency
Storm Water Inflow/Infiltration Reduction Project

City of Hampton Department of
Emergency Management

NH

1,250,000

Shaheen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Harrisonburg Suter Street
Drainage Improvement Project

City of Harrisonburg

VA

1,750,000

Kaine, Warner

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Holladay City Hall Seismic Retrofit
Project

City of Holladay, Utah

UT

1,759,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H/S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Huntsville Hospital for Women and
Children Generator Project

City of Huntsville

AL

2,597,000

Strong

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Indianapolis Howland Ditch
Greenway Flood Control Improvement Project Design

City of Indianapolis

IN

1,145,144

Carson

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Irvine/COAST Wildfire Prevention SR–133 Restoration Project

City of Irvine

CA

1,125,000

Min

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Jackson Midtown Area
Stormwater Infrastructure Improvements

City of Jackson Public Works Department

MS

1,125,000

Wicker

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Jackson Queens Area
Stormwater Infrastructure Improvements

City of Jackson Public Works Department

MS

1,125,000

Wicker

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00333

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.115

H
Britt

Padilla, Schiff

S

H
Moran

S

Fetterman

H
H

H

H
Sheehy

H22JAPT2

S

S

H1686

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)
Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Jasper Flood Mitigation Infrastructure

City of Jasper

AL

893,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Kingman—Bull Mountain
Channel Improvements

City of Kingman

AZ

493,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Lake Worth Beach Emergency Operations Center

City of Lake Worth Beach

FL

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Las Vegas—Emergency Operations Upgrades

City of Las Vegas

NV

150,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Sumter County Storm Drainage Improvements

City of Livingston

AL

3,093,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Lompoc—EOC Emergency
Generator Project

City of Lompoc

CA

375,000

Schiff

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Long Beach Harbor Mitigation
Project

City of Long Beach

MS

2,558,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Los Alamitos Emergency Operations
Center

City of Los Alamitos

CA

382,880

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Louisville Emergency Operations Center

City of Louisville

CO

100,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Madelia Wastewater Lift Station Accredited Levee

City of Madelia

MN

1,980,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Meriden for Combined Emergency Operations Center/Emergency Communications Center
Public Safety Communications
Upgrades

City of Meriden

CT

1,003,003

Blumenthal,
Murphy

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Elm Street Housing Elevation

City of Montpelier

VT

1,458,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Charleston Slough Tide Gates Improvement Project

City of Mountain View

CA

1,145,144

Liccardo

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Mt. Juliet Emergency Operations Center

City of Mt. Juliet

TN

1,000,000

Rose

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Walter Mary Burke Park Shoreline
Restoration Project

City of New Baltimore

MI

1,000,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

New Rochelle City Park Drainage Improvements

City of New Rochelle

NY

1,145,144

Latimer

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of North Myrtle Beach Emergency Operations Center

City of North Myrtle Beach

SC

2,606,000

Fry

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Southern End Erosion Project

City of Ocean Shores

WA

1,145,144

Randall

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Palm Desert Emergency Resiliency Plan

City of Palm Desert

CA

296,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Peachtree City Emergency
Operations Center

City of Peachtree City

GA

1,172,000

Jack

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Pines Point Hurricane Mitigation

City of Pembroke Pines

FL

428,619

Wasserman
Schultz

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Gust Lane Flood Mitigation Improvements

City of Portsmouth

VA

1,145,144

Scott (VA)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

West River Flood Response Initiative

City of Providence

RI

825,000

Amo

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center (EOC)
Relocation

City of Rancho Cucamonga

CA

1,034,487

Aguilar

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Abalone Cove Landslide Stabilization
Project

City of Rancho Palos Verdes

CA

1,145,144

Lieu

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Klondike Canyon Landslide Emergency Mitigation Project

City of Rancho Palos Verdes

CA

1,145,144

Lieu

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Citywide Flood Mitigation

City of Ridgeland

MS

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Keith Creek Greenway Improvements

City of Rockford

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Sacramento Fire Department EMS
Division Integration EOC

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

FEMA

Frankel

H

Tran

Hayes

H

Sanders, Welch

Peters, Slotkin

S

S

H
Padilla

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

H

Schiff

H

4,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

IL

2,000,000

Duckworth,
Durbin

S

City of Sacramento

CA

1,034,487

Planning & Design of Salt Lagoon &
Community Pond Flood Mitigation

City of Saint Paul

AK

375,000

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hazard Mitigation Infrastructure Resiliency Project

City of San Bernardino

CA

1,145,144

Aguilar

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Seattle Waterfront Elliott Bay Seawall Project, Phase 2

City of Seattle

WA

1,145,144

Jayapal

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Seattle Public Library Columbia
Branch Seismic Structural Upgrade

City of Seattle

WA

1,145,144

Smith (WA)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

MLK Street South Flooding Alleviation

City of St. Petersburg

FL

1,145,144

Castor

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

88th Avenue North Storm Drainage
Improvements

City of St. Petersburg

FL

1,145,144

Castor

H

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00334

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.115

Matsui

H
Murkowski

H22JAPT2

S
H

Cantwell

H

January 22, 2026

H1687

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)

Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Taunton Emergency Operations Center

City of Taunton

MA

1,034,487

Auchincloss

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Thousand Oaks Community
Resilience Center Project

City of Thousand Oaks

CA

1,145,144

Brownley

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

N. Summit St. Restoration

City of Toledo

OH

1,145,144

Kaptur

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Toledo Public Safety Building Outfit

City of Toledo

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Savin Rock Beach Reinforcement

City of West Haven

CT

2,479,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

West Haven EOC

City of West Haven

CT

1,034,487

DeLauro

Blumenthal,
Murphy

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Westlake Village Emergency
Operations Center Resilience
Project

City of Westlake Village

CA

336,000

Brownley

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Lower Brandywine Flood Mitigation
Project

City of Wilmington, Delaware

DE

1,509,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Wrightsville Emergency Operations Center Improvements

City of Wrightsville

GA

450,000

Warnock

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Yonkers Warburton Avenue Slope
Stabilization Project

City of Yonkers

NY

1,145,144

Latimer

Schumer

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Technology for South Site Emergency
Operations Center

Clark County

NV

1,034,487

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Flamingo Water Resources Center
Emergency Power Project

Clark County Water Reclamation District

NV

1,145,144

Titus

Cortez Masto

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Cleveland County Emergency Operations Center

Cleveland County

NC

1,954,000

Moore (NC)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Coffee County Emergency Operation
Center

Coffee County, Alabama

AL

977,000

Moore (AL)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

State Emergency Operations Center
Technology Update

Colorado Department of Public Safety—Division of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management

CO

585,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Coosa County Emergency Management Utilities Preservation

Coosa County Emergency Management Agency

AL

126,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Technology Refresh

County of Butte

CA

130,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Mercer County for Emergency Operations Center Improvements

County of Mercer

NJ

1,875,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Monroe County Goose Pond Dam Rehabilitation Project

County of Monroe

PA

2,432,000

Bresnahan

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

County of Orange Emergency Operations Center

County of Orange

CA

1,034,487

Correa

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Orange County Emergency Operations Center

County of Orange

NY

1,034,487

Ryan

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Pontotoc County Emergency Management Operations Center Construction Project

County of Pontotoc, Mississippi

MS

2,031,000

Kelly (MS)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Sacramento County Emergency Operations Center Project

County of Sacramento

CA

990,000

Bera

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Ulster County Emergency Operations
Center

County of Ulster

NY

1,034,487

Ryan

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Washington County Emergency Operations Center

County of Washington Emergency
Management Agency

IL

2,009,000

Bost

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Covington County Emergency Operations Center

Covington County Emergency Management Agency

MS

1,303,000

Guest

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Northwest Service Area Grid Resiliency

Cowlitz County Public Utility District
No. 1

WA

1,145,144

Perez

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Seismic Resiliency Reservoir and
Transmission Line Improvement
Project

Diablo Water District

CA

1,145,144

DeSaulnier

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Flood Reduction Project

DuPage County Stormwater Management

IL

225,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Alberta Avenue Storm and Domestic
Water Improvements

El Paso County Hospital District

TX

1,145,144

Escobar

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Frio County EOC

Frio County

TX

1,954,000

Gonzales

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Gibson County Emergency Generator

Gibson County, Tennessee

TN

117,000

Kustoff

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center

Habersham County

GA

2,500,000

Ossoff

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Harford County Department of Emergency Services Emergency Operations Center Equipment Upgrade

Harford County Department of Emergency Services

MD

525,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Tributary C116–00–00 Conveyance
and Drainage Improvements

Harris County Flood Control District

TX

1,145,144

Green (TX)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center IT
Modernization

Hawaii Emergency Management
Agency

HI

1,034,487

Case

H

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00335

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.115

H
Schiff

H

H

LaMalfa

H
Booker, Kim

S

Fetterman

H

Schumer

Cantwell

H

H
H

Durbin

H22JAPT2

H

S

H

H1688

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)
Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Display
and Control Systems Equipment

Henry County

GA

1,149,000

Ossoff

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Mobile Generators for the Honolulu
Fire Department

Honolulu Fire Department

HI

315,000

Schatz

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Humboldt County—Emergency Operations Center

Humboldt County

NV

500,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Freeport Nuisance Flooding Mitigation

Incorporated Village of Freeport

NY

1,145,144

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Iron County Forestry Department—
Saxon Harbor Lake Superior
Shoreline Restoration Project

Iron County Forestry Department

WI

375,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Roadway Wildfire Hazard Mitigation
in Jefferson County

Jefferson County Parks & Conservation

CO

1,000,000

Pettersen

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Kentucky Emergency Management
Flood Monitoring System

Kentucky Emergency Management

KY

869,000

Rogers

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Lawrence County EOC

Lawrence County Office of Emergency Management

TN

2,606,000

DesJarlais

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Livingston Parish Emergency Operations Center

Livingston Parish

LA

2,606,000

Letlow

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Lower Makefield Township Flood
Mitigation and Stormwater Management

Lower Makefield Township

PA

5,211,000

Fitzpatrick

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Lyon County—Emergency Backup
Generators

Lyon County

NV

375,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Holly Beach Farm Resiliency

Maryland Department of Natural Resources

MD

1,145,144

Elfreth

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Jorstad Substation Grid Resilience
Project

Mason County PUD 1

WA

1,145,144

Randall

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Mat-Su Revetment and Road Upgrades

Matanuska-Susitna Borough

AK

2,000,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Mesa County Douglas Wash Detention Basin Project

Mesa County Public Works Division

CO

869,000

Hurd

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Germantown, Englewood, Taylorsville
Upstream Dam Walls Rehabilitation

Miami Conservancy District

OH

8,685,000

Turner

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Middle Peninsula Emergency Operations Center Improvements

Middle Peninsula Planning District
Commission

VA

506,000

Kaine, Warner

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Montezuma County Emergency Operations Center

Montezuma County

CO

186,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Washington Ferry Road Restoration

Montgomery Area Chamber of Commerce

AL

4,000,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Wheaton Branch Flood Mitigation

Montgomery County Department of
Environmental Protection

MD

1,145,144

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

MATB Wastewater Treatment Plant
Flood Mitigation Project

Municipal Authority of the Town of
Bloomsburg

PA

1,205,000

Fetterman,
McCormick

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Little Mill Creek Upper Reach Flood
Control Project Major Maintenance

New Castle County, Delaware (Public
Works Department)

DE

758,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

New Hampshire State Emergency
Operations Center Modernization
Project

New Hampshire Division of Homeland Security and Emergency
Management

NH

250,000

Shaheen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

DHSEM Portable Backup Generators
and Water Support

NM Department of Homeland Security and Emergency Management

NM

1,500,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Wanchese Marine Industrial Park Authority Living Shoreline Resiliency
Project

North Carolina Department of Commerce

NC

2,605,000

Tillis

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Nye County—Gamebird Road Improvements Planning and Design
Project

Nye County

NV

323,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Nye County—Area Master Drainage
Plan (AMDP) Update

Nye County

NV

338,000

Rosen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Statewide Emergency Coordination
Center

Oregon Department of Emergency
Management

OR

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Ouachita Parish I-20 South Frontage
Road Drainage Improvements

Ouachita Parish Police Jury

LA

6,000,000

Cassidy,
Kennedy

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Lealman Community Hurricane Shelter Hardening

Pinellas County Board of County
Commissioners

FL

2,606,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Communications Enhancements

Prince George’s County Government

MD

469,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Pulaski County Emergency Operations Center Radio System Modernization

Pulaski County

GA

570,000

Warnock

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Southwestern WI Regional Planning
Commission—Resilient Southwest
Wisconsin

Resilient Southwest Wisconsin

WI

150,000

Baldwin

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00336

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.115

Gillen

H
Baldwin

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

H
H

Murkowski

Raskin

Luna

H22JAPT2

S

S

H

January 22, 2026

H1689

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)

Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Rio Vista—Emergency Operations
Center

Rio Vista Fire Department

CA

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Emergency Siren Warning System
Upgrades

Roosevelt County

NM

262,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Well 9 Seismic Resiliency Water
Transmission Main Design

Sammamish Plateau Water and
Sewer District

WA

1,125,000

Cantwell

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

San Miguel Community Services District Emergency Operations Center

San Miguel Community Services District

CA

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Westminster Emergency
Standby Generator and Control
Center for Drinking Water Plant

SC Emergency Management Division

SC

1,314,000

Graham

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Sedgwick County Emergency Operations Center

Sedgwick County

KS

2,000,000

Moran

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Shelby County Emergency Operations
Center

Shelby County Emergency Management and Homeland Security
Agency

TN

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Catfish Canal Stormwater Improvements Mitigation Project

South Carolina Office of Resilience

SC

1,359,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Centers Complex

Southern University and A&M College

LA

1,034,487

Fields

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Suffolk County Emergency Operations
Center Project

Suffolk County Fire, Rescue and
Emergency Services

NY

1,954,000

Garbarino

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Taylor County Emergency Operations
and Public Safety Complex

Taylor County Board of County Commissioners

FL

2,606,000

Dunn

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Terrebonne Parish Emergency Operations Center

Terrebonne Parish Consolidated Government

LA

1,129,000

Higgins

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Wildwood Crest Flood Mitigation

The Borough of Wildwood Crest

NJ

3,572,000

Van Drew

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Sunbury Flood Mitigation
Project

The Municipal Authority of the City
of Sunbury

PA

1,000,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Longboat Key Storm Resiliency
Project

The Town of Longboat Key

FL

1,954,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Barrington Police Cove Park Seawall
Repair

Town of Barrington

RI

475,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Bristol Independence Park Seawall
Restoration

Town of Bristol

RI

900,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Bristol Seawall Repair

Town of Bristol

RI

660,000

Whitehouse

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Town of Burnsville Landslide Remediation Project

Town of Burnsville

WV

488,000

Capito, Justice

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Wallum Lake Dam Spillway Improvements

Town of Burrillville

RI

345,000

Reed

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

East Lyme EOC

Town of East Lyme CT Emergency
Management

CT

395,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Joint Emergency Operations Center

Town of Fairfield

CT

562,500

Himes

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Town of Hamden Emergency Operations Center

Town of Hamden

CT

1,034,487

DeLauro

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hardwick Flood Recovery & Resilience Plan

Town of Hardwick

VT

70,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Town of Hempstead—Bulkheads

Town of Hempstead

NY

1,780,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hull Harborview Road Coastal Resiliency and Shoreline Protection

Town of Hull

MA

1,145,144

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Town of Lake Arthur Pump Station

Town of Lake Arthur

LA

900,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Lynnfield Emergency Operations Center Project

Town of Lynnfield

MA

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

New Town Hall Emergency Operations Center

Town of Norton

MA

22,000

Markey, Warren

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Town of Ossining—Town-Wide
Drainage Study

Town of Ossining

NY

99,000

Gillibrand,
Schumer

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Scituate Cedar Point Seawall

Town of Scituate

MA

1,145,144

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Plantsville Center Flooding Study

Town of Southington

CT

300,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hendricks Head Infrastructure Improvements

Town of Southport

ME

1,165,000

Collins, King

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Newbury Neck Peninsula Storm
Evacuation

Town of Surry

ME

2,928,000

Collins, King

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Westhampton Public Safety Complex
Emergency Operations Center

Town of Westhampton

MA

885,757

McGovern

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Town of Woodbridge Emergency Operations Center

Town of Woodbridge

CT

1,034,487

DeLauro

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

UW-Whitewater Emergency Operations Center

UW-Whitewater Police Department

WI

225,000

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00337

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.115

Thompson (CA)

H

Panetta

H

Cohen

H

Graham

H
Fetterman

Buchanan

S
H

Welch

S

Gillibrand,
Schumer

S

Lynch

H
Kennedy

Moulton

S
H

Keating

H

Baldwin

H22JAPT2

S

S

H1690

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)
Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

House
FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Village of La Farge Storm Sewer Improvements

Village of La Farge

WI

250,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Highbrook Avenue Drainage Improvement Project

Village of Pelham

NY

1,145,144

Latimer

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Village of Wellington Emergency Operations Center

Village of Wellington

FL

1,034,487

Frankel

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Winston County Road and Bridge
Restoration

Winston County Commission

AL

900,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Yakima Valley Emergency Operation
Center

Yakima Valley Emergency Management

WA

1,953,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

York County Flood Protection

York County Emergency Management
Agency

ME

1,762,000

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00338

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.115

Newhouse

H22JAPT2

Senate
Baldwin

S

Schumer

H
H

Britt

S

Cantwell

H

Collins

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1691

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00339

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/641 here EH220126.211

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00340

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/642 here EH220126.212

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1692

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1693

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00341

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/643 here EH220126.213

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00342

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/644 here EH220126.214

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1694

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1695

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00343

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/645 here EH220126.215

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00344

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/646 here EH220126.216

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1696

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1697

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00345

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/647 here EH220126.217

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00346

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/648 here EH220126.218

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1698

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1699

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00347

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/649 here EH220126.219

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00348

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/650 here EH220126.220

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1700

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1701

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00349

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/651 here EH220126.221

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00350

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/652 here EH220126.222

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1702

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1703

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00351

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/653 here EH220126.223

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00352

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/654 here EH220126.224

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1704

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1705

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00353

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/655 here EH220126.225

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00354

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/656 here EH220126.226

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1706

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1707

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00355

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/657 here EH220126.227

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00356

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/658 here EH220126.228

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1708

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1709

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00357

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/659 here EH220126.229

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00358

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/660 here EH220126.230

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1710

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1711

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00359

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/661 here EH220126.231

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00360

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/662 here EH220126.232

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1712

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1713

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00361

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/663 here EH220126.233

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00362

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/664 here EH220126.234

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1714

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1715

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00363

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/665 here EH220126.235

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00364

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/666 here EH220126.236

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1716

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1717

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00365

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/667 here EH220126.237

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00366

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/668 here EH220126.238

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1718

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1719

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00367

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/669 here EH220126.239

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00368

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/670 here EH220126.240

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1720

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1721

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00369

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/671 here EH220126.241

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00370

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/672 here EH220126.242

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1722

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1723

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00371

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/673 here EH220126.243

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00372

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/674 here EH220126.244

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1724

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1725

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00373

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/675 here EH220126.245

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00374

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/676 here EH220126.246

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1726

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1727

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00375

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/677 here EH220126.247

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00376

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/678 here EH220126.248

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1728

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1729

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00377

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/679 here EH220126.249

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00378

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/680 here EH220126.250

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1730

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1731

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00379

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/681 here EH220126.251

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00380

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/682 here EH220126.252

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1732

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1733

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00381

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.116

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/683 here EH220126.253

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

H1734

DIVISION D—TRANSPORTATION, HOUSING
AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED
AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS
ACT, 2026
CONGRESSIONAL DIRECTIVES
The joint explanatory statement accompanying this division is approved and indicates congressional intent. Unless otherwise
noted, the language set forth in House Report 119–212 and Senate Report 119–47 carry
the same weight as language included in this
joint explanatory statement and should be
complied with unless specifically addressed
to the contrary in this joint explanatory
statement. While some language is repeated
for emphasis, it is not intended to negate the
language referred to above unless expressly
provided herein. In cases where the House
and Senate have directed the submission of a
report, such report is to be submitted to both
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations. The Department of Transportation
[DOT] and the Department of Housing and
Urban Development [HUD] are directed to
notify the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations 7 days prior to the announcement of a new program, initiative, or authority.
PROGRAM, PROJECT, AND ACTIVITY
During fiscal year 2026, the terms ‘‘program, project, and activity’’ [PPA] shall
mean any item for which a dollar amount is
contained in appropriations acts (including
joint resolutions providing continuing appropriations), House Report 119–212, Senate Report 119–47, or this joint explanatory statement.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

OPERATING PLANS AND REPROGRAMMING
GUIDELINES

Reprogramming requests must be submitted to the Committees on Appropriations
no later than June 30, 2026, and include funding provided by this act, division J of Public
Law 117–58, or previous appropriations acts.
Any reprogramming request shall include
any out-year budgetary impacts and a separate accounting of program or mission impacts on estimated carryover funds. Reprogramming procedures shall apply to funds
provided in the bill, unobligated balances
from previous appropriations acts that are
available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, and non-appropriated resources
such as fee collections that are used to meet
program requirements in fiscal year 2026.
The agreement clarifies that section 405 applies to working capital funds of both the
DOT and the HUD and that no funds may be
obligated from working capital fund accounts to augment PPAs for which appropriations have been specifically rejected by
Congress, or to increase funds or personnel
for any PPA above the amounts appropriated
in the bill, House Report 119–212, Senate Report 119–47, or this joint explanatory statement.
The table in the operating plan required by
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations shall apply to all items for which a
dollar amount is specified and to all programs for which new budget (obligational)
authority is provided, as well as to discretionary grants and discretionary grant allocations. In addition, the operating plan shall
include an organizational chart with the
number of full-time personnel onboard as of
the end of the most recent pay period for
each office as approved by this bill or this
joint explanatory statement that provides
the customary level of detail provided to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations. The agreement directs the HUD to
provide organizational charts at the same
level of detail as those provided in April 2024.
The operating plan must also identify items
of special congressional interest.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET JUSTIFICATIONS

The agreement directs each agency to include within its budget justification the data
needed to make appropriate and meaningful
funding decisions and to include: (1) comparisons to the account and sub-account
structure provided under this act or this
joint explanatory statement; (2) all available
budgetary resources from contract authority, mandatory budget authority, advance
appropriations, and discretionary authority,
including disaster and emergency-designated
funding; (3) detailed discussions of proposed
new initiatives or changes to the agency’s financial plan; and (4) detailed tables and organizational charts (at the same organizational level of detail provided with the fiscal
year 2025 congressional budget justifications,
unless otherwise requested by the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations) that
delineate all budgetary resources for salaries
and expenses, the number of full-time equivalent [FTE] and full-time positions [FTP]
and provide justifications for all funding and
staffing
changes,
reorganizations,
and
restructurings. To the extent such information has not already been prepared for inclusion in the fiscal year 2027 congressional
budget justifications, the agreement directs
each agency to provide such information as
supplemental information to the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations not
later than 30 days after submission of the fiscal year 2027 congressional budget justifications.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

Each DOT and HUD agency is expected to
comply with report deadlines, as directed by
House Report 119–212, Senate Report 119–47,
and this joint explanatory statement.
FOREIGN MALIGN INFLUENCE MITIGATION

The agreement directs the DOT, in consultation with the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, and the National Center for Narrative Intelligence, to
provide a briefing to the House and Senate
Committees on Appropriations not later
than 180 days after enactment of this act on
state backed influence operations on U.S.
transportation infrastructure and transportation companies.
GRANTS AND CONTRACTS

The DOT and the HUD shall not carry out
any federal award terminations that are not
in accordance with the procedures established in the governmentwide guidance for
federal financial assistance in 2 CFR Part
200. The Departments shall not terminate a
federal award in part or in its entirety or require a renegotiation or rescoping of a federal award solely pursuant to 2 CFR
200.340(a)(4), without following Departmental
procedures.
Additionally, the agreement directs the
DOT and the HUD to transmit to the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations
not later than 90 days after enactment of
this act a report that identifies each grant,
cooperative agreement, and contract that
was obligated in the 5 prior fiscal years and
subsequently terminated, withdrawn, or reduced in scope during calendar year 2025 that
remains terminated, withdrawn, or reduced
in scope on the date of enactment of this act.
Such report shall explain why each change
was made and shall identify the recipient or
contractor, the location of the project or
service, and the amount and source of funds
impacted.
TITLE I
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The bill provides $187,344,000 for the salaries and expenses of the Office of the Sec-

PO 00000

Frm 00382

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

retary [OST], to remain available until September 30, 2027. The agreement includes
funding for staffing levels in line with the
deferred resignation program for OST, which
does not compromise safety personnel. The
agreement continues the direction in Senate
Report 119–47 under the heading ‘‘Staffing’’
in this account. Of the total amount, the
agreement provides the following levels for
each office.
Agreement
Office of the Secretary ...........................................
Office of the Deputy Secretary ..............................
Office of the General Counsel ...............................
Office of the Under Secretary for Policy* ..............
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Budget and
Programs ...........................................................
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Governmental Affairs ...................................................
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration ....................................................................
Office of Public Affairs and Public Engagement ..
Office of the Executive Secretariat ........................
Office of Intelligence, Security, and Emergency
Response ...........................................................
Office of the Chief Information Officer .................
Office of Tribal Government Affairs ......................
Working Capital Fund shared services ..................

$3,764,000
1,348,000
27,780,000
21,358,000

19,388,000
1,707,000
1,517,000
60,993,000

Total ..............................................................

187,344,000

21,505,000
3,807,000
16,181,000
5,664,000
2,332,000

* Includes the Office of Multimodal Freight Infrastructure Policy.

Aviation
consumer
protection.—Of
the
amounts provided for the Office of the General Counsel, not less than $4,000,000 is to
continue the Department’s efforts to address
aviation consumer complaints and related
consumer aviation activities as well as implement aviation consumer protection laws
through the Office of Aviation Consumer
Protection within the Office of the General
Counsel.
Cargo theft prevention.—The agreement includes the directions from House Report 119–
212 and Senate Report 119–47 under this heading, except that DOT is directed to coordinate with relevant stakeholders and the report shall be provided to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations within 180
days of enactment of this act.
Congressional
budget
justifications.—The
agreement directs OST to continue to delineate the funding for salaries and expenses
[S&E] and number of FTE and FTP positions
separate and distinct from the programmatic
funding, including in the detailed tables in
the congressional budget justification. This
shall include all S&E funding and FTE/FTP
positions provided by administrative takedowns from any and all budgetary resources.
Department policies.—The agreement directs
the Department to brief the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations on the
status of the statement of international air
transportation policy not later than 120 days
after enactment of this act.
Events at DOT headquarters.—The agreement directs the Department to include
major events hosted by DOT headquarters
for fiscal years 2018 through 2025 and expected for fiscal year 2026 in the briefing required in House Report 119–212.
Expropriation of U.S. commercial assets in
Mexico.—In lieu of the direction in House Report 119–212 under this heading, the agreement directs DOT to update the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations on the
flow of construction materials for U.S. infrastructure projects from North American foreign-owned ports no later than 270 days after
enactment of this act.
Freight logistics optimization works [FLOW]
program.—Of the $5,000,000 provided for the
Office of Multimodal Freight Infrastructure
and Policy, the agreement provides $3,000,000
for the FLOW program.
Grants review backlog.— The agreement directs the Department to brief the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations within 120 days of enactment of this act detailing
the scope of the grants review backlog, how

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.117

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

any staffing shortfalls at the modal and OST
level may contribute to this backlog, and the
Department’s plan to improve grant processing timelines and capacity. Further, the
agreement directs the Department to provide
the status of all awarded but not obligated
competitive grant and community project
funding/congressionally directed spending
projects. The Department shall provide a list
of all such awards by program, fiscal year,
and grantee, and include the name of the
project, the state of the project location, the
original amount of the award when announced, and the amount obligated to date.
The Department shall provide the data to
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations not later than 120 days after the
enactment of this act and biannually after
the first submission of such data.
Protective service.—The agreement expects
the protective service detail [PSD] of the Department to be included within the FTE/FTP
information required by the directives under
the header ‘‘Congressional budget justifications’’ in this account. The agreement directs the Department to provide a briefing
within 120 days of enactment of this act regarding the PSD. The briefing should include
historical FTE/FTP data of the PSD; current
and prior hiring plans, recruitment, and retention efforts; and specific details on how
the Department is complying with the National Security Presidential Memorandum
[NSPM–7]. As part of the briefing, the Department is directed to provide an analysis
of the potential to use funds provided by section 122 of division A of Public Law 119–37 to
supplement cabinet level security requirements government-wide.
Regional, division, and field offices.—The
agreement directs the Department, when
considering plans to open, close, redesignate
as a lesser office, or reorganize a regional,
division, or field office within the Department or an operating administration of the
Department, to conduct an analysis on the
effect of such action on each relevant office,
which shall consider the potential costs; impacts on staffing and workforce; relevant external stakeholders, as appropriate; and the
Department’s ability to carry out all statutorily authorized activities. The Department
is directed to provide such analysis to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations not later than 10 business days after
such analysis is requested by either the
House or Senate Committees on Appropriations.
RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

The bill provides $74,471,000 for research
and technology, of which $56,000,000 shall remain available until expended. The bill
specifies funding levels for activities within
the account.
NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The bill provides $145,000,000 for local and
regional project assistance grants as authorized under 49 U.S.C. 6702, to remain available
until expended. Of this amount, not less than
5 percent is for projects in historically disadvantaged communities or areas of persistent poverty. The bill directs the Secretary to take such measures to ensure an
equitable geographic distribution of funds,
an appropriate balance in addressing the
needs of rural and urban communities, including Tribal areas, and the investment in a
variety of transportation modes. Consistent
with 49 U.S.C. 6702, not more than 50 percent
of the funding shall be allocated to projects
in rural and urbanized areas, respectively.
Further, the bill requires the Secretary to
consider and award projects solely based
upon the selection criteria in 49 U.S.C.
6702(d)(3) and (d)(4).

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1735

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

NATIONAL SURFACE TRANSPORTATION AND
INNOVATIVE FINANCE BUREAU

The agreement provides $9,250,000 for the
National Surface Transportation and Innovative Finance Bureau, to remain available
until expended.
RURAL AND TRIBAL INFRASTRUCTURE
ADVANCEMENT

The agreement provides $10,000,000 for the
rural and Tribal infrastructure advancement
program as authorized by section 21205 of
Public Law 117–58, to remain available until
September 30, 2028.
RAILROAD REHABILITATION AND IMPROVEMENT
FINANCING PROGRAM

The bill authorizes the Secretary to issue
direct loans and loan guarantees pursuant to
chapter 224 of title 49, United States Code.
Limiting loans for high-speed rail projects.—
The agreement urges that, with respect to
any railroad rehabilitation and improvement
financing [RRIF] loans or loan guarantees
issued to high-speed rail projects, (a) any
debt senior the RRIF loan (or the debt guaranteed by the RRIF credit instrument)
should have an investment grade rating; (b)
prior to receiving a disbursement of funds
under such RRIF loan (or debt guaranteed by
the RRIF credit instrument) the high-speed
rail project should have received a permit to
construct from the Surface Transportation
Board to ensure responsible planning of infrastructure projects; and (c) the high-speed
rail project should be constructed to the
same ‘standard’ track gauge as the general
system of rail transportation.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT CAPITAL

The agreement provides $5,000,000 for the
financial management capital program, to
remain available until September 30, 2027.

quires the Secretary to provide a plan to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations describing the non-commodity IT and
procurement consolidation not less than 30
days prior to using the authorities provided
in the bill. Such plan shall include details on
the IT and procurement programs, systems,
and operations being consolidated; the operating administrations participating in such
consolidation; impacts on staffing within the
WCF, the Office of the Chief Information Officer within OST, the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Administration within OST,
and any participating operating administration; the expected costs and benefits to the
OST and any participating operating administrations for such consolidation; and the expected timeline for such consolidation.
In addition to the monthly briefings on
non-commodity IT and procurement services
required in the bill, the agreement directs
DOT to transmit monthly a report of the
WCF and provide quarterly briefings to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations regarding all expenditures of the WCF,
including the shared services within the fund
and the use of the fund by operating administration.
SMALL AND DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS
UTILIZATION AND OUTREACH

The bill provides $5,330,000 for small and
disadvantaged business utilization and outreach, to remain available until September
30, 2027.
Small business transportation resource centers
[SBTRCs].—The bill requires the Office of
Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization to maintain and operate not less than
six SBTRCs. The agreement directs that one
of the not less than six SBTRCs shall serve
the Mid-South Atlantic Region and be located in the same state as in fiscal year 2025.

CYBER SECURITY INITIATIVES

The agreement provides $60,000,000 for departmental cyber security initiatives, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
OFFICE OF CIVIL RIGHTS

The agreement provides $11,761,000 for the
Office of Civil Rights. The agreement does
not support moving positions and programs
of the Office of Civil Rights into the Department’s working capital fund.
TRANSPORTATION PLANNING, RESEARCH, AND
DEVELOPMENT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $32,043,000 for
planning, research, and development activities, to remain available until expended. Of
this amount, $5,436,000 is for the Interagency
Infrastructure Permitting Improvement Center and $9,647,000 is for the purposes and
amounts specified in the table entitled
‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included in this
joint explanatory statement.
Flight
5342.—The
agreement
provides
$2,000,000 for DOT to commission the National Academies of Science within 30 days
of enactment of this act to conduct an independent review of airspace design, civil-military coordination, and operational safety in
the National Capital Region, consistent with
all direction under this heading in Senate
Report 119–47.
WORKING CAPITAL FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The bill limits expenditures for working
capital fund [WCF] activities to $764,965,000.
Consolidation
proposal.—The
agreement
supports the budget request to consolidate
non-commodity information technology [IT]
and procurement services through the WCF.
The bill specifies how the Department may
proceed with the consolidation of non-commodity IT and procurement services and re-

PO 00000

Frm 00383

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

PAYMENTS TO AIR CARRIERS
(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)

The bill provides $513,637,231 for payments
to air carriers, to remain available until expended, and continues to waive certain eligibility requirements.
Program oversight.—In lieu of the direction
provided under this heading in House Report
119–212, the agreement directs the Department to provide the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations not later than 180
days after the date of enactment of this act
relevant data for the Essential Air Service
[EAS] program, including annual passenger
and load factors, subsidy levels, and per-passenger costs, for all communities outside of
Alaska and Hawaii.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—OFFICE OF THE
SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS)
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

Section 101 prohibits funds available to the
DOT from being obligated for the Office of
the Secretary of Transportation to approve
assessments or reimbursable agreements pertaining to funds appropriated to the operating administrations, except for activities
underway on the date of enactment of this
act, unless such assessments or agreements
have completed the normal reprogramming
process for congressional notification.
Section 102 requires the Secretary of
Transportation to post on the Internet a
schedule of all council on credit and finance
meetings, agendas, and meeting minutes.
Section 103 allows the DOT’s working capital fund to provide payments in advance to
vendors for the Federal transit pass fringe
benefit program, and to provide full or partial payments to, and to accept reimbursements from, Federal agencies for transit benefit distribution services.
Section 104 allows the DOT’s working capital fund to use certain recoveries from the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.117

H22JAPT2

H1736

transit benefit program to improve the administration of that program.
Section 105 requires approval from the Assistant Secretary for Administration for retention or senior executive bonuses for all
DOT employees.
Section 106 requires the DOT’s working
capital fund to transfer equipment into the
working capital fund and collect replacement reserve for the equipment equal to the
useful life and estimated replacement cost of
such equipment.
Section 107 requires congressional notification before the DOT provides credit assistance under the transportation infrastructure
finance and innovation act program.
Section 108 allows the Secretary to transfer and consolidate administrative resources
for certain programs.
Section 109 allows the operating administrations to transfer funds to the Office of
Tribal Government Affairs for recipients of
the Tribal transportation self-governance
program.
Section 109A modifies the amount of funding reserved for planning grants under the
safe streets and roads for all program.
Section 109B extends the period of availability for certain fiscal year 2022 grants.
Section 109C provides air service protections for rural communities who have regularly scheduled EAS service.
Section 109D rescinds certain unobligated
amounts.
Section 109E rescinds certain unobligated
amounts.
Section 109F rescinds certain unobligated
amounts.
Section 109G rescinds certain unobligated
amounts.
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)

The agreement provides $13,710,000,000 for
the operations of the Federal Aviation Administration [FAA], to remain available
until September 30, 2027. Of the total amount
provided, $13,040,600,000 is to be derived from
the airport and airway trust fund. The act
allocates funds by budget activity.
Funding level.—In lieu of the direction included under the heading ‘‘Additions and reductions’’ in House Report 119–212 and under
the heading ‘‘Funding Level’’ in Senate Report 119–47, the agreement—
(1) includes an adjustment of $95,877,000
over fiscal year 2025 for surging controller
hiring and training, with a goal of hiring
2,500 new controllers in fiscal year 2026;
(2) includes an adjustment of an additional
$9,744,000 over fiscal year 2025 for air carrier
surveillance and production oversight, including enhanced oversight of Boeing;
(3) includes an adjustment of an additional
$35,000,000 over fiscal year 2025 for cybersecurity efforts;
(4) includes savings due to staffing reductions related to the deferred resignation program; and
(5) directs the FAA to transition any activities from the Office of NextGen as a result of implementing section 206 of the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024 (Public Law 118–
63) to existing lines of business and staff offices (consistent with the reprogramming requirements in section 405 of this act), and to
minimize duplication of responsibilities
across offices.
Medical certifications and clearances.—The
agreement includes an increase of $3,000,000
above the budget request, for the Office of
Aerospace Medicine, for purposes consistent
with the directives included under this heading in Senate Report 119–47 and under the
heading ‘‘Aeromedical’’ in House Report 119–
212, to address the backlog of pilot and air
traffic controller medical certificates. The

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

agreement directs the FAA to provide the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations a briefing requested under both headings no later than 120 days after the enactment of this act.
Aircraft certification.—In lieu of the direction provided under this heading in Senate
Report 119–47 and the first paragraph under
the heading ‘‘Aircraft certification modernization and international competitiveness’’ in House Report 119–212, the agreement
includes not less than $379,223,000 for the aircraft certification service [AIR]. The additional 32 positions included in the budget request, and funded by this agreement, shall be
prioritized to address the FAA’s increased
oversight of air carriers and aircraft manufacturers. The agreement includes resources
to ensure sufficient technical expertise and
workforce training for the FAA’s certification workforce, strengthening safety and
production oversight. The agreement directs
the FAA to complete the briefings directed
under the heading ‘‘Aircraft certification
modernization and international competitiveness’’ in House Report 119–212 and Senate
Report 119–47 no later than 60 days after the
enactment of this act.
Air-traffic collegiate training initiative [AT–
CTI].—In lieu of the briefing requested under
the heading ‘‘Collegiate training initiatives’’
in House Report 119–212, and consistent with
the report directed under this heading in
Senate Report 119–47, the agreement directs
the FAA to provide, within 270 days of enactment of this act, a report on: (1) FAA hiring
and separation numbers for AT–CTI and Enhanced–Collegiate training initiative [E–CTI]
graduates; (2) the total number of AT–CTI
and E–CTI program graduates and the proportion that seek employment as certified
professional controllers [CPCs] within one
calendar year of program completion; and (3)
a comparison of training performance, separation rates and attainment of necessary
qualifications between AT–CTI and E–CTI
graduates and the FAA-academy trained
CPCs. For each hiring pool opened in fiscal
year 2026, the report shall contain the total
number of applicants for AT–CTI, E–CTI, and
the FAA academy, who have: (1) applied for
the position of air traffic controller; (2) been
issued a tentative offer letter for the position of air traffic controller; (3) been issued
a firm offer letter for the position of air traffic controller; and (4) been hired for the position of air traffic controller.
Designee training resources.—The agreement
includes $7,000,000 for the purposes described
under this heading in House Report 119–212
and under the heading ‘‘Designee Training’’
in Senate Report 119–47.
Contract towers.—The agreement includes
$6,000,000 for the pilot program described
under the heading ‘‘Contract Towers’’ in
Senate Report 119–47 and continues to direct
the FAA to commence this program within
180 days of enactment of this act and to
prioritize contract towers as required under
section 625(a)(2) of the FAA Reauthorization
Act of 2024.
Integration of commercial space and new entrants.—The agreement does not specify an
amount for, but maintains the direction included under the heading ‘‘Integration of
new entrants’’ in House Report 119–212, excluding tracking requirements, and the heading ‘‘Airspace Integration’’ in Senate Report
119–47, excluding live telemetry data requirements.
Unmanned aircraft system [UAS] beyond visual line of sight.— The agreement shares concern regarding the proposed rule ‘‘Normalizing Unmanned Aircraft Systems Beyond
Visual Line of Sight Operations’’ which may
make it more difficult for drone operators to
fly than is currently permissible under waivers, exemptions, and other approvals. The

PO 00000

Frm 00384

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

agreement directs the FAA to ensure that
the final rule allows the United States to
lead in the safe integration of drones into
the national airspace system, and, at a minimum, is not more restrictive on operations
than what is currently permissible under
Part 135 and Part 107 using waivers, exemptions, and other approvals.
Staffing.—The agreement modifies the directive under this heading in Senate Report
119–47 to direct the FAA to brief the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations
on all positions that remain unfilled due to
the deferred resignation program, and which
positions the FAA intends to backfill in fiscal year 2026. The agreement directs the FAA
to provide quarterly staffing updates, including hiring and separations, by line of business for all positions funded by this and any
other act, and: (1) the status of hiring new
controllers; (2) actual staffing levels, including hiring and separation levels, at all air
traffic control [ATC] facilities; and (3) flight
delays at each ATC facility by category.
Air traffic controller hiring.—The agreement
modifies the direction provided under this
heading in Senate Report 119–47 to direct the
FAA to expand training at the FAA Training
Academy at the Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center and continue to supplement
these efforts through the AT–CTI program.
Organization chart.—The agreement directs
the FAA to include a more detailed organization chart as an exhibit to section one of the
President’s budget justification that provides not less than one level of offices below
the Office of the Administrator and Deputy
Administrator, the Air Traffic Organization,
and the Office of the Assistant Administrator for Aviation Safety.
FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT
(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)

The agreement provides $4,000,000,000 for
facilities and equipment. Of the total
amount available, $697,850,000 is for personnel and related expenses and available
until September 30, 2027, and $3,302,150,000 is
available until September 30, 2028. The agreement directs the FAA to notify the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations
within 3 business days of the joint resources
council, the prime integrator, or any FAA
official making any final investment decisions, establishing a baseline for previously
approved projects, or making acquisition
program baseline changes that alter program
performance, cost or schedule baseline.
The table below provides allocations of
funds by activity for FAA facilities and
equipment from the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act [IIJA] for fiscal year 2026,
which are subject to section 405 of this act:

Allocation of FAA Facilities and Equipment Funding in the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act—Fiscal Year
2026
Budget line item
Terminal and En Route Air Traffic Control Facilities—
Replace ........................................................................
Electrical Power System—Sustain/Support and Fuel
Storage Tank Replacement and Management ............
Hazardous Materials Management and NAS Facilities,
OSHA, and Environmental Standards Compliance .....
Facility Security Risk Management .................................
Navigation, Landing and Lighting ...................................
Personnel Compensation, Benefits, and Travel [PCB&T]
IIJA—Long Range Radar Infrastructure Sustainment ....
IIJA—Air Route Traffic Control Center [ARTCC] & Combined Control Facility [CCF] Sustainment ..................
IIJA—Air Traffic Control Tower/Terminal Radar Approach Control Sustainment .......................................
Total ........................................................................

Agreement
$370,100,000
163,700,000
29,700,000
30,000,000
30,000,000
125,000,000
7,800,000
142,100,000
101,600,000
1,000,000,000

The table below provides details by activity for FAA facilities and equipment from
funds made available under this heading in
this act:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.118

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

Allocation of FAA Facilities and Equipment Funding in
This Act—Fiscal Year 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Budget line item

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Allocation of FAA Facilities and Equipment Funding in
This Act—Fiscal Year 2026—Continued

Agreement

Activity 1—Engineering, Development, Test and Evaluation:
Advanced Technology Development and Prototyping ..
William J. Hughes Technical Center Laboratory
Sustainment ............................................................
William J. Hughes Technical Center Infrastructure
Sustainment ............................................................
Separation Management Portfolio ...............................
Traffic Flow Management Portfolio .............................
On Demand NAS Portfolio ...........................................
NAS Infrastructure Portfolio ........................................
Support Portfolio ..........................................................
Unmanned Aircraft Systems [UAS] .............................
Enterprise, Concept Development, Human Factors, &
Demonstrations Portfolio .........................................
Total Activity 1 ...................................................
Activity 2—Air Traffic Control Facilities and Equipment:
a. En Route Programs .................................................
En Route Automation Modernization [ERAM]—System Enhancements and Tech Refresh ...............
Next Generation Weather Radar [NEXRAD] .............
Air Route Traffic Control Center [ARTCC] & Combined Control Facility [CCF] Building Improvements ..................................................................
Air/Ground Communications Infrastructure ............
Air Traffic Control En Route Radar Facilities Improvements .........................................................
Oceanic Automation System ...................................
System-Wide Information Management ..................
ADS–B NAS Wide Implementation ..........................
Air Traffic Management Implementation Portfolio
Time Based Flow Management Portfolio ................
Weather Processor ...................................................
Airborne Collision Avoidance System X [ACASX] ....
Data Communications in Support of NextGen Air
Transportation System ........................................
Offshore Automation ...............................................
Commercial Space Integration ...............................
Common Automation Platform ................................
Subtotal En Route Programs .........................
b. Terminal Programs ..................................................
Standard Terminal Automation Replacement System [STARS] [TAMR Phase 1] ............................
Terminal Automation Program ................................
Terminal Air Traffic Control Facilities—Replace ...
ATCT/Terminal Radar Approach Control [TRACON]
Facilities—Improve ............................................
NAS Facilities OSHA and Environmental Standards
Compliance .........................................................
Performance Based Navigation Support Portfolio ..
Unmanned Aircraft Systems [UAS] Implementation
Airport Ground Surveillance Portfolio .....................
Terminal and EnRoute Surveillance Portfolio .........
Terminal and EnRoute Voice Switch and Recorder
Portfolio ..............................................................
Enterprise Information Platform .............................
Remote Towers ........................................................
Subtotal Terminal Programs ..........................
c. Flight Service Programs.
Future Flight Services Program ..............................
Alaska Flight Service Facility Modernization
[AFSFM] ...............................................................
Weather Camera Program .......................................
Weather Systems Portfolio ......................................
Don Young Alaska Safety Initiatives ......................
Subtotal Flight Service Programs ..................
d. Landing and Navigational Aids Program.
Wide Area Augmentation System [WAAS] for GPS
Instrument Flight Procedures Automation [IFPA] ...
Runway Safety Areas—Navigational Mitigation ....
Landing and Lighting Portfolio ...............................
Subtotal Landing and Navigational Aids Programs ........................................................
e. Other ATC Facilities Programs ................................
Fuel Storage Tank Replacement and Management
Unstaffed Infrastructure Sustainment and Replacement ...........................................................
Aircraft Replacement and Related Equipment Program ...................................................................
Airport Cable Loop Systems—Sustained Support ..
Child Care Center Sustainment ..............................
Electrical Power Systems—Sustain/Support ..........
Energy Management and Compliance [EMC] .........
FAA Telecommunications Infrastructure .................
Operational Analysis and Reporting Systems ........
Aeronautical Information Management Program ....
Subtotal Other ATC Facilities Programs ........
Total Activity 2 ...................................................
Activity 3—Non-Air Traffic Control Facilities and
Equipment:
a. Support Equipment .................................................
Hazardous Materials Management .........................
Aviation Safety Analysis System [ASAS] .................
National Air Space [NAS] Recovery Communications [RCOM] ......................................................
Facility Security Risk Management ........................
Information Security ................................................
System Approach for Safety Oversight [SASO] ......
Aerospace Medical Equipment Needs [AMEN] ........
System Safety Management Portfolio .....................
National Test Equipment Program .........................
Mobile Assets Management Program .....................
Aerospace Medicine Safety Information Systems
[AMSIS] ...............................................................
Subtotal Support Equipment .........................
b. Training, Equipment and Facilities ........................
Aeronautical Center Infrastructure Sustainment ....
Distance Learning ...................................................
Subtotal Training, Equipment and Facilities

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H1737

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

..............................
$132,500,000
19,900,000
23,000,000
13,800,000
9,000,000
10,000,000
17,100,000
7,000,000
16,000,000
10,500,000
258,800,000
..............................
..............................
52,300,000
3,000,000
252,300,000
8,200,000
7,800,000
22,900,000
24,600,000
179,900,000
136,600,000
20,900,000
14,500,000
6,000,000
94,700,000
60,000,000
10,000,000
125,000,000
1,018,700,000
..............................
189,700,000
9,000,000
50,000,000
131,300,000
30,000,000
5,000,000
10,000,000
35,500,000
42,800,000
21,600,000
29,600,000
3,000,000
557,500,000
140,000,000
2,100,000
6,500,000
28,050,000
20,000,000
196,650,000
92,000,000
2,400,000
1,400,000
60,000,000
155,800,000
..............................
5,000,000
10,000,000
119,900,000
10,000,000
1,600,000
65,800,000
4,200,000
303,200,000
22,700,000
80,900,000
623,300,000
2,551,950,000

Budget line item

12,000,000
14,300,000
37,000,000
13,600,000
1,300,000
13,700,000
10,000,000
17,400,000
38,300,000
217,500,000
..............................
40,000,000
1,000,000
41,000,000

Jkt 069060

Agreement

Total Activity 3 ...................................................
Activity 4—Facilities and Equipment Mission Support:
System Engineering and Development Support ..........
Program Support Leases .............................................
Logistics and Acquisition Support Services ................
Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center Leases ................
Transition Engineering Support ...................................
Technical Support Services Contract [TSSC] ..............
Resource Tracking Program [RTP] ..............................
Center for Advanced Aviation System Development
[CAASD] ...................................................................
Total Activity 4 ...................................................
Activity 5—Personnel and Related Expenses:
Personnel and Related Expenses ................................
Total, All Activities .............................................

258,500,000
39,000,000
55,000,000
12,000,000
16,900,000
17,000,000
28,000,000
10,000,000
55,000,000
232,900,000
697,850,000
4,000,000,000

Facilities and equipment activities.—The
agreement provides amounts as specified in
the tables above and maintains the directions included in House Report 119–212 and
Senate Report 119–47 unless otherwise modified below.
Advanced technology development and prototyping.—The agreement provides $132,500,000,
of which $100,000,000 shall be for major airspace redesign initiative. From these
amounts, the FAA shall prioritize work on
the Hawaiian islands airspace modernization
project, and provide a briefing to the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations
on the status and timelines of this project
within 60 days of enactment of this act.
Digital filing and clearance delivery.—The
agreement includes funding for the continued development and implementation of digital flight filing and clearance delivery capabilities, but does not specify particular
amounts as specified under the same heading
in House Report 119–212. The agreement directs the FAA to provide the briefing included under this heading in the House Report 119– 212. The agreement directs the FAA
to provide the briefing included under this
heading in the House Report 119–212 6 months
after the enactment of this act.
Landing and lighting portfolio.—The agreement provides $60,000,000 for the landing and
lighting portfolio, which is in addition to the
$30,000,000 directed for this purpose from
amounts available under the IIJA for fiscal
year 2026. The agreement includes not less
than $15,000,000 for the procurement and installation of precision approach path indicators and not less than $10,000,000 for instrumentation landing systems.
Don Young Alaska aviation safety initiative.—The agreement includes $25,000,000 to
implement the Don Young Alaska aviation
safety initiative, which includes $20,000,000
from this budget line item [BLI], $3,500,000
from the ADS–B NAS-wide implementation
BLI, and $1,500,000 from the weather camera
program BLI.
RESEARCH, ENGINEERING, AND DEVELOPMENT
(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)

The agreement provides $290,000,000 for the
FAA’s research, engineering, and development activities, to remain available until
September 30, 2028.
The following table provides amounts for
budget line items under this heading:

..............................
19,900,000
40,000,000

RESEARCH, ENGINEERING, AND DEVELOPMENT
Research, Engineering & Development
Fire Research and Safety ..............................................
Propulsion and Fuel Systems ........................................
Advanced Materials/Structural Safety ...........................
Advanced Materials /Structural Safety—JAMS COE
(authorized under 49 USC § 44518) .........................
Aircraft Icing ..................................................................
Digital System Safety ....................................................
Continued Air Worthiness ..............................................
Flight deck/Maintenance/System Integration Human
Factors .......................................................................
System Safety Management/Terminal Area Safety ........
Air Traffic Control/Technical Operations Human Factors ............................................................................
Aeromedical Research ....................................................

PO 00000

Frm 00385

Fmt 4634

RESEARCH, ENGINEERING, AND DEVELOPMENT—
Continued

Sfmt 0634

Agreement
6,647,000
4,200,000
1,000,000
15,000,000
2,798,000
5,375,000
8,198,000
12,410,000
9,096,000
5,709,000
10,394,000

Research, Engineering & Development
Weather Program ...........................................................
Unmanned Aircraft Systems Research ..........................
Unmanned Aircraft Systems Research—ASSURE COE
(authorized under 49 USC § 44813) .........................
Alternative Fuels for General Aviation ...........................
Commercial Space Transportation Safety .....................
NextGen Wake Turbulence ..............................................
Information/Cyber Security .............................................
Energy & Efficiency ........................................................
Energy & Efficiency—ASCENT COE (authorized under
49 USC § 44520) .......................................................
Aircraft Technologies and Fuels Research ....................
Aircraft Technologies and Fuels Research—CLEEN
(authorized under 49 USC § 47511) .........................
Aircraft Technologies and Fuels Research—ASCENT
COE (authorized under 49 USC § 44520) .................
System Planning and Resource Management ...............
Aviation Grant Management (Aviation Workforce Development Grants) .........................................................
William J. Hughes Technical Center Laboratory Facilities .............................................................................
Aircraft Radio Altimeter Development, Testing, and
Certification ...............................................................
Tarmac Safety and Runway Incursion Prevention .........
Total ......................................................................

Agreement
15,436,000
10,000,000
14,000,000
10,000,000
4,300,000
4,700,000
4,596,000
12,500,000
8,500,000
5,000,000
38,500,000
27,000,000
3,894,000
40,000,000
6,747,000
3,000,000
1,000,000
290,000,000

Research, engineering, and development activities.—The agreement provides amounts as
specified in the table above and maintains
the directions included in House Report 119–
212 and Senate Report 119–47 unless otherwise modified below.
Advanced materials/structural safety—joint
center of excellence [COE] for advanced materials
[JAMS].—The
agreement
provides
$15,000,000 for advanced materials and structural safety work conducted through JAMS.
Of this total, no less than $6,000,000 shall be
used for the FAA to work directly with the
Advanced Composites Institute and its private partners to conduct research to develop,
evaluate, and validate out-of-autoclave composite manufacturing methods and related
emerging processes relevant to airworthiness
certification. This includes, but is not limited to, advanced composite manufacturing,
joining, repair, and sustainment technologies across thermoset and thermoplastic
systems. Of the total provided, not less than
$4,000,000 shall be for the Advanced Materials
in Transport Aircraft Structures and not less
than $4,000,000 is to advance the use of fiberreinforced composite materials in the commercial aviation industry through JAMS.
Energy & efficiency.—The agreement provides a total of $21,000,000 for energy & efficiency research across two BLIs, of which
$8,500,000 shall be for the COE for Alternative
Jet Fuels and Environment [ASCENT].
Funds shall be prioritized for SAF, noise,
emissions, and other ongoing research.
Aircraft technologies and fuels research.—The
agreement provides a total of $70,500,000 for
aircraft technologies and fuels research
across three BLIs, of which $38,500,000 shall
be for the CLEEN program and $27,000,000
shall be for ASCENT. The agreement directs
the FAA to prioritize research related to
SAF, and to provide no less than $20,000,000
for the research and development of high-efficiency aircraft propellers, engines, and
other systems, in collaboration with U.S.
manufacturers, that focus on improving safety, efficiency, reducing noise, and advancing
the technologies necessary to maintain U.S.
leadership.
UAS research.—The agreement provides
$10,000,000 for UAS research and an additional $14,000,000 for the UAS Center of Excellence, and includes the set-asides and direction included in House Report 119–212
under the heading ‘‘Counter-UAS’’ and in
Senate Report 119–47 under the heading
‘‘UAS Research’’.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.119

H22JAPT2

H1738
GRANTS-IN-AID FOR AIRPORTS

(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides an obligation limitation of $4,000,000,000 and a liquidating cash
appropriation of $4,000,000,000, to remain
available until expended. Within the obligation limitation, the agreement provides not
less than $160,000,000 for administrative expenses, $15,000,000 for the airport cooperative
research program, $41,827,000 for airport
technology research program, and $15,000,000
for the small community air service development program.
GRANTS-IN-AID FOR AIRPORTS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $577,356,000 for AIP
grants, of which $368,670,000 is derived from
unobligated balances in the IIJA. Of the
total, $542,356,000 is for the purposes and
amounts specified in the table entitled
‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included in this
joint explanatory statement, and $35,000,000
is available for competitive grants, which
may include projects authorized under section 767 of the FAA Reauthorization Act of
2024 (Public Law 118–63).
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

AVIATION ADMINISTRATION

Section 110 allows no more than 600 technical staff-years at the center for advanced
aviation systems development.
Section 111 prohibits funds for adopting
guidelines or regulations requiring airport
sponsors to provide the FAA ‘‘without cost’’
building construction or space.
Section 112 allows reimbursement for fees
collected and credited under 49 U.S.C. 45303.
Section 113 allows reimbursement of funds
for providing technical assistance to foreign
aviation authorities to be credited to the operations account.
Section 114 prohibits funds for Sunday premium pay unless work was actually performed on a Sunday.
Section 115 prohibits funds from being used
to buy store gift cards with government
issued credit cards.
Section 116 requires the administrator to
block the identifying information of an
owner or operator’s aircraft in any flight
tracking display to the public upon the request of an owner or operator.
Section 117 prohibits funds for salaries and
expenses of more than nine political and
Presidential appointees in the FAA.
Section 118 prohibits funds to increase fees
under 49 U.S.C. 44721 until the FAA provides
a report to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations that justifies all fees
related to aeronautical navigation products
and explains how such fees are consistent
with Executive Order 13642.
Section 119 requires the FAA to notify the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations at least 90 days before closing a regional operations center or reducing personnel or the services provided.
Section 119A prohibits funds from being
used to change weight restrictions or prior
permission rules at Teterboro Airport in New
Jersey.
Section 119B prohibits funds from being
used to withhold from consideration and approval certain applications for participation
in the contract tower program, or for certain
reevaluations of cost-share program participation.
Section 119C prohibits funds from being
used to open, close, redesignate, or reorganize a regional office, the aeronautical center, or the technical center subject to the re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

programming requirements outlined under
section 405 of this act.
Section 119D includes requirements for creating, reorganizing, or restructuring an organizational unit of the FAA.
Section 119E allows the use of unobligated
balances from the ‘‘Grants-in-Aid for Airports’’ account to reimburse airports affected by temporary flight restrictions for
residences of the President.
Section 119F provides restrictions on the
use of the authorities under 49 U.S.C. 44502 to
transfer certain air traffic systems or equipment to the FAA.
Section 119G prohibits the privatization or
separation of the air traffic control functions
of the FAA.
Section 119H prohibits the construction of
a second air traffic controller training academy.
Section 119I allows the FAA to increase
pay for employees with a medical degree in
the Office of Aerospace Medicine.
Section 119J requires a monthly spend plan
and briefing from senior FAA officials on all
air traffic control modernization efforts.
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION

titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included in
this joint explanatory statement. The agreement also includes: $200,000,000 for the Tribal
transportation program; $200,000,000 for public parking for commercial motor vehicles;
$5,000,000 for bollard installation projects;
$5,000,000 for the regional infrastructure accelerator demonstration program; $20,000,000
for the Appalachian development highway
system; $3,000,000 to be transferred to the
Southwest Border Regional Commission;
$5,000,000 to be transferred to the Northern
Border Regional Commission; $20,000,000 to
be transferred to the Denali Commission;
$2,000,000 for the pollinator-friendly practices
on roadsides and highway rights-of-way program; $10,000,000 for the national scenic byways program; $350,000,000 for a competitive
bridge replacement or rehabilitation grant
program; $25,000,000 for a competitive Type 3
highway bridge grant program; $6,159,500 for
research to reduce the impacts of 6PPD on
salmon-bearing streams; and $30,000,000 for
the reconnecting communities pilot program.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL

LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION

(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS)

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

Section 120 distributes the Federal-aid
highways program obligation limitation.
Section 121 allows funds received by the
Bureau of Transportation Statistics from the
sale of data products to be credited to the
Federal-aid highways account.
Section 122 provides requirements for any
waiver of Buy America Act requirements.
Section 123 requires 60-day notification to
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations for any INFRA grants awarded
under 23 U.S.C. 117.
Section 124 allows State DOTs to repurpose
certain highway project funding within 25
miles of its original designation.
Section 125 extends the period of availability of certain INFRA grant funds.
Section 126 extends the period of availability of certain bridge investment program
funds.
Section 127 extends the period of availability of certain PROTECT grant funds.
FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION

The agreement limits obligations for the
administrative expenses of the Federal Highway Administration [FHWA] to $507,435,977,
of which $3,248,000 is for the administrative
expenses of the Appalachian Regional Commission.
FEDERAL-AID HIGHWAYS
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

The agreement limits obligations for the
Federal-aid
highways
program
to
$62,657,105,821 in fiscal year 2026.
Cordon pricing.—In lieu of the report required by House Report 119–212 under the
header ‘‘Congestion pricing impact study’’,
the agreement directs the GAO to conduct a
study on zoning-based pricing, including cordon pricing, that includes the impact to safety, emissions, and congestion, as well as the
financial impact on personal vehicle drivers,
public transit users, bicyclists, and pedestrians.
Low population highway infrastructure.—In
lieu of the report required by House Report
119–212, the agreement encourages the Department to take proactive measures to ensure that meritorious grant applications for
projects not included in a Statewide Transportation Improvement Program or Transportation Improvement Program, and from
counties with populations less than 50,000,
receive fair consideration.
Electrical vehicle charging infrastructure.—
The agreement acknowledges that the Secretary issued interim final guidance for the
National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure program, consistent with the requirement in
Senate Report 119–47.
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

The agreement provides a liquidating cash
appropriation of $63,396,105,821, which is
available until expended, to pay the outstanding obligations of the various highway
programs at the levels provided in this act
and prior appropriations acts.
HIGHWAY INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMS

MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY OPERATIONS AND
PROGRAMS
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

The bill includes a liquidating cash appropriation and a limitation on obligations of
$390,000,000 for the operations and programs
of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration [FMCSA]. Of this limitation,
$14,073,000 is for the research and technology
program, and not less than $63,098,000 is for
information technology and information
management, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028.
Enforcement Training and Support Grant
Program.—The agreement directs FMCSA to
notify grantees of any updates to the instructor development program [IDP] and
Federal law enforcement training course accreditation and to continue to include grantees in the development and delivery of the
IDP, to ensure instructors are prepared to
deliver the curriculum to non-Federal employees under the grant program.

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $2,395,880,591 for
highway infrastructure programs, of which
$1,468,668,000 is derived from unobligated balances in the IIJA. Of the total amount, the
agreement provides $1,514,721,091 for the purposes and amounts specified in the table en-

PO 00000

Frm 00386

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY GRANTS
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

The bill includes a liquidating cash appropriation of $536,600,000 and a limitation on

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.120

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

obligations of $541,600,000 for motor carrier
safety grants. The following table provides
funding levels for activities within this account:

Section 142 provides funding for travel and
related expenses for state management reviews and highway safety core competency
development training.
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION

Motor carrier safety assistance program ........................
Commercial driver’s license program implementation
program .......................................................................
High priority program ......................................................
Commercial motor vehicle operators grant program ......
Commercial motor vehicle enforcement training and
support grant program ................................................

The agreement provides $264,761,000 for the
safety and operations of the Federal Railroad Administration [FRA], of which
$25,000,000 shall remain available until expended. The agreement supports staffing levels in line with the deferred resignations at
the FRA but does not support any reductions
to safety personnel. The agreement continues the directives in Senate Report 119–47
under the heading ‘‘Staffing’’ and directs the
report to include information on each office
in the FRA. The agreement does not include
the transfer of human resources, communications, government affairs, and civil
rights functions into the Department’s working capital fund.
The agreement provides the following
funding levels for specific activities within
this account:

SAFETY AND OPERATIONS

$422,500,000
45,200,000
62,400,000
1,500,000
10,000,000

Training provider registry.—The agreement
directs the Secretary to submit to the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations
information on the number of certificates
issued by training providers on the training
provider registry not later than 90 days after
enactment of this act and bi-annually after
initial submission of such information. The
agreement further directs the Secretary to
submit a plan to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations, including any resource requirements, on how the FMCSA will
conduct regular audits of the training provider registry not later than 120 days after
enactment of this act.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL MOTOR

Automated track inspection program ..............................

CARRIER SAFETY ADMINISTRATION

Section 130 prohibits funds from being used
to enforce the electronic logging device rule
with respect to carriers transporting livestock or insects.
Section 131 requires the Secretary to update the Department’s regulations to ensure
that non-compliance with 49 CFR 391.11(b)(2)
triggers an out-of-service order.
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONS AND RESEARCH
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $200,000,000 for operations and research for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration [NHTSA],
of which $65,000,000 shall remain available
through September 30, 2027, and of which
$129,000,000 shall be derived from the IIJA.
OPERATIONS AND RESEARCH
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

The agreement provides a liquidating cash
appropriation and an obligation limitation
of $209,600,000, to remain available until expended, which reflects the authorized level of
contract authority, and of which $57,500,000
shall remain available until September 30,
2027. Of the total amount, the agreement
provides $202,000,000 for programs authorized
under section 403 of title 23, U.S.C., including
behavioral research on automated driving
systems and advanced driver assistance systems and improving consumer responses to
safety recalls, and section 25024 of Public
Law 117–58; and $7,600,000 for the national
driver register authorized under chapter 303
of title 49, U.S.C.
HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY GRANTS
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

The bill provides a liquidating cash appropriation and an obligation limitation of
$849,654,625 for highway traffic safety grants,
to remain available until expended.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—NATIONAL
HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION

Section 140 exempts obligation authority
made available in previous public laws from
the obligation limitations set for the current
year.
Section 141 prohibits the use of funds for
advertising campaigns that encourage illegal
drug or alcohol use.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1739

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Positive train control support program ...........................
Trespasser prevention ......................................................
Highway-rail grade crossing safety .................................
Confidential close call reporting system .........................
Grant and project development technical assistance,
oversight ......................................................................

No less than
$21,600,000
Up to 1,000,000
No less than
400,000
No less than
1,000,000
Up to 4,800,000
Up to 500,000

Confidential Close Call Reporting System
[C3RS].—The agreement continues the directives in Senate Report 119–47 under this
heading and further directs the FRA to brief
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations within 90 days of enactment of this
act on the status of the C3RS and efforts to
continue the Class I freight railroads pilot
program.
Hazardous material incident mitigation.—The
agreement directs the FRA to complete the
update to the 2007 vent and burn reports in
collaboration with rail industry hazardous
material teams, the first responder community, and other incident command stakeholders and republish the reports which shall
include clear instructions to consult the
shipper when considering a vent and burn;
more comprehensive guidance on what products are candidates for a vent and burn,
along with what chemicals and other hazards
may result from a vent and burn; and an updated process flow chart. These reports shall
be distributed to emergency responder associations.
In addition, to appropriately evaluate and
develop updated vent and burn reports, guidance, and best practices, the agreement directs the FRA to use existing research and
development resources to ensure first responders, rail industry hazardous material
teams, and other incident command stakeholders are best prepared to respond to rail
hazardous material incidents.
Trespasser prevention.—As part of the briefing directed in House Report 119–212 under
this heading, the FRA shall identify, within
270 days of enactment of this act, the States
and localities across the country that have
the highest number of trespasser incidents
and fatalities. The FRA is further directed to
provide a summary of its efforts and guidance to assist such States and localities to
reduce trespasser fatalities.
RAILROAD RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

The agreement provides $40,000,000 for railroad research and development, to remain
available until expended. Of this amount, up
to $3,000,000 is available to make improvements at the transportation technology cen-

PO 00000

Frm 00387

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ter as authorized under 49 U.S.C. 20108(d) and
not less than $2,500,000 is for a rail research
and development center of excellence as authorized in 49 U.S.C. 20108(j).
Rolling stock equipment and components
[RSEC] maintenance and inspection.—The
agreement includes no less than $5,000,000 to
support RSEC research to evaluate, test, and
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency
of automated inspection and maintenance
equipment and procedures and reiterates the
directives under this heading in Senate Report 119–47. Further, the agreement recognizes that the FRA reinstated the Railroad
Safety Advisory Committee [RSAC], which
is meant to be a forum through which all
segments of the rail community can convene
to provide advice and recommendations to
the FRA on railroad safety matters through
a consensus process. The agreement continues to direct the FRA to use the RSAC to
inform industry, Congress, and the public on
additional safety measures that should be
taken, including regulatory and statutory
changes.
Short-line safety.—The agreement provides
$2,500,000 to continue improving safety practices and training for class II and class III
freight railroads, including efforts to improve the safe transportation of hazardous
materials, freight, and passenger rail. The
agreement also includes an additional
$250,000 for maintenance of safety trainsets.
FEDERAL–STATE PARTNERSHIP FOR INTERCITY
PASSENGER RAIL
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $65,000,000 for Federal-State partnership for intercity passenger rail grants [FSP] as authorized under
49 U.S.C. 24911, to remain available until expended, of which $40,000,000 is derived from
unobligated balances in the FRA administrative and oversight expenses account from the
IIJA.
Great Lakes corridor.—The agreement requests a briefing from the FRA no later than
270 days after enactment of this act on the
feasibility of expanding passenger rail service in the Great Lakes region. The briefing
should include infrastructure requirements,
station and facility needs, and regulatory
considerations related to cross-border operations and any barriers to such expansion.
Washington Union Station.—The agreement
includes $5,000,000 for the rehabilitation and
repair of the Washington Union Station complex. The agreement continues the directions
in Senate Report 119–47 under this heading
and clarifies that the briefing required under
this heading shall include the Department’s
plans to maintain public-private partnerships for Union Station, as established by
the Union Station Redevelopment Act of
1981.
CONSOLIDATED RAIL INFRASTRUCTURE AND
SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $137,426,000 for
consolidated rail infrastructure and safety
improvements grants as authorized under 49
U.S.C. 22907, to remain available until expended, of which $130,000,000 is derived from
unobligated balances in the FRA administrative and oversight expenses account from the
IIJA.
Of this amount, $87,426,000 is for the purposes, amounts, and corresponding recipients
specified in the table entitled ‘‘Community
Project Funding/Congressionally Directed
Spending’’ included in this joint explanatory
statement. In addition, the agreement directs the FRA to make amounts available
under this heading for the purposes described
in 49 U.S.C. 22907(c)(13).
THE NATIONAL RAILROAD PASSENGER
CORPORATION [AMTRAK]

The agreement provides
$2,427,000,000 for Amtrak.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.121

H22JAPT2

a

total

of

H1740

Fleet modernization.—The agreement recognizes Amtrak’s service launch of the nextgeneration Acela trains in August 2025. Instead of the briefing required under this
heading in Senate Report 119–47, the agreement directs Amtrak to provide a briefing to
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations within 30 days of enactment of this
act on the outcomes of the August 2025
launch of the NextGen Acelas, timeline for
the next set of NextGen Acela trains to enter
service, status of launching the new Airo
trainsets, any challenges to Amtrak’s overall fleet modernization efforts, and actions
Amtrak has taken to address recommendations in the recent Amtrak Office of the Inspector General report OIG–A–2026–002.
Passenger rail feasibility analysis.—The
agreement supports the study under this
heading in Senate Report 119–47.
Station agents.—The agreement directs Amtrak to either provide a station agent in
each Amtrak station that had a ticket agent
position eliminated in fiscal year 2018 or,
with respect to any given station on that
list, to instead reach an agreement with the
labor organization representing employees
at such station to provide a station agent in
a different station.
NORTHEAST CORRIDOR GRANTS TO THE
NATIONAL RAILROAD PASSENGER CORPORATION

The agreement provides $850,000,000, to remain available until expended, for the Secretary to make grants to Amtrak for activities associated with the Northeast Corridor.

Section 153 permits the Union Station Redevelopment Corporation [USRC] to be an eligible recipient for the FSP program and reiterates certain statutory responsibilities of
the USRC.
Section 154 prohibits the use of funds made
available by this act by Amtrak in contravention of the Worker Adjustment and
Retraining Notification Act.
Section 155 expresses the sense of Congress
that long-distance passenger rail routes and
services should be sustained to ensure
connectivity throughout the national network.
Section 156 rescinds certain unobligated
balances.
FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION

The agreement provides $1,577,000,000, to
remain available until expended, for the Secretary to make grants to Amtrak for activities associated with the national network.
The agreement does not provide additional
funding for the interstate rail compacts
grant program, as up to $3,000,000 in advance
appropriations in fiscal year 2026 from the
IIJA fully funds such grants as authorized in
section 22101(f) of such act.
Chicago Union Station [CUS] modernization.—The agreement directs Amtrak to report to the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations within 60 days of enactment
of this act on the status of funding and work
associated with the CUS improvement
project.
Modernization projects.—Of the amount provided for the national network, the agreement includes $5,000,000 for the Atlanta hub
initiative for a new intercity passenger rail
hub in downtown Atlanta as included in Amtrak’s fiscal year 2026 legislative and grant
request.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL
RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS)

Section 150 allows the FRA to transfer certain amounts made available in this and
prior acts to the financial assistance oversight and technical assistance account to
support the award, administration, project
management oversight, and technical assistance of grants administered by the FRA,
with an exception.
Section 151 limits overtime to $35,000 per
Amtrak employee, allows Amtrak’s president to waive this restriction for specific
employees for safety or operational efficiency reasons, and requires Amtrak to submit a report on overtime payments to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations.
Section 152 prohibits the use of funds made
available to Amtrak to reduce the total
number of Amtrak police department uniformed officers patrolling on board passenger
trains or at stations, facilities or rights-ofway below the staffing level on May 1, 2019.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

CAPITAL INVESTMENT GRANTS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $1,700,000,000 for
fixed-guideway projects, to remain available
until expended. Of this amount, $17,000,000 is
available for oversight activities consistent
with 49 U.S.C. 5338(c). The agreement adjusts
the set-asides of the amounts provided under
this heading in division J of the IIJA to ensure that, when combined with amounts provided in this act, and $388,800,000 in
unallocated amounts from prior fiscal years,
there are total budgetary resources of
$3,656,200,000 for the following projects to be
funded in the following amounts.

Allocation of FTA Capital Investment Grants Funding

TRANSIT FORMULA GRANTS

Agreement

(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

The agreement includes a liquidation of
contract authorization and a limitation on
obligations from the mass transit account
for transit formula grants of $14,642,000,000,
as authorized by the IIJA.
Updates to the Federal Transit Administration’s [FTA] best practices procurement and lessons learned manual.—The agreement clarifies the directions under this heading in
House Report 119–212 and Senate Report 119–
47 by directing the FTA to incorporate recommendations from industry stakeholders,
to the greatest extent practicable.

NATIONAL NETWORK GRANTS TO THE NATIONAL
RAILROAD PASSENGER CORPORATION

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

TRANSIT INFRASTRUCTURE GRANTS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $211,423,390 in
transit infrastructure grants, to remain
available
until
expended,
of
which
$188,371,000 is derived from unobligated balances of administrative and oversight expenses from the IIJA. Of the funds provided,
$25,000,000 is available for ferry boats grants
as authorized under 49 U.S.C. 5307(h), of
which no less than $4,000,000 is available only
for low or zero emission ferries or ferries
using electric battery or fuel cell components and the infrastructure to support such
ferries; $1,500,000 is available for bus testing
facilities as authorized under 49 U.S.C. 5318;
$2,000,000 is available for the accelerating innovative mobility initiative as authorized
under 49 U.S.C. 5312; $147,923,390 is available
for the purposes and amounts specified in the
table entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included
in
this
joint
explanatory
statement;
$20,000,000 is available for ferry service for
rural communities as authorized under section 71103 of division G of Public Law 117–58;
and $15,000,000 is available for operating
costs to improve public safety, reduce crime,
and increase security in large urbanized area
transit systems.
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING

The agreement provides $7,500,000 for technical assistance and training activities under
49 U.S.C. 5314, to remain available until September 30, 2027. The funding provided under
this heading is supplemental to the funding
provided under the heading ‘‘Transit Formula Grants’’, as authorized by the IIJA.
Small-urban, rural, and Tribal transit providers.—The agreement directs that not less
than $1,500,000 shall be for a cooperative
agreement for a technical assistance center
to assist small- urban, rural, and Tribal public transit recipients and planning organizations with applied innovation and capacity
building.
Workforce development and standards-based
training.—The agreement directs that not
less than $2,500,000 shall be for a cooperative
agreement consistent with the direction in
Senate Report 119–47.

PO 00000

Frm 00388

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

New starts:
CA—BART Silicon Valley Phase II ....................................
CA—Transbay Downtown Rail Extension ..........................
FL—Northeast Corridor Rapid Transit Project .................
IL—Red Line Extension .....................................................
MN—METRO Blue Line Extension [Bottineau LRT] ..........
NJ/NY—Hudson Tunnel .....................................................
NY—Second Avenue Subway Phase 2 ..............................
SC—Lowcountry Rapid Transit .........................................
VA—Richmond Highway BRT ............................................
WA—Interstate Bridge Replacement [IBR] Program ........
Other new starts projects that may become ready ..........
Core capacity:
MA—Green Line Transformation Core Capacity Program
UT—FrontRunner 2X .........................................................
Small starts:
CA—Downtown Riverfront Streetcar .................................
CA—Vermont Ave BRT ......................................................
GA—MARTA Rapid Southlake ...........................................
MA—Blue Hill Avenue Transit Action Plan ......................
MD—Viers Mill Road Flash Bus Rapid Transit Project ...
NC—North-South BRT .......................................................
OH—West Broad Street BRT .............................................
WA—Division Street Bus Rapid Transit Project ...............
WI—Madison North-South BRT .........................................
Other small starts projects that may become ready .......
Expedited project delivery pilot program:
Any expedited project delivery projects that may become
ready .............................................................................

$100,000,000
100,000,000
100,000,000
350,000,000
100,000,000
700,000,000
307,300,000
275,000,000
100,000,000
100,000,000
100,000,000
100,000,000
100,000,000
36,200,000
149,900,000
60,900,000
80,300,000
141,800,000
117,400,000
141,800,000
82,000,000
118,100,000
95,500,000
100,000,000

Capital investment grants [CIG] administration.—The agreement directs the FTA to continue to update the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations, monthly, on the
status of projects that are in the current CIG
funding pipeline. This update should include
anticipated milestone schedules for advancing projects, especially those within 2 years
of a proposed full funding grant agreement
[FFGA]. It should also highlight and explain
any potential cost and schedule changes affecting projects. The agreement directs that
such monthly reporting includes any requests for letters of no prejudice; the level of
funds allocated and obligated, by fiscal year;
and any use of the transfer authority provided in the bill for projects not yet under a
FFGA.
The agreement directs the Secretary to
submit the fiscal year 2027 annual report on
funding recommendations required by 49
U.S.C. 5309(o). Further, the agreement directs the FTA to maintain the Federal funding commitments for all existing grant
agreements, unless otherwise requested by
the project sponsor; to identify all projects
with a medium or higher rating that anticipate requesting a grant agreement in fiscal
year 2027; and to submit a list of projects to
which it expects to award a FFGA or small
starts grant agreement during the budget
year.
FFGAs.—The agreement directs FTA to include the yearly and total Federal appropriations amount that can be reasonably planned
or anticipated for future FFGAs for each fiscal year through 2028 in its notification to
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriation on FFGAs in place of item (3) included in Senate Report 119–47.
GRANTS TO THE WASHINGTON METROPOLITAN
AREA TRANSIT AUTHORITY

The agreement provides $150,000,000 to
carry out section 601 of division B of Public

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.122

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

Law 110–432 and section 30019 of the IIJA, to
remain available until expended.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL
TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

Section 160 exempts previously made transit obligations from limitations on obligations.
Section 161 allows funds provided in this
act that remain unobligated by September
30, 2029, for fixed guideway capital investment projects to be available for projects to
use the funds for the purposes for which they
were originally provided.
Section 162 allows for the transfer of appropriations made prior to October 1, 2025,
from older accounts to be merged into new
accounts with similar current activities.
Section 163 prohibits the use of funds to
adjust apportionments pursuant to 26 U.S.C.
9503(e)(4).
Section 164 prohibits the use of funds to
impede or hinder project advancement or approval for any project seeking a Federal contribution from the CIG program of greater
than 40 percent of project costs.
Section 165 repurposes funding for certain
activities related to the 2028 Olympic and
Paralympic Games.
Section 166 repurposes funding for certain
activities related to the 2026 FIFA World
Cup.
GREAT LAKES ST. LAWRENCE SEAWAY
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
(HARBOR MAINTENANCE TRUST FUND)

The agreement provides $38,080,000 for the
operations, maintenance, and capital infrastructure activities of the Great Lakes St.
Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation
[GLS]. Of that amount, not less than
$15,950,000 is provided for the seaway infrastructure program. The agreement provides
$1,000,000 for trade and economic development activities at the GLS, to be carried out
in conjunction with system stakeholders.
MARITIME ADMINISTRATION
MARITIME SECURITY PROGRAM
(INCLUDING RESCISSION)

The agreement provides $390,000,000 for the
maritime security program, to remain available until expended, and rescinds $38,400,000
in unobligated amounts made available in
fiscal years 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, and 2025.

USMMA facilities maintenance and repair, and equipment
USMMA capital improvement program ..................................
Maritime environmental and technical assistance [META]
program .............................................................................
United States marine highway program ...............................
MARAD headquarters operations ...........................................

50,000,000
50,000,000
2,000,000
5,000,000
67,291,000

Staffing.—The agreement continues the direction in Senate Report 119–47 under this
heading. The funding level in the agreement
for headquarters operations is in line with
the deferred resignations of MARAD. The
agreement does not include the transfer of
human resources, communications, government affairs, and civil rights functions into
the Department’s working capital fund.
Vessel generated underwater noise.—The
agreement continues the directions for not
less than $1,500,000 of the funds provided
under the META program to support collecting data and further investigating vessel
generated underwater noise as described
under this heading of Senate Report 119–47.
STATE MARITIME ACADEMY OPERATIONS

The agreement provides $138,900,000 for
State maritime academy [SMA] operations.
The following table provides funding levels
for activities within this account:
School ship maintenance and repair ....................................
National security multi-mission vessel program ..................
Student incentive program ....................................................
Fuel assistance payments .....................................................
Direct payments for SMAs .....................................................

$7,800,000
110,000,000
4,800,000
9,300,000
7,000,000

PIPELINE AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONAL EXPENSES

The agreement provides $28,647,000 for the
necessary operational expenses of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration [PHMSA], of which $4,500,000 shall
remain available until September 30, 2028,
with $2,000,000 of such amounts for the pipeline safety information grants to communities as authorized by section 60130 of title
49, United States Code, and $2,500,000 for
emergency response grants as authorized by
section 60125(b) of title 49, United States
Code. The agreement requires the PHMSA to
approve any requests to extend the period of
performance for grants made under section
60130(c)(2) of such title, to the extent such
funds are available for obligation, if such requests were made within 12 months prior to
the date of enactment of this act.
Staffing.—The agreement provides staffing
levels across the PHMSA in line with the deferred resignations but does not support any
reductions to safety personnel. The agreement continues the direction in Senate Report 119–47 under this same heading and directs the report to include information on
each office in the PHMSA. The agreement
does not include the transfer of human resources, communications, government affairs, and civil rights functions into the Department’s working capital fund.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY

National security multi-mission vessel [NSMV]
program.—The agreement includes not less
than $55,000,000 for shore-side infrastructure
improvements at the SMAs, and up to
$55,000,000 to support the operation, integration, oversight and management of the
NSMVs, including insurance, maintenance,
repair, and equipment costs. The agreement
reaffirms that all NSMV program requirements included under this heading in Senate
Report 119–47 apply to these funds.
ASSISTANCE TO SMALL SHIPYARDS

The agreement provides $35,000,000 for the
small shipyard grant program, to remain
available until expended.
SHIP DISPOSAL

The agreement provides $6,000,000 for the
ship disposal program, to remain available
until expended.
MARITIME GUARANTEED LOAN (TITLE XI)
PROGRAM ACCOUNT

CABLE SECURITY FLEET

The agreement provides $66,050,000 for the
PHMSA’s hazardous materials safety functions, of which $8,570,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2028.
The agreement specifies that $1,000,000
shall be for community safety grants as authorized by 49 U.S.C. 5107(i), $1,000,000 shall
be for the assistance for local emergency response training grants, and $1,000,000 shall be
for the State hazardous materials safety inspection program. The funding level provides
no less than $5,570,000 for the PHMSA’s hazardous materials research and development
program.
East Palestine, Ohio.—The agreement continues the directives under this heading in
Senate Report 119–47, except that it clarifies
that the direction related to DOT–111 tank
cars applies only to DOT–111 tank cars in
flammable liquids service, consistent with
the National Transportation Safety Board
recommendation R–24–12.

(INCLUDING RESCISSION)

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

PIPELINE SAFETY

The agreement provides $10,000,000 for the
cable security fleet program, to remain
available until expended, and rescinds
$12,392,000 in unobligated amounts made
available in fiscal years 2021 and 2022.

The agreement provides $3,940,000 for the
administrative expenses of the Title XI program and directs that these funds be transferred to the MARAD’s operations and training account.

(PIPELINE SAFETY FUND)

TANKER SECURITY PROGRAM

PORT INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM

(INCLUDING RESCISSION)

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1741

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The agreement provides $81,600,000 for the
tanker security fleet program, to remain
available until expended, and rescinds
$42,808,000 in unobligated amounts made
available in fiscal years 2022, 2023, and 2024.
The agreement directs the Maritime Administration [MARAD] to make payments to the
10 program participants at the levels authorized in 46 U.S.C. 53406(a). The rescission of
unobligated balances shall not include
amounts made available in fiscal year 2025
for reimbursements of participants in the
training program authorized by 46 U.S.C.
53406.
OPERATIONS AND TRAINING

The agreement provides $275,791,000 for
MARAD’s operations and training account.
The following table provides funding levels
for activities within this account:
United States Merchant Marine Academy [USMMA] operations .................................................................................

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

$101,500,000

Jkt 069060

The agreement provides $103,330,000 for the
port infrastructure development program, to
remain available until expended. Of the total
amount, the agreement provides $64,702,000
for the purposes and amounts specified in the
table entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included
in this joint explanatory statement.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—MARITIME
ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING RESCISSION)

Section 170 authorizes the MARAD to furnish utilities and services and to make necessary repairs in connection with any lease,
contract, or occupancy involving government property under control of the MARAD
and allows payments received to be credited
to the Treasury and to remain available
until expended.
Section 171 rescinds certain unobligated
balances.

PO 00000

Frm 00389

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND)

The agreement provides $214,807,000 for the
PHMSA’s pipeline safety program, to remain
available until September 30, 2028. Of that
amount, $30,000,000 is derived from the oil
spill liability trust fund, $177,407,000 is derived from the pipeline safety fund, $200,000
is derived from fees collected under 49 U.S.C.
60303 and deposited in the liquefied natural
gas siting account, $200,000 is derived from
fees collected under 49 U.S.C. 60117 and deposited in the pipeline safety design review
account, and $7,000,000 is derived from fees
collected under 49 U.S.C. 60302 and deposited
in the underground natural gas storage facility safety account.
The agreement provides the following levels for specific activities within this account:
Research and development ...............
Grants ................................................
Operations ..........................................
Programs ............................................

$12,500,000
89,558,000
not less than 94,022,000
not less than 18,727,000

Liquefied natural gas [LNG] COE— Of the
amounts provided for research and development, the agreement includes $5,000,000 for
the national COE for LNG Safety.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.123

H22JAPT2

H1742
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS GRANTS
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS FUND)

The agreement provides an obligation limitation of $46,825,000 for emergency preparedness grants, to remain available until September 30, 2028.
The agreement continues to encourage the
PHMSA to ensure that small businesses are
not disproportionately affected by any reasonable, limited fee changes.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The agreement provides $113,000,000 for the
salaries and expenses of the Office of Inspector General.
GENERAL PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION
Section 180 provides authorization for the
DOT to maintain and operate aircraft, hire
passenger motor vehicles and aircraft, purchase liability insurance, pay for uniforms,
and purchase and operate unmanned aircraft
systems.
Section 181 limits appropriations for services authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109 up to the rate
permitted for an executive level IV.
Section 182 prohibits recipients of funds in
this act from disseminating personal information obtained by state departments of
motor vehicles in connection to motor vehicle records with an exception.
Section 183 prohibits funds in this act for
salaries and expenses of more than 125 political and presidential appointees in the Department of Transportation.
Section 184 stipulates that revenue collected by the FHWA and the FRA from
States, counties, municipalities, other public
authorities, and private sources for training
may be credited to specific accounts within
the agencies, with an exception for state rail
safety inspectors participating in training.
Section 185 prohibits the DOT from using
funds to make, terminate, withdraw, or rescind (except at the request of the recipient),
a loan, loan guarantee, line of credit, letter
of intent, Federally funded cooperative
agreement, full funding grant agreement, or
discretionary grant unless the DOT gives a
3–day advance notice to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations. The provision requires the DOT to provide a comprehensive list of all such loans, loan guarantees, lines of credit, letters of intent, Federally funded cooperative agreements, full
funding grant agreements, and discretionary
grants that will be announced or changed
with a 3–day advance notice to the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations. The
provision also requires concurrent notice of
any ‘‘quick release’’ of funds from the
FHWA’s emergency relief program, and prohibits notifications from involving funds not
available for obligation.
Section 186 allows funds received from rebates, refunds, and similar sources to be
credited to appropriations of the DOT.
Section 187 requires reprogramming actions to be approved or denied by the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations,
and reprogramming notifications shall be
transmitted solely to the Appropriations
Committees.
Section 188 allows funds appropriated to
operating administrations to be obligated for
the Office of the Secretary for costs related
to assessments only when such funds provide
a direct benefit to the operating administrations.
Section 189 authorizes the Secretary to
carry out a program that establishes uniform standards for developing and supporting agency transit pass and transit benefits, including distribution of transit benefits.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Section 190 allows the use of funds to assist
a contract utilizing geographic, economic, or
other hiring preference not otherwise authorized by law, only if certain requirements
are met related to availability of local labor,
displacement of existing employees, and
delays in transportation plans.
Section 191 directs the Secretary of Transportation to work with the Secretaries of
Homeland Security and Commerce to ensure
that best practices for industrial control systems procurement are up to date and are
considered for all systems procured with
funds provided under this title.
Section 192 prohibits funds from being used
in contravention of the American Security
Drone Act of 2023.
Section 193 prohibits funds made available
to the DOT from being used to enforce a
mask mandate in response to the COVID–19
virus.
Section 194 directs the Secretary to issue a
new notice of funding opportunity for six
new university transportation centers.
TITLE II
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION

Office of Public and Indian Housing .....................................
Office of Community Planning and Development .................
Office of Housing ...................................................................
Office of Policy Development and Research .........................
Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity ......................
Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes ..............

$233,000,000
129,000,000
380,000,000
31,500,000
60,000,000
9,000,000

Total ...................................................................................

842,500,000

Critical staff increases.—The agreement
provides sufficient funding to support current staffing levels across all offices while
also providing increases to core program offices to expeditiously address any staffing
gaps the Department may encounter to
maintain mission critical activities. The
agreement directs the Department to inform
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations on how it is implementing this direction and addressing any other staffing
gaps identified by the Department, as part of
the semiannual staffing reports required
under section 422 of this act.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FUND
The agreement provides $345,000,000 for the
information technology fund, to remain
available until September 30, 2028.
WORKING CAPITAL FUND

EXECUTIVE OFFICES

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement includes $17,500,000 for the
salaries and expenses for executive offices, to
remain available until September 30, 2027. Of
the amounts provided, not less than $2,500,000
shall be for the Office of the Deputy Secretary, of which not less than $500,000 shall
be for the Office of Gender-Based Violence
Prevention and not less than $1,500,000 shall
be for the Office of Disaster Management.

For the working capital fund [WCF], the
agreement permits only centralized activities and funds from this account to include
Federal shared services for financial management, procurement, travel, relocation,
and human resources; printing; records management (including archiving services);
space renovation; furniture; and supply services.
Dissolution plan.—The agreement directs
the Department to begin winding down existing WCF operations, so that the WCF will no
longer be used for the currently approved activities in fiscal year 2027 and beyond. The
Department is directed to submit to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations within 90 days of enactment of this act
its proposed dissolution and transition plan
to wind down WCF operations and rebuild inhouse human resources processing capacity
and to brief the Committees on this plan before beginning implementation.
PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING
TENANT–BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE
The agreement provides a combined total
of $38,438,557,000 to remain available until expended, for tenant-based section 8 activities.
The following table provides funding levels
for activities funded within this account.

ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT OFFICES

The agreement provides $595,000,000 for the
salaries and expenses for administrative support offices, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
The following table provides funding levels
for activities within this account:
Office of the Chief Financial Officer .....................................
Office of the General Counsel ...............................................
Office of Administration ........................................................
Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer ...........................
Office of the Chief Procurement Officer ...............................
Office of Field Policy and Management ................................
Office of Departmental Equal Employment Opportunity .......
Office of the Chief Information Officer .................................

$103,200,000
93,000,000
218,000,000
53,000,000
29,500,000
40,000,000
3,300,000
55,000,000

Total ...................................................................................

595,000,000

Office of the Chief Financial Officer
[OCFO].—The agreement provides that not
more than $10,000,000 within the amounts
available for the OCFO may be used for the
program payments integrity project. The
agreement directs the Department to brief
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations within 30 days of enactment of this
act on the planned use of these funds in fiscal year 2026, the project management structure, and the timeline for full implementation of this project.
Weaver building.—In addition to the direction provided under the heading ‘‘Weaver
Building’’ in Senate Report 119–47, the agreement directs the Department to coordinate
with the General Services Administration to
identify and brief the House and Senate
Committees on Appropriations on all potential financing options for Weaver Building
close-out costs, including the substantial
outstanding liability associated with prior
capital improvements, given the uncertain
availability of future funding.
PROGRAM OFFICES

The agreement provides $842,500,000 for the
salaries and expenses for program offices, to
remain available until September 30, 2027.
The following table provides funding levels
for activities within this account:

PO 00000

Frm 00390

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Voucher renewals ...................................................
Administrative fees ................................................
Tenant protection vouchers ...................................
HUD–Veterans Affairs supportive housing [HUD–
VASH] .................................................................
Family unification program ...................................

$34,957,000,000
2,835,935,000
600,622,000

Total ...................................................................

38,438,557,000

15,000,000
30,000,000

The agreement directs the Department to
prioritize fully funding voucher renewals in
calendar year 2026 with the amounts and authorities provided in this act, including
amounts set aside for adjustments.
The agreement consolidates funding for
section 811 mainstream vouchers within the
total amounts for renewals and administrative fees to reduce administrative burden on
HUD and public housing agencies [PHAs].
Funds made available for the mainstream
voucher program in prior years remain available only for mainstream voucher purposes
and may not be redesignated for other uses.
The agreement allows the Department to
use the amounts provided for tenant protection vouchers to administer calendar year
2026 assistance to PHAs that would otherwise
be required to terminate emergency housing

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.124

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

vouchers funded in Public Law 117–2, and
also provides new waiver authorities to facilitate transitions to the housing choice
voucher program.
The agreement provides $10,000,000 for the
Tribal HUD–VASH program in the Native
American Programs account.
Shortfall prevention mobilization to support
housing markets experiencing rapid change.—In
lieu of the Rocky Mountain West pilot program included in House Report 119–212, the
agreement directs the Department to deploy
the shortfall prevention team to increase
support for communities where rental market conditions and rising costs are outpacing
HUD’s ability to provide funding.
HOUSING CERTIFICATE FUND
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS)

The agreement allows unobligated balances in the housing certificate fund to be
used for the renewal of or amendments to
section 8 project-based contracts and for performance-based contract administrators.
PUBLIC HOUSING FUND

The agreement provides $8,319,393,000 for
the public housing fund, to remain available
until September 30, 2029.
Within the total, the agreement provides
$4,687,393,000 for the public housing operating
formula for 2026 payments (including
amounts for resident participation pursuant
to 24 CFR Part 990); $337,000,000 for needbased allocations to PHAs that experience or
are
at
risk
of
financial
shortfalls;
$3,200,000,000 for allocations to PHAs through
the capital fund formula; $30,000,000 for emergency capital needs, of which not less than
$10,000,000 is for safety and security measures; $50,000,000 for competitive grants to
PHAs to evaluate and reduce residential
health hazards, including lead-based paint,
carbon monoxide, mold, radon, and fire safety, of which not less than $25,000,000 is specifically for lead hazards; and $15,000,000 for
administrative and judicial receiverships.
Operating expenses.—Based on current estimates, the funding levels for the operating
formula and shortfall allocations provide
sufficient resources for every PHA to maintain current service levels and to prevent an
increase in shortfalls, especially for PHAs
who already have less than 3 months of reserves. The agreement directs the Department to award shortfall funds within 180
days of enactment of this act and pursuant
to the methodology previously presented to
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations. Within 60 days of enactment of
this act, the Department shall brief the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations on PHAs’ estimated shortfall eligibility and how it intends to update the financial indicator scoring criteria to account for
this year’s funding levels.
ASSISTED HOUSING INSPECTIONS AND RISK
ASSESSMENTS

The agreement provides $50,000,000 for the
Department’s inspection and assessment programs, to remain available until September
30, 2028.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

CHOICE NEIGHBORHOODS INITIATIVE

The agreement provides $25,000,000 for the
choice neighborhoods initiative, to remain
available until September 30, 2030. Of this
amount, not less than $12,500,000 shall be
made available to PHAs and not more than
$10,000,000 is available for planning grants.
SELF–SUFFICIENCY PROGRAMS
The agreement provides $206,400,000 for
self-sufficiency programs, to remain available until September 30, 2029. Of the total,
$156,400,000 is for the family self-sufficiency
program, $40,000,000 is for the resident opportunity and self-sufficiency program, and
$10,000,000 is for the jobs-plus initiative.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1743

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

NATIVE AMERICAN PROGRAMS

The agreement provides $1,354,000,000 for
Native American programs, to remain available until September 30, 2030. The agreement
provides $1,111,000,000 for the Native American
housing
block
grant
program;
$125,000,000 for the competitive Native American housing block grant program; $10,000,000
for the Tribal HUD–VASH program; $1,000,000
for the title VI loan program; $100,000,000 for
the Indian community development block
grant program; and $7,000,000 for training and
technical assistance.
INDIAN HOUSING LOAN GUARANTEE FUND
PROGRAM ACCOUNT

The agreement provides $1,400,000 for the
cost of guaranteed loans and administrative
contract expenses, to remain available until
expended. The agreement allows HUD to use
funds in this and prior acts for the cost of
guaranteed loans that are unobligated to
subsidize a total loan level of not more than
$1,800,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
NATIVE HAWAIIAN HOUSING BLOCK GRANT

The agreement provides $22,300,000 for the
Native Hawaiian housing block grant program, to remain available until September
30, 2030.
NATIVE HAWAIIAN HOUSING LOAN GUARANTEE
FUND PROGRAM ACCOUNT

The agreement provides not more than
$28,000,000 in loan guarantee commitment authority, including the authority to guarantee refinance loans, to remain available
until September 30, 2027.
COMMUNITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR PERSONS WITH
AIDS

The agreement provides $529,000,000 for the
housing opportunities for persons with AIDS
program, to remain available until September 30, 2029.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FUND

The agreement provides $6,995,244,120 for
the community development fund, to remain
available until September 30, 2029. Of the
total, the agreement provides $3,300,000,000 in
community development block grant [CDBG]
formula funding, $30,000,000 for activities authorized under section 8071 of the SUPPORT
for
Patients
and
Communities
Act,
$50,000,000 for grants to reduce barriers to affordable
housing
development,
and
$3,615,244,120 for economic development initiatives [EDIs].
EDIs.—The agreement directs HUD to provide funding for the projects listed in the
table entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included
in this joint explanatory statement in the
corresponding amounts and for the corresponding recipients. The agreement continues the direction for HUD to provide
semi-annual briefings to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations on the
implementation of EDIs and the Department’s oversight of projects. The agreement
further directs HUD to provide regular written updates of technical changes to projects
that require congressional approval as well
as a regular status update on all grants
which have not yet resulted in a fully executed grant agreement. Finally, the agreement continues to direct HUD to prioritize
timely outreach and responses to EDI grantees to ensure successful execution of grants.
Manufactured housing.—The agreement directs HUD to make direct technical assistance available to grantees seeking to use
CDBG funds to preserve long-term affordability of manufactured housing and to revitalize manufactured housing communities,
consistent with Notice CPD–2023–10.
Zoning requirements.—In lieu of the direction in House Report 119–212, the agreement

PO 00000

Frm 00391

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

directs the GAO to examine, to the extent
that data is available and reliable, how zoning regulations of State and local jurisdictions may affect the implementation of HUD
housing and community development grant
programs. The agreement continues the request regarding a GAO briefing and subsequent report under this heading in House Report 119–212.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT LOAN GUARANTEES
PROGRAM ACCOUNT

The agreement provides the authority to
collect fees from borrowers adequate to result in a subsidy cost of zero and an aggregate limitation on commitments of no more
than $300,000,000 for loan guarantees under
section 108.
HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIPS PROGRAM

The agreement provides $1,250,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2029, for
the HOME investment partnerships program.
HOME—ARP expenditure of funds.—The
agreement continues the directions in House
Report 119–212 under this account, except
that in place of the direction in the fifth sentence, the agreement instead directs HUD to
include an analysis on NEPA requirements
in its findings.
SELF–HELP AND ASSISTED HOMEOWNERSHIP
OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM

The agreement provides $65,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028. The
agreement provides the following funding
levels for specific activities within this account:

Self-help homeownership opportunity program ........................................................
Section 4 program .......................................
[Rural capacity building activities] ........
National rural capacity building .................

$12,000,000
46,000,000
[not less than 5,000,000]
7,000,000

Total ....................................................

65,000,000

Capacity building to address the needs of tribal communities.—HUD is directed to ensure
section 4 grantees collectively invest not
less than $1,000,000 in targeted capacity
building activities to benefit Native Hawaiian, American Indian, and Alaska Native
communities and populations. This minimum investment is separate from the required investment for rural capacity building activities of not less than $5,000,000.
HOMELESS ASSISTANCE GRANTS

The agreement provides $4,417,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2028, for
homeless assistance grants. Funding is provided in the amounts shown in the following
table:

Emergency solutions grants [ESG] ..............
Continuum of care [CoC] and rural housing
stability assistance .................................
[Projects to assist survivors of domestic
violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking] ...............................
[Supportive service line items to address Cost of Living Adjustment] .......
[Technical assistance] ............................
National homeless data analysis project ....
Comprehensive approach to serving homeless youth ................................................
[Youth homelessness system improvement grants] .......................................
[Technical assistance] ............................
Total ....................................................

$290,000,000
4,010,000,000
[52,000,000]
[43,000,000]
[not less than 20,000,000]
10,000,000
107,000,000
[not less than 25,000,000]
[up to 10,000,000]
4,417,000,000

Homeless students.—The agreement continues the direction under this heading in
House Report 119–212.
Improving access to healthcare and services.—
Within the amounts provided for technical
assistance, the agreement continues the
$5,000,000 included in Senate Report 119–47 to
support efforts between HUD and the Department of Health and Human Services to help
communities improve coordination of services.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.125

H22JAPT2

H1744

Addressing the needs of survivors of domestic
violence.—The agreement continues the direction in Senate Report 119–47 for the Department to submit a report on CoC and ESG
utilization by survivors of domestic violence,
dating violence, sexual assault and stalking.
HOUSING PROGRAMS
PROJECT–BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE
The agreement provides a combined total
of $18,543,000,000, to remain available until
expended, for project-based rental assistance
activities. Of the total, not more than
$509,000,000 is for performance-based contract
administrators.
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY

The agreement provides $1,031,000,000 for
the section 202 program, to remain available
until September 30, 2029, of which up to
$122,000,000 shall be for service coordinators
and the continuation of existing congregate
service grants. This amount, in combination
with existing carryover balances, fully funds
all annual project-based rental assistance
contract renewals and amendments.
HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

The agreement provides $287,000,000 for the
section 811 program, to remain available
until September 30, 2029.
HOUSING COUNSELING ASSISTANCE

The agreement provides $57,500,000 for
housing counseling, including up to $4,500,000
for administrative contract services, to remain available until September 30, 2027. The
agreement includes the $3,000,000 set-aside
from Senate Report 119–47.
PAYMENT TO MANUFACTURED HOUSING FEES
TRUST FUND

The agreement provides $14,000,000 for the
manufactured housing standards programs,
to remain available until expended, of which
$14,000,000 is to be derived from fees collected
and deposited in the manufactured housing
fees trust fund.
FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION
MUTUAL MORTGAGE INSURANCE PROGRAM
ACCOUNT

The agreement sets a limit of up to
$400,000,000,000 on commitments to guarantee
single-family loans and provides $160,000,000
for administrative contract expenses, which
shall be available until September 30, 2027.
GENERAL AND SPECIAL RISK PROGRAM ACCOUNT

The agreement sets a limit of up to
$35,000,000,000 on multifamily and specialized
loan guarantees and provides that such commitment authority shall be available until
September 30, 2027.
GOVERNMENT NATIONAL MORTGAGE
ASSOCIATION
GUARANTEES OF MORTGAGE–BACKED SECURITIES LOAN GUARANTEE PROGRAM ACCOUNT

The agreement sets a limit of up to
$550,000,000,000 for new commitments and
provides $56,000,000 for salaries and expenses
for the Government National Mortgage Association, which shall be available until September 30, 2027.
POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND RESEARCH

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

The agreement provides $122,500,000 for research and technology activities and technical assistance, to remain available until
September 30, 2027.
Core research and technology.—The agreement provides no less than $72,900,000 for
core research and technology, of which
$5,000,000 is for cooperative agreements and
research partnerships as required under this
heading in House Report 119–212, and of
which up to $4,900,000 is for innovative building technologies and disaster relief research
as described under this heading in House Report 119–212 and Senate Report 119–47.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Research, evaluations, and demonstrations.—
The agreement provides up to $3,128,000 in
new funding, and permits the Department to
use amounts remaining from previously appropriated funding, for new and continuing
studies and demonstration evaluations, including research activities delineated under
this heading in House Report 119–212 and in
Senate Report 119–47. The Principal Deputy
Assistant Secretary for the Office of Policy
Development and Research is reminded to
provide concurrent updates on the Department’s research agenda to the Chair and
Ranking Members of the House and Senate
Committees on Appropriations.
Technical assistance.—The agreement provides $40,000,000 for technical assistance, of
which $5,000,000 is for the distressed cities
technical assistance program. The agreement also directs the Department to provide,
not later than 90 days after the enactment of
this act, an allocation plan for the technical
assistance funds provided by this act, to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations.
FAIR HOUSING AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
FAIR HOUSING ACTIVITIES

The agreement provides $86,355,000 for fair
housing activities, to remain available until
September 30, 2027. The bill specifies program levels in the account.
OFFICE OF LEAD HAZARD CONTROL AND
HEALTHY HOMES
LEAD HAZARD REDUCTION
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $295,600,000 for
lead hazard control and healthy homes programs, to remain available until September
30, 2028.
The following table provides funding levels
for activities within this account:

Lead hazard reduction grants .....................
[Areas with the highest lead-based
paint abatement needs] .....................
Healthy homes initiative ..............................
[Aging-in-place home modification
grants] ................................................

[105,000,000]
140,000,000

$155,600,000

Total ....................................................

295,600,000

[30,000,000]

New financing mechanism pilot.—The agreement provides up to $10,000,000 for the Department to establish a one-time national
pilot within the healthy homes initiative to
facilitate new financing mechanisms to address lead and other residential environmental stressors in low-income communities. The agreement directs the Department to issue a notice of funding opportunity for the pilot program no later than
120 days after enactment of this act. As part
of the briefing required under this heading in
House Report 119–212, the Department shall
provide its framework for assessing the pilot
and how its lessons may inform the broader
healthy homes initiative program.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
The agreement provides $144,500,000 for the
salaries and expenses of the Office of Inspector General.
GENERAL PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS)
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

Section 201 splits overpayments evenly between the Treasury and State housing finance agencies.
Section 202 prohibits funds from being used
to investigate or prosecute lawful activities
under the Fair Housing Act.
Section 203 requires any grant or cooperative agreement to be made on a competitive
basis, unless otherwise provided, in accordance with section 102 of the Department of

PO 00000

Frm 00392

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Housing and Urban Development Reform Act
of 1989.
Section 204 relates to the availability of
funds for services and facilities for government-sponsored enterprises and others subject to the Government Corporation Control
Act and the Housing Act.
Section 205 prohibits the use of funds in excess of the budget estimates, unless provided
otherwise.
Section 206 relates to the expenditure of
funds for corporations and agencies subject
to the Government Corporation Control Act.
Section 207 exempts the Government National Mortgage Association from certain requirements of the Federal Credit Reform Act
of 1990.
Section 208 authorizes HUD to transfer
debt and use agreements from an obsolete
project to a viable project, provided that no
additional costs are incurred and other conditions are met.
Section 209 sets forth certain requirements
for section 8 eligibility and includes consideration for persons with disabilities.
Section 210 distributes Native American
housing block grants to the same Native
Alaskan recipients as in fiscal year 2005.
Section 211 instructs HUD on managing
and disposing of any multifamily property
that is owned or held by HUD.
Section 212 allows PHAs that own and operate 400 or fewer units of public housing to
be exempt from asset management requirements.
Section 213 restricts the Secretary from
imposing any requirements or guidelines relating to asset management that restrict or
limit the use of capital funds for central office costs, up to the limits established in
law.
Section 214 requires that no employee of
the Department be designated as an allotment holder unless the CFO determines that
such employee has received certain training.
Section 215 requires the Secretary to notify the public of notices of funding opportunity for competitively awarded funds, and
establishes how such notification may occur.
Section 216 requires attorney fees for programmatic litigation to be paid from the individual program office and the Office of
General Counsel salaries and expenses appropriations.
Section 217 allows the Secretary to transfer up to 10 percent of funds or $5,000,000,
whichever is less, appropriated under the
headings ‘‘Administrative Support Offices’’
or ‘‘Program Offices’’ to any other office
funded under such headings, after notifying
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations.
Section 218 requires HUD to take certain
actions against owners receiving rental subsidies that do not maintain safe properties.
Section 219 places a salary and bonus limit
on public housing agency officials and employees.
Section 220 requires the Secretary to notify the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations at least 3 full business days
before grant award announcements or cancellations, and requires such notifications to
include state and congressional district information.
Section 221 prohibits funds for HUD financing of mortgages for properties that have
been subject to eminent domain.
Section 222 prohibits the use of funds to
terminate the status of a unit of general
local government as a metropolitan city
with respect to grants under section 106 of
the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974.
Section 223 allows funding for research,
evaluation, and statistical purposes that is
unexpended at the time of completion of the
contract, grant, or cooperative agreement to
be re-obligated for additional research.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.126

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

Section 224 prohibits funds for financial
awards for employees subject to administrative discipline.
Section 225 allows program income as an
eligible match for 2015 through 2026 continuum of care funds.
Section 226 permits HUD to provide one
year transition grants under the continuum
of care program.
Section 227 maintains current promise
zone designations and agreements.
Section 228 addresses the establishment of
reserves for PHAs designated as MTW agencies.
Section 229 prohibits funds from being used
to make certain eligibility limitations as
part of a notice of funding opportunity for
competitive grant awards under the public
housing fund.
Section 230 addresses the manner in which
HUD may make adjustments for formula allocation corrections.
Section 231 allows for transfers to the information technology fund.
Section 232 requires compliance with all
process requirements when revising any annual contributions contract.
Section 233 prohibits the use of funds by
HUD to issue a solicitation or accept bids on
any solicitation that is substantially equivalent to the draft solicitation entitled ‘‘Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) Contract
Supports Services (HAPSS)’’ posted on July
27, 2022.
Section 234 rescinds certain unobligated
balances.
Section 235 clarifies the use of funds for
the family self-sufficiency program.
Section 236 allows the Secretary to waive
or specify alternatives for certain requirements for the mainstream and family unification voucher programs.
Section 237 requires the Secretary to enforce the Fair Housing Act and prohibits the
use of funds to direct a grantee to undertake
specific changes to existing zoning laws as
part of carrying out the interim final rule
entitled ‘‘Affirmatively Furthering Fair
Housing Revisions.’’
Section 238 applies whistleblower protections to funded contracts, consistent with 41
U.S.C. 4712.
Section 239 allows for the forgiveness or restructuring of certain flexible subsidy loans
and appropriates funds for such purpose.
Section 240 extends the expenditure period
for certain previously appropriated funds for
housing for persons with disabilities.
Section 241 allows the Office of Housing to
provide direct support to small properties
and owners converting assistance under the
rental assistance demonstration.
Section 242 requires the Secretary to conduct all rulemaking in accordance with 24
CFR Part 10 and Executive Order 12866 as
amended.
Section 243 requires that foregone increases to tenant rent payments due to resident participation in the jobs-plus initiative
be factored into rental assistance renewal
eligibility within the appropriate account.
Section 244 establishes conditions and a
timeline for the Secretary to renew continuum of care projects expiring during calendar year 2026.
TITLE III—RELATED AGENCIES
ACCESS BOARD
DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $9,955,000 for salaries and expenses.
FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $40,000,000, of
which $2,000,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2027, for the salaries and expenses of the Federal Maritime Commission.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1745

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

NATIONAL RAILROAD PASSENGER CORPORATION
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $29,240,000 for the
salaries and expenses of the National Railroad Passenger Corporation Office of Inspector General.
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $145,000,000 for the
salaries and expenses of the National Transportation Safety Board.
NEIGHBORHOOD REINVESTMENT CORPORATION
PAYMENT TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD
REINVESTMENT CORPORATION

The agreement provides $158,000,000 for the
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation, operating
under
the
trade
name
‘‘NeighborWorks America’’. The agreement
directs NeighborWorks to notify network organizations of their full formula grant award
within 60 days of enactment of this act and
to expeditiously disburse those amounts.
SURFACE TRANSPORTATION BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $40,799,000 for the
salaries and expenses of the Surface Transportation Board. The agreement permits the
collection of up to $1,250,000 in user fees to be
credited to this appropriation and provides
that the general fund appropriation be reduced on a dollar-for-dollar basis by the actual amount collected in user fees to result
in a final appropriation from the general
fund estimated at not more than $39,549,000.
UNITED STATES INTERAGENCY COUNCIL ON
HOMELESSNESS
OPERATING EXPENSES

The agreement provides $3,000,000 for the
operating expenses of the United States
Interagency Council on Homelessness. This
funding level is sufficient to sustain current
staffing and its statutory responsibilities
under 42 U.S.C. 11313.
TITLE IV—GENERAL PROVISIONS—THIS
ACT
Section 401 prohibits the use of funds for
the planning or execution of any program to
pay the expenses of, or otherwise compensate, non-Federal parties intervening in
regulatory or adjudicatory proceedings.
Section 402 prohibits the obligation of
funds beyond the current fiscal year and the
transfer of funds to other appropriations, unless expressly provided.
Section 403 limits consulting service expenditures through procurement contracts
to those contracts contained in the public
record, except where otherwise provided
under existing law.
Section 404 prohibits funds from being used
for certain types of employee training.
Section 405 specifies requirements for the
reprogramming of funds and requires agencies to submit an operating plan to establish
the baseline for the application of reprogramming and transfer authorities.
Section 406 provides that not to exceed 50
percent of unobligated balances for salaries
and expenses may remain available until
September 30, 2027, for each account for the
purposes authorized, subject to the approval
of the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations.
Section 407 prohibits the use of funds for
any project that seeks to use the power of
eminent domain, unless eminent domain is
employed only for a public use.
Section 408 prohibits funds from being
transferred to any department, agency, or
instrumentality of the U.S. Government, except where transfer authority is provided in
this or any other appropriations act.

PO 00000

Frm 00393

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Section 409 prohibits funds from being used
by an entity unless the expenditure is in
compliance with the Buy American Act.
Section 410 prohibits funds from being
made available to any person or entity that
has been convicted of violating the Buy
American Act.
Section 411 prohibits funds from being used
for first-class airline accommodations in
contravention of sections 301–10.122 and 301–
10.123 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations.
Section 412 restricts the number of employees that agencies may send to international conferences unless such attendance
is important to the national interest.
Section 413 caps the amount of fees the
Surface Transportation Board can charge or
collect for rate or practice complaints filed
at the amount authorized for district court
civil suit filing fees.
Section 414 prohibits funds from being used
to maintain or establish computer networks
unless such networks block the viewing,
downloading, or exchange of pornography.
Section 415 prohibits funds from being used
to deny an Inspector General timely access
to any records, documents, or other materials available to the department or agency
over which that Inspector General has responsibilities, or to prevent or impede that
Inspector General’s access to such records,
documents, or other materials.
Section 416 prohibits funds from being used
to pay award or incentive fees for contractors whose performance is below satisfactory, behind schedule, over budget, or failed
to meet requirements of the contract, with
exceptions.
Section 417 prohibits funds from being used
to permanently replace an employee intent
on returning to his or her past occupation
following completion of military service.
Section 418 prohibits funds from being used
for the approval of a new foreign air carrier
permit or exemption application if that approval would contravene U.S. law or Article
17 bis of the U.S.-E.U.-Iceland-Norway Air
Transport Agreement.
Section 419 restates current law regarding
eligibility and ineligibility of immigrants to
receive housing assistance.
Section 420 prohibits the use of funds in
this act and the IIJA for activities designed
to support or defeat legislation pending before the Congress, other than in normal and
recognized executive-legislative relationships.
Section 421 makes technical corrections to
division L of Public Law 117–103, division L
of Public Law 117–328, and division F of Public Law 118–42.
Section 422 requires that DOT and HUD
provide the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations certain funding and staffing
information.
Section 423 requires each Department and
agency funded in this act to maintain certain information on a publicly accessible
website.
Section 424 requires the Departments and
agencies funded under this act to submit a
report to the House and Senate Committees
on Appropriations regarding staffing levels
for all political and Presidential appointees.
Section 425 redesignates the foster youth
to independence initiative as the ‘‘Melania
Trump Foster Youth to Independence Initiative’’.
Section 426 provides technical corrections.
DISCLOSURE OF EARMARKS AND
CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING ITEMS

Following is a list of congressional earmarks and congressionally directed spending
items (as defined in clause 9 of rule XXI of
the Rules of the House of Representatives
and rule XLIV of the Standing Rules of the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.127

H22JAPT2

H1746

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Senate, respectively) included in the bill or
this explanatory statement, along with the
name of each House Member, Senator, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner who submitted a request to the Committee of jurisdiction for each item so identified. For each

item, a Member is required to provide a certification that neither the Member nor the
Member’s immediate family has a financial
interest, and each Senator is required to provide a certification that neither the Senator
nor the Senator’s immediate family has a pe-

cuniary interest in such congressionally directed spending item. Neither the bill nor
the explanatory statement contains any limited tax benefits or limited tariff benefits as
defined in the applicable House and Senate
rules.

COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Salina Airport Authority

Salina Airport Advanced
Aviation & Engineering
Research Operations

KS

1,000,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Elizabethtown Regional Airport (EKX)

Runway Reconfiguration
Study

KY

250,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Lee County

Tupelo VHF Omnidirectional
Range Relocation

MS

3,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Greene County Board of Supervisors

Airport Planning and Development

MS

500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

East Orange, New Jersey

Freeway Drive Overbuild
Planning Project

NJ

3,397,000

Booker

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Puget Sound Regional
Council

Regional Mobility Forecast:
Connections to Transportation, Housing and Jobs
for the Puget Sound

WA

500,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Pacific NorthWest Economic
Region Foundation

Build Northwest Export Accelerator

WA

1,000,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Wasilla Airport (IYS)

Runway Improvements

AK

3,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Tuscaloosa

Tuscaloosa National Airport
(TCL)—Airport Terminal
Improvements

AL

8,500,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Albertville

Albertville Regional Airport
(BFZ) Expansion

AL

5,000,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

HL Sonny Callahan Airport
(CQF)

Airport Improvements

AL

500,000

Moore (AL)

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Craig Field Airport and Industrial Authority

Craig Field Airport Improvements

AL

250,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Huntsville-Madison County
Airport Authority

Huntsville International Airport (HSV) West Aviation
Center Project

AL

2,000,000

Strong

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Enterprise Airport (EDN)

Runway Extension and Refurbishment

AL

2,355,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gulf Shores International
Airport (GUF)

Airport Safety Improvements

AL

150,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Mobile International (BFM)

Airfield Tarmac Improvements

AL

3,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Perry County Airport/Vaiden
Field (A08)

Airport Improvements

AL

400,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Evergreen Airport (GZH)

Infrastructure Improvements

AL

1,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Chilton County Airport
(02A)

Runway Extension

AL

3,850,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Montgomery Regional Airport (MGM)

Runway Rehabilitation

AL

1,145,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Bessemer Airport (EKY)

Aircraft Ramp and Apron
Project

AL

4,000,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Texarkana Airport Authority

Texarkana Regional Airport
Taxiway-Taxilane Construction Rehabilitation
(TXK)

AR

11,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Fort Smith Regional Airport
(FSM)

Inclement Weather Storage
Building

AR

4,100,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Phoenix

Sky Harbor Airport Improvements

AZ

250,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00394

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Britt

Westerman, Moran

H

Boozman

Ansari, Stanton

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.128

S

H22JAPT2

S

H

January 22, 2026

H1747

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Cochise County

Bisbee-Douglas International Airport Runway
Reconstruction Project
(DUG)

AZ

2,000,000

Ciscomani

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Palm Springs

Palm Springs International
Airport (PSP) Inline Baggage Handling System
Improvement Project

CA

3,000,000

Calvert

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

County of Riverside

French Valley Airport Contract Tower Project (F70)

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Fresno

Fresno Airport Improvements

CA

3,150,000

Costa

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

San Bernardino County

Twentynine Palms Airport
Infrastructure Improvements (TNP)

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

San Diego International Airport

Aircraft Rescue and Fire
Fighting (ARFF) Station
Modernization

CA

250,000

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Greeley-Weld County Airport
Authority

Taxiway Bravo & Echo
Stage II Construction:
Greeley-Weld County Airport (GXY)

CO

3,500,000

Evans (CO)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Melbourne

Melbourne Orlando International Airport Terminal
Upgrades (MLB)

FL

4,000,000

Haridopolos

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Palm Beach County

North Palm Beach County
General Aviation Airport
Runway 14–32 Expansion (F45)

FL

2,000,000

Mast

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Sanford Airport Authority

SFB—Terminal Connector
Corridor

FL

1,000,000

Mills

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

St. Augustine Airport Authority

Northeast Florida Regional
Airport Access Road Expansion Project (SGJ)

FL

9,650,000

Rutherford

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Greater Orlando Aviation
Authority

Airport Public Roadway
Wayfinding and Signage
Phase 1 (MCO)

FL

1,000,000

Webster

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Molokai Airport (MKK)

Runway and Taxiway Reliability Project

HI

1,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Cedar Rapids

Eastern Iowa Airport Aircraft Deicing Facility
(CID)

IA

10,000,000

Hinson

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Polk County Aviation Authority

Ankeny Regional Airport
(IKV)—Runway 18–36
Extension

IA

2,500,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Idaho Falls

Idaho Falls Regional Airport
Terminal Expansion (IDA)

ID

12,000,000

Simpson

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Bi-State Development
Agency

St. Louis Downtown Airport
Aircraft Rescue Firefighting Apparatus and
Snow Removal Equipment Acquisition

IL

250,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

MidAmerica St. Louis Airport (BLV)

Federal Inspection Area Upgrades

IL

4,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Indianapolis Airport Authority

Indianapolis Airport Authority—Optimized Baggage
Handling System

IN

2,000,000

Carson

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Evansville-Vanderburg Airport Authority

Evansville Regional Airport
(EVV) Passenger Terminal Emergency Backup
Generator

IN

1,615,000

Messmer

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gary/Chicago International
Airport Authority

Air Cargo/Logistics Apron
at Gary/Chicago International Airport (GYY),
Gary, IN

IN

850,000

Mrvan

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Fort Wayne-Allen County
Airport Authority

Fort Wayne International
Airport (FWA) Rehabilitate Corporate and General Aviation Apron

IN

2,000,000

Stutzman

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Johnson County Airport
Commission

Air Traffic Control Tower
(ATCT) at New Century
AirCenter (IXD)

KS

2,000,000

Davids

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Miami County (Paola) Airport (K81)

Runway Extension

KS

1,800,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Ottawa Municipal Airport
(OWI)

Airport Construction

KS

2,613,000

Moran

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00395

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

H

Padilla

Hirono, Schatz

Duckworth

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H

S

S

H1748

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Kearny County Airport (36K)

Runway Expansion

KS

11,250,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Freeman Field Airport (3JC)

Runway Rehabilitation

KS

4,038,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Topeka Regional Airport/
Forbes Field (FOE)

North Apron Rehabilitation

KS

5,986,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Marion-Crittenden County
Airport Board

Marion-Crittenden County
Regional Airport Parallel
Taxiway (GDA)

KY

1,000,000

Comer

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Kenton County Airport
Board

Concourse A Apron Rehabilitation at CVG Airport

KY

2,000,000

Massie

McConnell

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Cincinnati-Northern Kentucky International Airport (CVG)

Taxiway Reconstruction

KY

7,500,000

Massie

McConnell

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Kenton County Airport
Board

South Airfield Tunnel Rehabilitation at CVG Airport

KY

1,000,000

Massie

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Cities of London & Corbin

London/Corbin Airport Terminal Renovation (LOZ)

KY

2,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Louisville Muhammad Ali
International Airport
(SDF)

Federal Inspection Service
Facility

KY

9,600,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Blue Grass Airport (LEX)

Air Traffic Control Tower
Relocation Enabling
Projects

KY

5,400,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Elizabethtown Regional Airport (EKX)

Runway Reconfiguration

KY

9,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Barkley Regional Airport
(PAH)

Airfield Lighting Rehabilitation

KY

3,100,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Houma-Terrebonne Airport
Commission

West Ramp Rehabilitation
Project Phase II

LA

1,000,000

Higgins

Kennedy

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Hammond

Hammond Northshore Regional Airport Runway
Extension and Related
Improvement Project
(HDC)

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Chennault International Airport (CWF)

Hangar and Apron Development Project

LA

1,700,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Acadiana Regional Airport
(ARA)

East Side Development

LA

6,600,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Maryland Department of
Transportation

Runway Improvement Program—Amtrak Catenary
Line Relocation

MD

850,000

Olszewski

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Capital Region Airport Authority

New Jet Bridges at Capital
Region International Airport (LAN)

MI

7,823,000

Barrett

Peters, Slotkin

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gerald R. Ford International
Airport Authority (GFIAA)

Taxiway B Lighting Replacement

MI

801,000

Scholten

Slotkin

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Detroit Airport
(Coleman A. Young Airport KDET)

City of Detroit Airport Construction of Taxiway B

MI

250,000

Thanedar

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Chippewa County International Airport (CIU)

Airport Fire Station Improvement

MI

750,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gerald R. Ford International
Airport (GRR)

Federal Inspection Station—Phase 2

MI

800,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Mankato

Mankato Regional Airport
Air Traffic Control Tower
Construction (MKT)

MN

3,500,000

Finstad

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

University of Central Missouri

Economic Growth through
Skyhaven Airport Expansion (RCM)

MO

6,000,000

Alford

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

St. Louis Lambert International Airport

New Central Utility Plant
(CUP) & New West Electrical Substation (WES)
at St. Louis Lambert
International Airport

MO

3,150,000

Bell

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

The City of Jefferson

Jefferson City Memorial Airport (JEF) Snow Removal
Equipment Building

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00396

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H

H

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1749

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

John Bell Williams Airport
(JVW)

Hinds Community College
Aviation Training Expansion

MS

1,993,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Brookhaven Lincoln County
Airport (1R7)

Fixed Base Operator Facility

MS

2,500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Golden Triangle Regional
Airport (GTR)

Terminal Baggage Claim
Expansion

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Meridian Regional Airport
(MEI)

Terminal Building

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gulfport-Biloxi Regional Airport (GPT)

Passenger Boarding Bridge
Replacement

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Billings

Billings Logan International
Airport Stormwater Improvements Project (BIL)

MT

1,500,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Bozeman Yellowstone International Airport (BZN)

Apron Construction

MT

4,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Greater Asheville Regional
Airport Authority

Asheville Regional Airport
Taxiway Expansion (AVL)

NC

2,500,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Raleigh-Durham Airport Authority

RDU Taxiway J Reconstruction

NC

850,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Raleigh-Durham Airport Authority

Raleigh-Durham International Airport, Replacement Runway 5L/
23R and Taxiway B
(RDU)

NC

5,000,000

Knott

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Charlotte

Charlotte Douglas International Airport, Aircraft
Rescue Firefighting Burn
Prop Design (CLT)

NC

1,000,000

Moore (NC)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Raleigh-Durham Airport Authority

John Brantley Boulevard Extension

NC

1,200,000

Ross

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Omaha Airport Authority

Improvements at Eppley
Airfield (OMA)

NE

7,000,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Brenner Field Airport (FNB)

Taxiway Relocation

NE

600,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Blair Executive Airport
(BTA)

Runway Improvements

NE

5,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Hastings Municipal Airport
(HSI)

Electrical Improvements

NE

4,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Alliance Municipal Airport
(AIA)

Airport Improvements

NE

6,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Nebraska City Municipal
Airport (AFK)

Airport Improvements

NE

3,440,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Raton Municipal Airport/
Crews Field (RTN)

Apron Reconstruction

NM

2,073,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Angel Fire Airport (AXX)

Snow Removal Equipment

NM

412,000

Luján

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Reno-Tahoe Airport Authority

Terminal Improvements

NV

2,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Clark County Department of
Aviation

Reconstruct the ARFF Station at LAS Phase 2 to
Reconstruct the Airfield
Rescue and Fire Fighting
Station at LAS Airport

NV

850,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Clark County Department of
Aviation

Clark County Department of
Aviation—Phase 2 to
Reconstruct the Airfield
Rescue and Fire Fighting
Station at LAS Airport

NV

250,000

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Clark County Department of
Aviation

Vehicle Replacement at D
and C Tram System at
Harry Reid International
Airport in Las Vegas,
Nevada

NV

2,000,000

Titus

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority

Buffalo Niagara International Airport Vehicles
and Related Infrastructure

NY

1,800,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00397

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Downing

H

Sheehy

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

S

H1750

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority

Snow Fighting Equipment
at Buffalo Niagara International Airport (BUF)

NY

1,482,000

Langworthy

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Syracuse Regional Airport
Authority

SYR Baggage System Upgrade

NY

850,000

Mannion

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Jefferson County

Installation of Runway 10
Omni-Directional Approach Lights at Watertown International Airport (ART)

NY

1,000,000

Tenney

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Western Reserve Port Authority

Youngstown-Warren Regional Airport Runway
Rehabilitation (YNG)

OH

5,000,000

Joyce (OH)

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Chandler

Chandler Regional Airport
Runway Extension (CQB)

OK

8,000,000

Bice

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Shawnee

Shawnee Regional Airport
Runway and Taxiway
Strengthening (SNL)

OK

13,500,000

Bice

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

University of Oklahoma

University of Oklahoma
Westheimer Airport Improvements (OUN)

OK

17,065,000

Cole

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Ada

Ada Regional Airport Improvements (ADH)

OK

15,000,000

Cole

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Duncan

Duncan Municipal Airport,
Halliburton Field Improvements (DUC)

OK

7,000,000

Cole

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

OKC Will Rogers International Airport (OKC)

Terminal Access Roadways
Rehabilitation

OK

5,000,000

Lucas

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Boise City

Boise City Airport (17K)

OK

2,660,000

Lucas

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Ponca City Regional Airport
(PNC)

Airport Terminal

OK

7,800,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Philadelphia, Department of Aviation

PNE—Taxiway C Rehabilitation

PA

1,000,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Johnstown-Cambria County
Airport Authority

Johnstown Cambria County
Airport Terminal Renovations and Hold Room Expansion (JST)

PA

750,000

Joyce (PA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Erie Regional Airport Authority

Erie International Airport
Aircraft Rescue Firefighting Vehicle (ERI)

PA

1,050,000

Kelly (PA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Lehigh-Northampton Airport
Authority

ABE Pedestrian Walkway
Elevators and Escalators

PA

2,000,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Philadelphia, Department of Aviation

Taxiway Rehabilitation at
Philadelphia International Airport

PA

850,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Johnstown-Cambria County
Airport (JST)

Hangar Site

PA

1,984,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Lancaster Airport (LNS)

Airport Improvements

PA

5,000,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

DuBois Regional Airport
(DUJ)

Pavement Rehabilitation
and Reconstruction

PA

4,190,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Columbia Metropolitan Airport (CAE)

Improvements Project

SC

2,239,000

Graham

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Greenville-Spartanburg Airport (GSP)

Rehabilitation Project

SC

25,000,000

Graham

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Sioux Falls Regional Airport
Authority (FSD)

Concourse Expansion
Project

SD

30,000,000

Rounds, Thune

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Rapid City Regional Airport
(RAP)

Airline Concourse Project

SD

20,000,000

Rounds, Thune

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Memphis-Shelby County
Airport Authority

Terminal Modernization and
Seismic Project at Memphis International Airport

TN

250,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Memphis-Shelby County
Airport Authority

Memphis International Airport, Terminal Modernization and Seismic
Program (MEM)

TN

4,000,000

Kustoff

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00398

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

H

Gillibrand, Schumer

H

Husted

Mullin

H

H/S

H

Mullin

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

S

January 22, 2026

H1751

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Lubbock

Airport Improvements for
Lubbock Airport (LBB)

TX

5,000,000

Arrington

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

County of Victoria

Victoria Regional Airport
(VCT) Passenger Terminal

TX

5,500,000

Cloud

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Lancaster

City of Lancaster Taxiway
Relocation Project

TX

2,000,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Sugar Land

Sugar Land Regional Airport Runway Improvements

TX

850,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Texas A&M University System

Easterwood Field Airport Air
Traffic Control Tower Relocation and Construction (CLL)

TX

4,000,000

McCaul

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Sugar Land

Sugar Land Regional Airport Runway Improvement Project (SGR)

TX

2,000,000

Nehls

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of San Angelo

San Angelo Regional Airport
(SJT)—Air Traffic Control
Tower Reconstruction

TX

5,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Provo

Provo Municipal Airport Terminal Expansion and
Wayfinding Project (PVU)

UT

1,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of St. George

St. George Regional Airport
(SGU)

UT

2,800,000

Maloy

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Spanish Fork

Spanish Fork Municipal Airport (SPK) Airfield
Project

UT

1,000,000

Owens

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Provo Airport (PVU)

Airport Improvements

UT

3,500,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Capital Region Airport
Commission

Richmond Airport Passenger Terminal Apron
Reconstruction

VA

250,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Manassas Regional Airport

Replace or Rehabilitate
Taxiway B Bridge

VA

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Brown County

Green Bay Austin Straubel
International Airport
Taxiway and Apron Infrastructure Rehabilitation
(GRB)

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Central West Virginia Regional Airport Authority

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Department of
Transportation

Curtis

H

H

Curtis

S

McClellan

Kaine, Warner

H

850,000

Subramanyam

Kaine, Warner

H

WI

4,000,000

Wied

H

West Virginia International
Yeager Airport, Main Terminal Apron Improvements (CRW)

WV

2,992,000

Miller (WV)

H

Greenbrier Valley Airport
(LWB)

Terminal Renovation

WV

8,000,000

Capito

S

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Yeager Airport (CRW)

Terminal Modernization
Project

WV

25,000,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AK

Fairbanks Road Reconstruction

AK

5,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

I–22 Connector Feasibility
Studies, Winston and
Franklin Counties

AL

5,000,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

U.S. 278/SR 69 St. Bernard
Bridge Replacement and
Supporting Infrastructure, Cullman County

AL

13,500,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Waterloo Bridge Feasibility
and Construction, Lauderdale County

AL

7,000,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Alabama Capital Maxwell
Gateway Project

AL

2,000,000

Figures

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Hooks Lake Port Connection
Road

AL

250,000

Figures

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

CR 64 Improvements

AL

2,000,000

Moore (AL)

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

City of Southside State
Highway 77 North Coosa
River Bridge Project

AL

3,000,000

Rogers (AL)

Britt, Tuberville

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Co. Rd. 65 Bridge Replacement Over Branch
Creek—Cleburne County

AL

1,000,000

Rogers (AL)

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00399

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Tuberville

H

H

H22JAPT2

H

H1752

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Capshaw Road (Old Monrovia Road to Jeff Road)
Additional Lanes

AL

5,500,000

Strong

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Increasing Capacity Over
the Tennessee River

AL

3,000,000

Strong

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Slaughter Road Additional
Lanes

AL

3,500,000

Strong

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Cleburne County Bridge Replacement

AL

1,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Lawrence County Bridge
Study

AL

100,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Sparkman Drive Bridge

AL

2,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Depot Street Bridge Replacement

AL

1,020,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Deerfoot Parkway Extension

AL

4,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Boll Weevil Circle Project

AL

15,680,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Hale County Road 21
Project

AL

1,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Mooresville Road Widening,
Planning, and Design

AL

1,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

County Road 9 Project

AL

1,000,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Swayback Bridge

AL

2,000,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Highway 412 Corridor Improvements

AR

11,000,000

Crawford

Boozman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Future Interstate 57 (Walnut Ridge to Missouri
State Line)

AR

6,734,000

Crawford

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Highway 82 Railroad Overpass

AR

7,000,000

Westerman

Boozman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Arkansas Highway 112

AR

3,000,000

Womack

Boozman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Springdale Northern Bypass

AR

59,000,000

Womack

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Construction of Future
Interstate I–49

AR

3,000,000

Womack

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

I–49

AR

15,800,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

North Little Rock Main
Street Viaduct Bridge

AR

2,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Duncan Main Street and
High Street Improvements

AZ

1,900,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Buffalo Soldier Trail Reconstruction

AZ

7,000,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Town of Oro Valley: Bridge
Replacement

AZ

7,000,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Frontier Street Mill and
Overlay Project

AZ

1,000,000

Ciscomani

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Douglas Commercial Land
Port of Entry Connector
Road

AZ

20,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Highland-Redlands Regional Connector

CA

2,000,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00400

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

H

H

Gallego, Kelly

Aguilar

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

S

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1753

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Rossmoor Bar Trail Enhancements Project

CA

850,000

Bera

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Snowy Egret Overcrossing
Study

CA

850,000

Bera

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Marysville Boulevard Vision
Zero Safety Project

CA

2,000,000

Bera

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–15 Express Lanes Southern Extension Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Scott Road/Bundy Canyon
Road Widening Project

CA

2,500,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Indian Canyon Flood Mitigation Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–10 Singleton Road Interchange Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Magnolia Avenue Widening
Project

CA

4,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Santa Barbara County Association of Governments—Cabrillo Project

CA

1,500,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Shell Beach Road Shared
Use Path

CA

2,000,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Temple City Lower Azusa
Road Resurfacing and
ADA Improvements

CA

850,000

Chu

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Industry Regional
Safety and Mobility
Project

CA

1,000,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

San Dimas Canyon Road
Multi-modal Transportation Improvement
Project

CA

850,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

East San Gabriel Valley
Sustainable Multimodal
Improvement Project

CA

250,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Euclid Street Multimodal
Safety Enhancements

CA

2,000,000

Correa

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Danville Townwide Fiber
Project

CA

850,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Antioch and Oakley Smart
Signals Project

CA

1,970,010

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Village Parkway Complete
Streets Improvements
Project

CA

850,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Marsh Drive Class I Bikeway Project

CA

1,200,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Treat Boulevard Corridor
Improvements Project

CA

1,000,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Olive Avenue Bridge Replacement

CA

250,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Heart of Fairfield Downtown
Project

CA

1,000,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Markeley Lane Extension
Project

CA

850,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

North Bailey Road Active
Transportation Corridor

CA

850,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

El Cerrito Plaza BART Station TOD Complete
Streets

CA

850,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Richmond Bay Trail Gap
Closure Project

CA

250,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Pacifica Avenue Safe
Routes to School Project

CA

250,000

Garamendi

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00401

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schiff

H22JAPT2

H

H1754

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

LA River Path (between
Riverside Drive and Atlantic Boulevard)

CA

250,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–205 Managed Lanes

CA

250,000

Harder

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Pershing Avenue Road
Safety Improvement and
Enhancement Project

CA

250,000

Harder

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Diaz Road Expansion
Project

CA

2,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

SR–52 Operational Improvements Project

CA

4,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–215 and Keller Road
Interchange Right of
Way Acquisition

CA

1,500,000

Issa

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

San Miguel Elementary
Safe Routes to School
Infrastructure Improvements

CA

250,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Pruneridge Avenue Complete Streets Project

CA

1,000,000

Khanna

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Safe Routes to Schools and
Parks

CA

2,000,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Main Street Revitalization
and Safety Project

CA

250,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Cedar Boulevard Complete
Streets Project

CA

850,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Interstate 80 Culvert Resilience Project

CA

1,000,000

Kiley

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Interstate 80/Rocklin Road
Interchange Improvements Project

CA

3,000,000

Kiley

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

White Rock Road Improvement Project

CA

2,000,000

Kiley

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Baseline Road Traffic Safety Improvement and Signal Project

CA

1,000,000

Kiley

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–80/Horseshoe Bar Road
Interchange Improvements Project

CA

1,000,000

Kiley

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–5 Improvement Project

CA

1,700,000

Kim

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Savi Ranch Parkway Road
Improvement Project

CA

3,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

State Route 91 Eastbound
Corridor Operations
Project

CA

3,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

State Route 55 Improvement Project

CA

3,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

North Coast Highway 101
Drainage Improvement
Project, Encinitas, CA

CA

1,000,000

Levin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

La Novia Avenue Bridge
Replacement Project,
San Juan Capistrano, CA

CA

850,000

Levin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Interstate 5 Improvement
Project, Orange County,
CA

CA

850,000

Levin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Strengthening Coastal Resilience: Smart Infrastructure & Emergency
Preparedness for San
Mateo Coastal Communities

CA

1,200,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Mountain Home Road
Bridge, Woodside, California

CA

250,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Campbell PDA Enhancements

CA

250,000

Liccardo

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00402

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schiff

Schiff

H22JAPT2

H

H

January 22, 2026

H1755

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

American River Loop Trail

CA

250,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Laguna Creek Trail
Connectivity and Overcrossing Project

CA

850,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Laguna Canyon Road: Protect and Connect

CA

850,000

Min

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Technology and Signal Upgrades Project

CA

250,000

Min

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

East Palo Alto Woodland
Avenue Safety Improvements

CA

2,000,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Redwood City SR 84-US
101 Interchange Reimagined

CA

850,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

San Bruno Huntington Avenue Bicycle and Pedestrians Improvement
Project

CA

850,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

San Carlos US 101-Holly
Street Interchange &
Overcrossing

CA

500,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Millbrae Trail to Bay Connections

CA

250,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Yucaipa Wildwood
Canyon Interchange

CA

2,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Ranchero Road Corridor
Phase IV Street Improvements Project

CA

2,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Trona Roadway and Repairs
Project

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Palm Avenue Pedestrian
Safety Improvements
and Stormwater Drainage Installation

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Boulder Creek Complete
Streets Improvements

CA

850,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Los Angeles’ Reseda
Green and Accessible
Medians and Shaded
School Routes Project

CA

250,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Los Angeles’ Colfax
Ave. Pedestrian Improvement Project

CA

250,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Sepulveda Basin Pedestrian
Safety & Access Improvements

CA

850,000

Rivas, Sherman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Indian Canyon Drive Bridge
Project

CA

850,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Monroe Street & Interstate10 Interchange Project
(Construction Phase)

CA

850,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

State Street Rehabilitation
Project

CA

850,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Salton Sea Reimagined: CV
Link Extension

CA

250,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Advanced Traffic Controllers at the Future Metro
L Line Norwalk and
Lambert Stations Areas

CA

250,000

Sanchez

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Los Angeles River Greenway
Studio City Habitat Restoration, Beautification,
and Safety Project

CA

250,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Malibu Canyon Road and
Kanan Dume Road Tunnel Lighting Upgrade
Project

CA

250,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Lincoln Avenue/Marshall
Way/Pacific Avenue Corridor Improvement
Project

CA

850,000

Simon

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00403

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Padilla

H22JAPT2

H

H1756

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Limonite Avenue Roadway
Improvement

CA

850,000

Takano

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Donald Gap

CA

1,200,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

The Amtrak Depot/Olive
Drive Connection

CA

1,000,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

South Main Street Road
Rehabilitation Project

CA

850,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Napa Valley Vine Trail—
Yountville to St. Helena
Gap Closure

CA

850,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Moorland Pedestrian and
School Access Project

CA

850,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Del Amo Boulevard Bridge
Replacement and Roadway Improvement Project

CA

3,150,000

Tran

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Brea Safe Routes to
School

CA

850,000

Tran

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Fullerton—Local
Street Rehabilitation
Project

CA

250,000

Tran

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

SR 43/7th Standard Rd
Roundabout—Last-Mile
Truck-Rail Access Safety
Project

CA

2,500,000

Valadao

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Wasco Downtown Revitalization

CA

5,000,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Road 192 Farm to Market
Corridor Improvements

CA

2,500,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

The Monitor Street Safe
Route to Schools Project

CA

3,000,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

4th Street Development
Project-Arvin

CA

1,250,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Streamview Drive Safety
Improvements Project

CA

850,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Lawndale’s Hawthorne Boulevard Rehabilitation
Project

CA

850,000

Waters

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Rancho Vista Boulevard
Grade Separation Right
of Way Acquisition

CA

2,000,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Traffic Circulation and Pedestrian Safety Improvements Project

CA

1,200,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Avenue G Interchange
Project

CA

850,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

The Santa Clarita Valley
Multimodal Transportation and Safety Enhancement Project

CA

850,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Oakland Ferry Terminal
Modernization Project

CA

1,980,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Tenderloin Neighborhood
Pedestrian Safety Signal
Upgrades

CA

1,500,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Grangeville Boulevard
Grade Separation Project

CA

2,000,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Highway 85 Widening
Project

CO

500,000

Boebert

Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

SH 71 Corridor Improvements Project (Heartland
Expressway)

CO

2,000,000

Boebert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Windsor Colorado Blvd and
Crossroads Blvd Intersection Improvements
Project

CO

500,000

Boebert

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00404

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schiff

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1757

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Constitution and Peterson
Road Traffic Safety
Project

CO

1,000,000

Crank

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Havana Street Corridor
Multimodal Improvements Project

CO

850,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Box Elder Creek Roadway
Improvement Project

CO

500,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Mineral/Santa Fe Operational Improvements
Project

CO

850,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Montview Boulevard Complete Streets Project

CO

250,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

I–70/Aerotropolis Parkway
Interchange Project

CO

250,000

Crow

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

E. 88th Avenue Corridor
Improvement Project—
Segment B

CO

850,000

Evans (CO)

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

35th Avenue Multimodal
Safety Enhancements

CO

850,000

Evans (CO)

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

I–76 and Bromley Lane
Capital improvement
Project

CO

900,000

Evans (CO)

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Mesa County E Road Improvements

CO

2,000,000

Hurd

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Pueblo Rest Area at Exit
108

CO

1,000,000

Hurd

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

City of Fort Collins Taft Hill
Road Improvement, CO

CO

250,000

Neguse

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Town of Silverthorne’s
‘‘Stephens Way’’ Improvement, CO

CO

250,000

Neguse

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

McCaslin Multi-Use Trail
Project, CO

CO

250,000

Neguse

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Birch Elementary Safety
Improvement Project

CO

850,000

Pettersen

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Town of Parachute—US 6/
1st Street Safety Enhancements, Repairs,
and Revitalization

CO

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

City of Federal Heights—
North Pecos Street Culvert Replacement

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

Department of
Transportation

H

H

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

Bennet

H/S

H

H

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

3,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

CO

1,250,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Mansfield Phase II of Bike
and Pedestrian Connection

CT

1,952,000

Courtney

H

CT

Mohegan-Pequot Bridge Rehabilitation Project

CT

1,000,000

Courtney

H

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Town of Bethany—Round
Hill Road

CT

344,000

DeLauro

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Washington Boulevard Pedestrian and Bicycle Improvements

CT

2,500,000

Himes

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Norwalk River Valley Trail
Extension to Calf Pasture Beach

CT

850,000

Himes

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Maple Avenue in Hartford

CT

1,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DC

Suitland Parkway Safety
Enhancements

DC

850,000

Norton

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DC

Solar Charging for Capital
eBikes

DC

250,000

Norton

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DE

Wilmington Riverwalk Extension Shared-Use Path

DE

250,000

McBride

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DE

Lewes-Georgetown Highway
(US 9) Pedestrian Bridge

DE

850,000

McBride

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00405

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Blumenthal, Murphy

H

Blumenthal, Murphy

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H/S

Blunt Rochester

H22JAPT2

S

H

H

H1758

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DE

Washington Street Separated Bike Lane

DE

2,000,000

Blunt Rochester

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DE

Georgetown to Lewes
Trail—US 9 Pedestrian
Bridge and Approaches

DE

1,400,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Construction of Wilton Way
Connector Road on
Speros FL Development

FL

500,000

Bilirakis

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

51st Street West Extension,
Manatee County

FL

1,500,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

State Road 64 Traffic Congestion Alternatives, City
of Bradenton

FL

1,000,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Pedestrian Greenway Corridor, New College of
Florida

FL

800,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

West River Walk Expansion

FL

250,000

Castor

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

San Martin Boulevard
Bridge Replacement

FL

850,000

Castor

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

I–75 Project Development
and Environmental
Study, NW 170th ST and
NW 154th ST

FL

6,000,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Feasibility Analysis for Proposed Interchange at I–
75 and Everglades Boulevard

FL

2,000,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Palm Beach Lakes Boulevard Bridge

FL

1,000,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Willowbrook Road Design
and Construction

FL

3,000,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Berman Road SR 710 Extension

FL

1,000,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Sugarloaf Boulevard Bridge
Replacement Project

FL

2,300,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

South Dade Corridor Project

FL

1,000,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Minton Road Widening
Project

FL

1,000,000

Haridopolos

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Kathleen Road Widening
and Extension Project

FL

3,000,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Collier Parkway & S
Countyline Rd—Turn
Lanes & Sidewalk

FL

1,000,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Oldwoods Avenue at
Wyndfields Blvd—
Connectivity & Intersection Safety Improvements

FL

1,000,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Lighthouse Point NE 28th
Street Bridge Replacement Phase 1

FL

250,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Port Everglades Bypass
Road

FL

1,000,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Dixie Highway Safety Fence
Phase 2

FL

850,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Roadway Resurfacing along
Coral Way from SW 77
Avenue to SW 87 Avenue

FL

960,000

Salazar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Fruitville Road Corridor Capacity Improvement
Project

FL

1,500,000

Steube

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

River Road Regional Interstate Connector MultiModal Capacity Improvement Project

FL

1,500,000

Steube

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

SW 61st Avenue Bridge
Widening and Roadway
Improvements

FL

250,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00406

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1759

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Town of Montverde CR 455
Complete Street

FL

1,500,000

Webster

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

I–16 Widening 4 to 6
Lanes, Chatham,
Effingham, & Bryan
Counties

GA

5,000,000

Carter (GA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Quacco Road Phase II

GA

4,000,000

Carter (GA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Dallas Hwy/SR 120 at Lost
Mountain Rd/Mars Hill
Rd

GA

1,000,000

Greene (GA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Chestnut Drive Realignment

GA

1,000,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Old 41 Highway Roundabouts

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Cass White Phase II Road
Widening Project

GA

3,000,000

Loudermilk

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Bells Ferry Road over Noonday Creek Bridge Replacement

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

George Busbee Parkway

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Cobb Parkway Pedestrian
Bridge North

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Austell-Powder Springs
Road Intersection Improvement Project

GA

500,000

McBath

Ossoff, Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Factory Shoals Pedestrian
Bridge Over I–20

GA

2,000,000

McBath

Warnock

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

South Cobb Drive/SR 280
Improvement Project

GA

2,000,000

McBath

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Roosevelt Highway
Streetscape Phase II

GA

2,000,000

McBath

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Ball Ground Truck Bypass

GA

1,000,000

McCormick

Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Old Alabama Bridge Replacement Project

GA

2,500,000

McCormick

Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Roswell’s Norcross Street
Bridge Replacement
Project

GA

1,500,000

McCormick

Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Atlanta—Peachtree
Street Streetscape

GA

1,200,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Riverdale—Sidewalk
Connectivity Improvements

GA

1,000,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Clarkston—
Clarkston Greenway Trail
Phase I

GA

2,000,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Stone Mountain—
Main and Mimosa Intersection Improvement

GA

1,781,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Atlanta—Beltline
Southside Trail Pedestrian Bridge Over Interstate 20

GA

2,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

HI

North South Collector Road
Shared Use Path

HI

2,500,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

HI

Kamehameha Highway
Shared Use Path

HI

6,980,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

HI

Waimea to Kekaha Shared
Use Path

HI

2,300,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

HI

Daniel K. Inouye Highway
Extension

HI

7,250,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

City of Burlington Cascade
Bridge Project

IA

6,000,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00407

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Warnock

Miller-Meeks

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H

H

H1760

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

Keokuk County, Iowa Route
G13 Pavement Improvement Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

U.S. Highway 6/Deer Creek
Road Intersection Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

Iowa County, Route W21
Pavement Improvement

IA

2,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

P33 Rehabilitation

IA

2,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

White Pole Road Revitalization Project

IA

500,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

Alice’s Road Reconstruction

IA

1,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

Highway 141/Towner Drive
Interchange Project within the City of Johnston

IA

500,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ID

Soda Springs US–30 Reconstruction

ID

9,367,000

Simpson

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Flora West Side Transportation Improvements

IL

1,329,000

Bost

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Decatur-Macon County
Beltway Northeast Connector Segment Design
Engineering

IL

1,000,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Weber Road, 135th Street
to Airport Road for Will
County

IL

850,000

Foster

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

79th/Stony Island Planning
and Environmental Linkages Study

IL

850,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

100th St Bridge over the
Calumet River

IL

850,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Route 25/West Bartlett Rd
Intersection Improvements

IL

1,500,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Hammond Drive at
Algonquin Road Intersection Improvements

IL

1,152,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Radnor Road Complete
Street Corridor Plan

IL

1,000,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Furrow Road Bridge Replacement

IL

500,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Park & Bilger Bridges

IL

1,000,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

New Interchange Minooka
Road/I–80 Project

IL

5,000,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Capital Improvement—IL–
16 Access Point and
Loop Road

IL

1,500,000

Miller (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Weber Spur Trail

IL

850,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Niles Howard Street Bridge
Replacement Project

IL

250,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Cook County East Lake Avenue Bridge Project

IL

850,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Forest Hill Avenue and
Sterling Avenue Intersection Improvements

IL

250,000

Sorensen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Sycamore Street Bridge Replacement

IL

1,500,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Town of Normal—Trail Extension

IL

1,900,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IN

Market Street Improvement
Project

IN

500,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00408

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Carson

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1761

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IN

Town of Liberty Bridge Reconstruction

IN

1,300,000

Shreve

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IN

City of Richmond Bridge
Reconstruction

IN

1,800,000

Shreve

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Metcalf Ave. and I–435
Signal Replacement

KS

1,300,000

Davids

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Intersection of 191st Street
and US Highway 169
Safety Improvements

KS

850,000

Davids

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Massoni Bridge Replacement

KS

2,376,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

235th Street Road Improvement

KS

6,200,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Buhler Road Bridge and
Roadway Improvements

KS

5,962,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Arkansas River Crossing
and 95th Street

KS

3,000,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Louisville Loop: Jefferson
Memorial Forest—Dodge
Gap

KY

500,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Cooper Chapel Road Extension and Construction

KY

250,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Belvedere Redevelopment
Project

KY

250,000

McGarvey

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Mountain Parkway Expansion

KY

36,500,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Somerset Northern Bypass

KY

37,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

I–69 Ohio River Crossing

KY

10,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Hal Rogers Parkway Improvement

KY

20,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

LA 47: Hayne Blvd. Improvements

LA

2,550,000

Carter (LA)

Kennedy

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

LA73-LA429 Intersection
Improvement Project

LA

150,000

Carter (LA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Interstate 20 Lighting Upgrades

LA

1,000,000

Fields

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Bernice Street Bridge Replacement

LA

250,000

Fields

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Ouachita Parish Capels
Road Corridor Reconstruction Improvement
Project

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

City of West Monroe, LA
Downing Pines Road Improvements Thomas
Road to US–80 Project

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Ascension Parish Airline
Highway Raising Project

LA

6,000,000

Scalise

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Highway 11, St. Tammany
Parish

LA

10,000,000

Scalise

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Burbank Drive Safety Improvements

LA

2,000,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Johnston Street Safety Mitigation and Enhancements

LA

7,500,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Livingston Parish Browns
Road Improvement
Project

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

US 190 Widening Project

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00409

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

McConnell

Cassidy, Kennedy

H

H/S

H

H22JAPT2

H1762

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Tangipahoa Parish Airport
Road and Highway 3158
Roundabout Project

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Millhaven Interchange
Mega-Project

LA

7,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Topsy Bel Road Bridge Replacement

LA

3,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

St. Bernard Transportation
Corridor

LA

10,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Merrymount Parkway Bridge
Replacement

MA

2,000,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Pearl Street/Ivory Street/
John Mahar Highway
Intersection Reconstruction, Braintree, Norfolk
County, MA, 8th District

MA

500,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Route 20 Corridor Improvements Project in Shrewsbury

MA

850,000

McGovern

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Oxford, MA Roadway Rehabilitation on Route 12
(Main Street)

MA

2,000,000

Neal

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Lawrence Bridges Restoration Project

MA

1,200,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Guilford Road Pedestrian/
Bicycle Improvements,
Phase 3

MD

2,000,000

Elfreth

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

MD–99 Pedestrian
Connectivity Improvements

MD

500,000

Elfreth

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Town of Upper Marlboro
School and Wilson Lane
Road Renewal Project

MD

250,000

Hoyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Gaithersburg Pedestrian
Safety Improvements

MD

1,000,000

McClain Delaney

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Grantsville Sidewalk Project

MD

2,000,000

McClain Delaney

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Bridge Repair Program

MD

850,000

McClain Delaney

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

I–795 & Dolfield Blvd.
Interchange

MD

2,000,000

Olszewski

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Cheverly MD 201 Bike Trail

MD

650,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Sidewalks for All: The
Downtown Frederick
Streetscape Project

MD

2,478,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Thompson Creek Connector
Road & Trail Extension

MD

1,416,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Town of Easton—Rails To
Trails Expansion

MD

411,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Revitalize Hanover Street:
Bridging Futures Transforming South Baltimore
Neighborhoods

MD

500,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Baltimore Regional Trail
Hub

MD

3,000,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Madrid to Rangeley State
Route 4 Rehabilitation

ME

10,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Bucksport Main Street
Safety Improvements

ME

7,200,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Jackman US Route 201 Rehabilitation

ME

2,450,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Androscoggin State Route 4
Safety Improvements

ME

5,000,000

Collins, King

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00410

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

Van Hollen

H22JAPT2

H

H

January 22, 2026

H1763

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Route 26–100 Roundabout
Construction

ME

9,600,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Deer Isle State Route 15
Causeway Improvements

ME

12,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Reconstruction of the
Houghton Canal Road,
Stanton Township,
Houghton County

MI

5,100,000

Bergman

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Cross Street and Prospect
Street Bridge Rehabilitation

MI

250,000

Dingell

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Silverwood Road from
Clifford Road to Castle
Road Resurfacing Project

MI

3,112,000

McClain

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

State Park Drive Rehabilitation Project

MI

850,000

McDonald Rivet

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Frances Road Bridge Replacement over Butternut Creek

MI

850,000

McDonald Rivet

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Patterson Avenue Resurfacing

MI

250,000

Scholten

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Non-motorized, Shared-use
Crossing over I–96 at
Forest Hill Avenue, SE

MI

250,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Countywide Bridge Repair
Project

MI

2,000,000

Walberg

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

North River Road Safety
Improvement Project

MI

5,000,000

Walberg

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Reconstruction of Mound
Road from 8 Mile to I–
696

MI

750,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Saginaw Road Bridge Reconstruction Project

MI

955,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Red Run Park Bridge Installation Project

MI

1,000,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Detroit/Wayne County Port
Authority—Detroit Windsor Tunnel Roadway Column Rehabilitation and
Infrastructure Upgrades

MI

1,613,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

City of Mt. Pleasant Mill
and Overlay—Preston
and Bradley

MI

500,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Dakota County I–35
Bridges and CH 50
Interchange Project

MN

2,000,000

Craig

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Town Line Road Reconstruction

MN

1,500,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Heatherwood Road Infrastructure & Multi-Modal
Improvements

MN

7,000,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Minnesota State Highway
65 & Bunker Lake Blvd
Project

MN

7,000,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

CSAH 19 & CSAH 123
Intersection Improvements

MN

1,500,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Highway 24—Clearwater

MN

3,700,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Interchanges on U.S. Highway 14 at CSAH 3 and
CSAH 5

MN

2,000,000

Finstad

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Weir Drive Reconstruction
Phase II

MN

1,350,000

McCollum

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

CH 18 and Settlers Ridge
Parkway Reconstruction

MN

250,000

McCollum

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Highway 169 & County
Road 130 Interchange
Mobility Project

MN

850,000

Morrison

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00411

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Peters

H

H

Klobuchar, Smith

H22JAPT2

H

H1764

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Main Street (CSAH 150)
Reconstruction

MN

850,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Trunk Highway 610 & East
River Road Full Access
Interchange

MN

250,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Highway 47 Corridor and
BNSF Railroad Grade
Separation

MN

250,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Fridley Northtown Railyard
Overpass Connector

MN

1,000,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Oxford Louisiana Area Infrastructure Investment

MN

250,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

County Highway 32 Pedestrian and Safety Improvement Project

MN

5,000,000

Stauber

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

US Highway 8 Reconstruction

MN

5,000,000

Stauber

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Highway 23 Coalition
Willmar Bypass Project

MN

3,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

City of Saint Paul Reconstruction of Randolph
Avenue Bridge

MN

2,102,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

City of Bloomington—
Normandale Boulevard
Sidewalk and Trail Improvements

MN

600,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

White Road Non-NBI Bridge
Replacement

MO

397,000

Alford

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

Compton Bridge Reconstruction Phase 2

MO

500,000

Bell

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

Kentucky Ave. Bridge Replacement

MO

1,200,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

Highway 54 Shared 4 Lane
Project

MO

4,900,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

US 136 Bridge Project

MO

1,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

Holt County Bridge Improvement Project

MO

1,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

US 36 Interchange

MO

1,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

I–29 to I–35 Ramp Bridge

MO

1,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MP

Route 36 Improvement
Phase 1B

MP

2,000,000

King-Hinds

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Edwards Street Reconstruction

MS

1,000,000

Ezell

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Lincoln Road Phase 2

MS

1,000,000

Ezell

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Madison Avenue Widening
for the City of Madison

MS

1,000,000

Guest

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Bozeman-Reunion Crossing
Interconnectivity System
for Madison County

MS

2,000,000

Guest

Wicker

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Dale Drive Intersection Improvement and Road
Widening for the Town of
Marion

MS

2,000,000

Guest

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Lincoln County-Brookhaven
Industrial Park Road Improvements for Lincoln
County

MS

2,000,000

Guest

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Wright Road Bridge Project

MS

3,500,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00412

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

H

Hyde-Smith

H22JAPT2

S

January 22, 2026

H1765

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Starkville Eastern Connections

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Desoto County I–55 Improvements

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

CR 306 Rehabilitation

MS

1,048,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Jackson County US 90 Improvements

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Jackson Multi-use Connection

MS

640,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Deerbrook Road Improvements

MS

4,500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

MS 19 Neshoba County

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Lake Okhissa Access and
Utilities Project

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Canal Street Bridge Replacement Project

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Texas Flat Road Reconstruction

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Star Landing Road

MS

7,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Highway 80 East Widening
Project

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

US Highway 80 Improvements

MS

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Dedeaux Road Widening
Project

MS

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MT

Noxon Bridge

MT

10,000,000

Sheehy

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

Crow Tribe of Montana

BIA 91 Highway Reconstruction

MT

4,000,000

Sheehy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NC

Fordham Boulevard
Sidepath

NC

1,000,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NC

Basin Street Extension

NC

3,900,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Omaha Urban Core Renewal

NE

3,500,000

Bacon

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

38th Street Viaduct in
Omaha

NE

5,000,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Gretna Hwy 6/31 Overpass

NE

1,500,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Morningside Road Improvements for Inland Port
Development

NE

3,000,000

Flood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Elkhorn River Bridge Replacement

NE

1,500,000

Flood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Schram Road Parkway
Grading and Surfacing

NE

5,120,000

Flood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Sheridan County Road Rehabilitation

NE

3,434,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Fairbury Highway 136 Improvements

NE

4,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Garfield County Asphalt
Project

NE

3,200,000

Fischer

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00413

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Zinke

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Fischer

H22JAPT2

S

H1766

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Village of Exeter Paving
Project

NE

700,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Brown County Bridge
Rehabs and Replacement

NE

897,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Stromsburg 9th Street Reconstruction

NE

2,275,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Garden County Bridge Replacement

NE

5,200,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Gage County Hickory Road
Improvements

NE

4,733,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Village of Adams Pavement
Project

NE

880,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Chadron North on Highway
385

NE

6,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NH

Lebanon Mechanic Street
Sidewalks Project

NH

250,000

Goodlander

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NH

Pettengill Road Traffic Improvements and Widening Project

NH

2,000,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Probasco Road Freight Bypass Project

NJ

2,000,000

Conaway

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Kenilworth Boulevard &
Lenape Park Intersection
Improvements

NJ

850,000

McIver

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Route 440 Pedestrian
Bridge Project

NJ

2,000,000

Menendez

Booker

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

City of Newark—Safe Gateway Pedestrianization
and Safety Improvements Project

NJ

1,500,000

Menendez

Booker

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Passaic Avenue Safety Improvements

NJ

3,000,000

Menendez, Pou

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Extension of Thomas Edison
Parkway (CR–641 Spur)
from US Route 322 to
Lambs Road (CR 635) in
Mantua Township

NJ

850,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Highland Park Pedestrian,
Bicycle, and Roadway
Safety Improvements

NJ

850,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

New Brunswick Traffic
Safety Improvements

NJ

500,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Livingston Avenue
Streetscape Improvement

NJ

850,000

Sherrill

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

County Route 537 Corridor
Improvements Section B
Project

NJ

2,000,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Route 522 Realignment Extension Project

NJ

450,000

Watson Coleman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

County of Cumberland—
Extension of Nabb Avenue

NJ

1,000,000

Booker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

County of Middlesex, New
Jersey—Veterans Memorial Bridge Safety Enhancements, CR–535

NJ

1,200,000

Booker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Pleasantville Pedestrian
Bridge

NJ

1,500,000

Booker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

County of Atlantic—Intersection Improvements to
Wrangleboro Road (CR
575) and Tilton Road
(CR 563)

NJ

350,000

Booker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Hudson County—JFK Boulevard Roadway and Pedestrian Safety Improvements

NJ

1,500,000

Booker, Kim

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00414

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Kim

H

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1767

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

House

Origination

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

City of Las Vegas, NM
South Pacific Road Improvements

NM

850,000

Leger Fernandez

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

Raton, NM Ports to Plains

NM

1,000,000

Leger Fernandez

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

Sunland Park Drive Intersection Phase I

NM

250,000

Vasquez

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

Ports-to-Plains Corridor
Interstate Planning—
Raton I–27 / I–25—
Interchange Alignment
Study

NM

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

City of Bloomfield—East
Blanco Road

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

Department of
Transportation

Senate
Luján

H

H

Luján

H

1,600,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

NM

1,210,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

City of Bloomfield—Solar &
Electric Vehicle Charging
Infrastructure

NM

600,000

Luján

S

Navajo Division of Transportation

N321 Environmental Assessment and Roadway
Improvements

NM

519,000

Luján

S

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

US 93 Safety Enhancements in Wells, NV

NV

2,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

US 6 in White Pine County

NV

2,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

US 6, Tonopah Downtown
Rehabilitation

NV

850,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

SR 596 Jones Blvd Preservation

NV

250,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Revitalizing Bonanza Road
for Safer Mobility

NV

250,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

CC–215 Trail Bridges at
Summerlin Parkway

NV

1,200,000

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Nevada Department of
Transportation—SR 159
Preservation

NV

2,000,000

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Vision Zero School Zone
Safety Improvements

NV

1,100,000

Lee (NV), Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

SR 147 Improvements

NV

1,000,000

Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Nevada Way Rehabilitation

NV

850,000

Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Charleston Boulevard Preservation

NV

1,200,000

Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

City of Henderson—Via
Nobila Interchange
Project

NV

5,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Tahoe Transportation District—Sand Harbor
Multi-Use Trail Project

NV

5,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

US 50A Fernley Cottonwood
Roundabout

NV

2,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Jamaica Bay Greenway
Gateway Link

NY

250,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Reconstruction of Broadway

NY

1,850,000

Jeffries, Velázquez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Como Park Ave./Borden Rd.
Roundabout

NY

250,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Losson Rd./Borden Rd.
Roundabout

NY

250,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Liberty Avenue Plaza

NY

850,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

City of Poughkeepsie—
Washington Street
Bridge Reconstruction

NY

3,400,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00415

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Gillibrand

H22JAPT2

S

H1768

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

County of Chautauqua Industrial Development
Agency—Ripley Interstate Industrial Park
Left-Hand Turn Lane

NY

650,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Safe & Accessible Flatbush
& Foxhall

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Thornwood Drive South Improvement Project, City
of Heath

OH

4,000,000

Balderson

Moreno

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Ety Road South Improvement Project, City of
Lancaster

OH

2,000,000

Balderson

Moreno

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Sunbury Parkway Phase D
Project

OH

1,000,000

Balderson

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Brooksedge Boulevard Mobility Improvements

OH

1,200,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Havens Corners Road
Roundabout

OH

1,000,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Cooke Road Reconstruction

OH

250,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Sancus Boulevard Shared
Use Path

OH

850,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Morse Road Improvements

OH

250,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Stabilization and Rehabilitation of Irishtown Bend

OH

1,200,000

Brown

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

East 66th Complete Street
(DREAM 66)

OH

1,850,000

Brown

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

The Emerald Connector

OH

3,000,000

Carey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Franklin US 33 Corridor

OH

2,000,000

Carey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Millikin Road at Interstate
75, Future Exit 26

OH

2,200,000

Davidson

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Chessie Circle Trail Buildout

OH

1,000,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Village of Gibsonburg
Downtown Improvement
Project

OH

250,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

State Route 48 Improvement Project

OH

2,000,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Downtown Lebanon Pedestrian Safety Improvement
Project

OH

600,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

State Route 741 Improvement Project

OH

250,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Van Wert US 30 Interchange

OH

1,500,000

Latta

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

City of North Royalton—
Royalton Road Reconstruction Phase II

OH

4,000,000

Miller (OH)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Solon Ohio Diverging Diamond Project

OH

2,000,000

Miller (OH)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

US 224 Corridor Safety Enhancements

OH

1,500,000

Rulli

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Blaine Barton Road Intersection Safety Improvements

OH

3,840,000

Rulli

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Clinton Road Rehabilitation
Project

OH

250,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Wooster Beall Avenue Safety Improvement Project

OH

3,750,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00416

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Moreno

Moreno

Husted

H22JAPT2

H

H

S

January 22, 2026

H1769

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Sweetwater Shoulder

OK

4,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Beaver Shoulder Construction

OK

1,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Pawnee Shoulder Construction

OK

1,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Harmon Shoulder Construction

OK

1,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Oklahoma City Congestion
Relief

OK

10,000,000

Mullin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

I–40 Bridge Replacement

OK

35,200,000

Mullin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Gateway to OMSI

OR

850,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Broadway Bridge Deck Replacement

OR

250,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Williams Creek Trestle and
Learning Mile

OR

250,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Kellogg Creek OR–99E
Community Project (Kellogg Project)

OR

850,000

Bynum

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

OR 126: 35th Street Signal
and Pedestrian Improvements (Redmond)

OR

250,000

Bynum

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Roundabout at Shaff and
Wilco Road

OR

850,000

Bynum

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Safer Sandy: Safety Improvements to Sandy
Blvd

OR

850,000

Dexter

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Lower César E. Chávez
Boulevard Safety and
Resilience Project

OR

250,000

Dexter

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

OR 99W Corridor Safety
and Intersection Improvements

OR

850,000

Salinas

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

65th and Borland Intersection Improvement Project

OR

250,000

Salinas

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Verda Lane Pedestrian
Safety Project

OR

850,000

Salinas

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Feather Drive Bridge Replacement

OR

1,787,000

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

SR 6 Over Wallenpaupack
Creek Bridge

PA

2,000,000

Bresnahan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Route 309/Mundy Street
Crossroads Improvement
Project

PA

2,500,000

Bresnahan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Lederach PA 113
(Harleysville Pike Alternate Route) Shared Use
Path—Phase 1 Project

PA

250,000

Dean

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Verona Road Bridge Replacement

PA

850,000

Deluzio

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Freeport Road Safety Improvement and Brilliant
Avenue Realignment

PA

2,000,000

Deluzio

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Crafton Blvd Streetscape—
School Plaza

PA

1,338,581

Deluzio

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Route 30 Corridor Improvements Project

PA

3,150,000

Houlahan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Ekastown West 3R Rehabilitation

PA

7,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

SR 422, Business 422 to
Butler County Line

PA

3,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Fetterman

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00417

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

H

Merkley, Wyden

H

H

Merkley, Wyden

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Fetterman, McCormick,

H22JAPT2

S

H

H1770

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

SR18, Wilmington Road
Betterment

PA

2,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Fetterman, McCormick,

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Versailles Avenue Viaduct
Replacement—McKeesport, PA

PA

850,000

Lee (PA)

McCormick

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

City of Jeannette—2nd
Street Bridge Reconstruction

PA

850,000

Lee (PA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Rex Road Bridge Repairs

PA

375,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Lower Saucon Road Bridge
Replacement

PA

242,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

SR420 Advance Warning
Safety Improvements

PA

425,500

Scanlon

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Third Street Pedestrian and
Bicycle Bridge

PA

500,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Lenni Road Quad Gate Installation

PA

250,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Improvements of Falls
Creek Streets and Sidewalks

PA

1,150,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Pedestrian Bridges for the
Connellsville Urban Passage

PA

500,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Carbon County Bridge Replacement

PA

1,119,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Country Club Road Bridge
Replacement

PA

1,901,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Johnstown Dellwood Street
Bridge Project

PA

806,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Greystone Bridge Reconstruction

RI

1,000,000

Amo

Reed

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Wood Street Stormwater
and Flooding Mitigation
Project

RI

1,500,000

Magaziner

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Town of Scituate—Drainage Infrastructure Improvements

RI

970,000

Reed

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Town of Barrington—
Massasoit Avenue Sidewalk

RI

800,000

Reed

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Pell Bridge Ramps Beautification

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Blackstone Bikeway Segment 8B–2

RI

2,200,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Woonasquatucket River
Greenway—Esmond Village Park

RI

4,400,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

City of East Providence—
Traffic Signal Improvements

RI

4,200,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

SC

Clemson Intersection Improvement Project

SC

4,300,000

Graham

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

SC

Airport Connector Road
Project

SC

20,500,000

Graham

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

SD

Box Elder Regional Transportation Improvement
Project

SD

4,000,000

Rounds

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

SD

SD44 Bridge Replacement
and Improvement

SD

25,000,000

Rounds, Thune

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TN

Loudon Co I–75 Widening
from Exit 81 to I–40

TN

1,000,000

Burchett

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TN

I–69 Troy Bypass North &
South

TN

5,000,000

Kustoff

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00418

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Fetterman

H

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1771

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TN

New Middleton Elementary/
New Middleton Highway
Lane Addition

TN

2,000,000

Rose

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

US–87

TX

5,000,000

Arrington

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Study of Lamesa Improvements/Interstate Upgrade Option

TX

640,000

Arrington

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

SH 195 Project

TX

10,000,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Wirtz Dam Bridge Construction

TX

10,000,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Connell Street Widening
Project

TX

9,680,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Sawdust Bridge Elevation

TX

5,000,000

Crenshaw

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

City of Cedar Hill Loop 9
Highway Project

TX

250,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

BOLT—Bridge Operations &
Logistics Transformation,
Pharr International
Bridge

TX

3,520,000

De La Cruz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

West Bouldin Creek Trail
Extension

TX

3,500,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Connecting Windsor Park:
Belfast Bridge & Trail

TX

2,000,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

I–10 Deck Plaza

TX

3,150,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Paso Del Norte Trail—
Socorro Spine Alignment

TX

500,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Segundo Barrio Safe
Streets

TX

1,000,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Ysleta Port of Entry Engineering Design

TX

3,100,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Texas Spur 228 Widening
Project; Amarillo

TX

1,880,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Interstate Planning Funds
for City Location Study
at Dumas

TX

1,000,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

SL 335—Upgrade to Freeway—Amarillo West of
FM 2590 to South to FM
2186; Amarillo

TX

1,000,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Centennial at Buckingham
Intersection Improvements

TX

1,000,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

White Rock Lake Trail Relocation

TX

1,200,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Hemlock Avenue Safe
Streets Enhancements

TX

850,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Ferguson Road Corridor
Safety Enhancements

TX

850,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Lakewood Park Pedestrian
Bridge & Accessibility

TX

250,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Marshall Relief Route

TX

2,000,000

Moran

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Future Interstate Planning
between San Angelo and
Sonora (Future Interstate
Segment FIS 0159–01)

TX

1,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Mineral Wells Bridge

TX

1,000,000

Pfluger

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00419

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1772

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Rancier Avenue Reconstruction Project

TX

1,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Corridor A2 Segment Advanced Technology Route

TX

7,000,000

Sessions

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Future I–69/U.S. 59 Feasibility Study and Environmental Clearance

TX

3,000,000

Sessions

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

City of Colleyville Arterial
Bridge

TX

2,000,000

Van Duyne

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Pipeline Road Reconstruction

TX

1,000,000

Van Duyne

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

City of Dallas Royal Lane
Corridor

TX

250,000

Van Duyne

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Bachman Area Transportation Plan Implementation—Safety Improvements to Improve Neighborhood Access to
Bachman Lake and the
Bachman Creek Greenbelt

TX

250,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Quitchupah Creek Road Rehabilitation Project

UT

3,000,000

Maloy

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Droubay Road Project

UT

5,200,000

Maloy

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Brush Wellman Road
Project, Juab

UT

1,000,000

Maloy

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Utah Paradise Parkway
Corridor

UT

2,000,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Utah Ogden Canyon Trail

UT

1,000,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Summit County, Utah
Kimball Junction Overpass

UT

1,000,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

South Jordan City Bingham
Creek Trail Project

UT

500,000

Owens

Curtis

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Lehi Freeway Evaluation
Project

UT

500,000

Owens

Curtis

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Salem City Road Transportation Infrastructure
Project

UT

1,000,000

Owens

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

North Shore Freeway Development

UT

2,000,000

Curtis

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

SR–224 Pedestrian Overpass at Kimball Junction

UT

1,396,000

Curtis

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Roadside and Trailside
Comfort Station at Gravelly Point

VA

550,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

S. George Mason Dr.
Multimodal Improvements

VA

850,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Mason Neck Trail Extension
(Southern Segment)

VA

250,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Interstate 81 Corridor—
Widening

VA

17,000,000

Cline

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Fairfax County Transportation Safety Initiative—
Springfield

VA

3,150,000

Connolly

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Corridor Q—U.S. Connector
Phase II Paving Project

VA

3,000,000

Griffith

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

I–264/Independence Blvd.
Interchange Improvements

VA

10,000,000

Kiggans

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

I–95 and Willis Road Interchange Improvements
Phase 1

VA

850,000

McClellan

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00420

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1773

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate
Kaine, Warner

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Plaza Street Sidewalk Safety Improvements

VA

1,000,000

Subramanyam

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Route 15 Trail and Crossing at Catharpin Creek

VA

850,000

Subramanyam

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Route 15/Braddock Road
Roundabout

VA

3,150,000

Subramanyam

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Pedestrian Bridge Route 1
VRE Station Connection

VA

1,000,000

Vindman

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Leeland Road Improvement
Project

VA

250,000

Vindman

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Harrison Road/Salem
Church Road Intersection
Improvements

VA

850,000

Vindman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

I–95/Exit 126 SB Onramp
Improvements

VA

250,000

Vindman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Powhite Parkway Extension
Phase II—Preliminary
Engineering

VA

8,000,000

Wittman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

National Park Service

Appalachian National Scenic Trail McAfee Knob
Trailhead Parking and
Transit Access Improvements

VA

6,304,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Shelton Shop Road Widening and Safety Improvements

VA

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Newport News—Citywide
Signal System Upgrade

VA

1,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

City of Suffolk—Townpoint
Sidewalk

VA

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Fall Line Trail Segment 4A

VA

1,454,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VT

Burlington—Winooski River
Bridge Replacement

VT

850,000

Balint

Sanders, Welch

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Bigelow-Sullivan Corridor:
Sullivan and Trent Interchange Project, City of
Spokane Valley

WA

4,000,000

Baumgartner

Cantwell

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Alderwood Mall Parkway:
SR525 to 168th St SW

WA

1,000,000

DelBene

Cantwell

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

SR–531 Trail

WA

850,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

156th Street NE Railroad
Overcrossing

WA

4,100,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

City of Shoreline Trail Along
the Rail Project

WA

850,000

Jayapal

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Pepin Flood, Agriculture,
Salmon, and Safety
Transportation (FASST)
Project

WA

1,000,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Wenatchi Landing Interchange

WA

10,000,000

Newhouse

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

The Port of Warden Road
Project

WA

2,500,000

Newhouse

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

54th Ave E and Taylor Way
Corridor Improvements

WA

500,000

Randall

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Kittitas County I–90 Widening—Kittitas County,
WA, WA–08

WA

2,000,000

Schrier

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Bellevue Grand Connection:
I–405 Crossing—Downtown to Eastrail

WA

2,000,000

Smith (WA)

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Airport Station Area Pedestrian Improvements
Project

WA

250,000

Smith (WA)

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00421

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Murray

H

H/S

H

Cantwell

H

H

Cantwell

H22JAPT2

H

H

H1774

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Ceres Hill Bridge Rehabilitation

WA

3,350,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Port Orchard Bay Street ReConstruction

WA

3,554,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

The Kalispel Tribe of Indians

Dike Road Emergency Access and Flood Control

WA

717,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

South Royle Road Corridor
Improvements Project

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Portland Avenue Freight
Improvement Program

WA

2,500,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Columbia Heights Road
Safety Improvement
Project, Phase II

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Clinton Passenger-Only
Ferry Dock Replacement

WA

1,900,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Vancouver Heights Infrastructure Phase II

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

City of Washougal—Rail
Crossing Project

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WI

Waukesha County Trunk
Highway O/Moorland
Road Construction

WI

5,500,000

Fitzgerald

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WI

Great Sauk State Trail Bicycle Rail Trail Connection

WI

1,200,000

Pocan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WI

Monroe County CTH ET
Multimodal & Freight
Corridor

WI

8,455,000

Van Orden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

Northern Parkway Improvements

WV

2,000,000

Moore (WV)

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

WVDOH District 4 City
Bridges

WV

5,000,000

Moore (WV)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

Market Street Bridge

WV

1,000,000

Moore (WV)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

Sutton Elk River Trail Improvements

WV

2,240,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

Corridor H Parsons to Davis

WV

4,000,000

Justice

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

WV Route 2 Improvements

WV

5,000,000

Justice

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Alabama Port Authority

Port Railroad Expansion

AL

2,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Port of Fort Smith

Transload Yard

AR

8,100,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Southeast Arkansas Economic Development District, Inc.

Port of Yellow Bend Rail
Improvements

AR

5,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Southern California Regional Rail Authority

Southern California Regional Railroad Authority
(Metrolink) Arroyo Simi
Bridges Scour Mitigation
Project

CA

250,000

Brownley

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Carlsbad

Carlsbad Village Railroad
Double Track Trenching,
Carlsbad, CA

CA

1,000,000

Levin

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

North County Transit District

Positive Train Control Rail
Safety Enhancement
Project, Oceanside, CA

CA

600,000

Levin

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

San Diego Association of
Governments (SANDAG)

LOSSAN Rail Bridge Replacements

CA

2,000,000

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Beaumont

Pennsylvania Avenue Grade
Separation Project

CA

2,000,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

San Joaquin Regional Rail
Commission

Modesto & Empire Terminal
Railroad Positive Train
Control Installation

CA

1,934,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00422

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Capito, Justice

Padilla

H22JAPT2

H

S

January 22, 2026

H1775

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

San Diego Association of
Governments

Sorrento to Miramar Double
Track Project

CA

2,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Colorado Department of
Transportation

Fort Collins and Loveland
Station Planning Study

CO

900,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Cocoa

Cocoa Multi-Modal Passenger Station

FL

2,000,000

Haridopolos

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Des Plaines

Algonquin Rd Grade Separation

IL

1,800,000

Quigley,
Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Town of McCordsville

Mt. Comfort Road Regional
Underpass

IN

2,000,000

Shreve

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Pittsburg

Rehabilitation of Pittsburg
Industrial Park Rail
Lines

KS

2,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

New Orleans Public Belt
Railroad

Bywater Rail Relocation
Project

LA

1,200,000

Carter (LA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Lake Charles Harbor & Terminal District (Port of
Lake Charles)

Industrial Park East Industrial Lead Railroad Rehabilitation Project

LA

1,800,000

Higgins

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Jefferson Parish

Westbank Rail Alignment
Project

LA

8,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Massachusetts Department
of Transportation

Knowledge Corridor Positive
Train Control

MA

1,200,000

Neal

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Maryland Department of
Transportation

Enhancing Eastern Shore
Freight Rail Growth and
Reliability

MD

8,000,000

Harris

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Detroit

Michigan Central Station
Intermodal Passenger
Project

MI

3,000,000

Thanedar

Peters, Slotkin

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Shakopee

City of Shakopee Downtown
Quiet Zone Improvements

MN

850,000

Craig

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Minneapolis

Logan Park Rail Crossing
Improvements

MN

250,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

George County

Coastal Railroad Rehabilitation and Velocity Improvement Project

MS

4,000,000

Ezell

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Brookhaven

Railroad Safety Fencing

MS

641,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Mississippi Department of
Transportation

Tupelo Rail Improvements

MS

10,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

North Carolina Department
of Transportation

Charlotte Gateway Station

NC

500,000

Adams

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Town of Tabor City

Tabor City Railroad Improvements

NC

900,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Palmetto Railways

Lowcountry Region Rail
Bridge and Track Rehabilitation Program

SC

5,449,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Houston (Houston
Public Works)

East End Railway Improvement Project

TX

850,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Virginia Passenger Rail Authority

Alexandria Fourth Track
and Related Infrastructure Projects

VA

250,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Port of Pend Oreille

Locomotive Facility Upgrade
Project

WA

852,000

Baumgartner

Cantwell

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Monroe

Rail Grade Separation Feasibility Study and Design

WA

850,000

DelBene

Cantwell

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Snohomish County

Everett Intermodal Yard
and Curve Improvements

WA

250,000

Larsen

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Port of Quincy (Grant County Port District 1)

Port of Quincy Rail Infrastructure Expansion
Project

WA

2,500,000

Newhouse

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Port of Benton

White Bluffs Rail Modernization and Intermodal Facility Project

WA

2,500,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00423

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Moran

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

H

H

Hyde-Smith

S

Wicker

S

Graham

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

S

S

H

Cantwell

H

Cantwell

S

H22JAPT2

H1776

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Inter-Island Ferry Authority

Lifesaving Equipment Upgrade

AK

1,575,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Omnitrans

Battery Electric Buses and
Installation of Charging
Infrastructure

CA

1,000,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Simi Valley

City of Simi Valley Additional In-Route Charges
for the Simi Valley Transit Hub Project

CA

1,120,000

Brownley

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation
Authority

Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation
Authority’s (Metro) Regional Bus Stop Enhancement Program

CA

2,600,000

Brownley, Friedman, Gomez,
Rivas,
Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Foothill Transit

Foothill Transit Zero Emissions Bus Program

CA

850,000

Chu, Sanchez

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Contra Costa Transit Authority

Solar Integrated Battery
Storage System Project

CA

2,000,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Southern California Regional Rail Authority
(Metrolink)

Updating and replacing
Customer Information
Systems at Glendale and
Burbank Stations

CA

250,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

San Francisco Bay Area
Rapid Transit District
(BART)

BART Station LED Lighting
Program

CA

500,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

County of Los Angeles

El Sol Shuttle Zero-Emission Battery Electric
Buses

CA

1,000,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Cupertino

Silicon Valley Hopper OnDemand Microtransit
Shuttle

CA

1,200,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Culver City

Hydrogen Bus Pilot Project

CA

1,200,000

Lieu, KamlagerDove

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Sacramento Regional Transit District

City College & Fruitridge
Light Rail Station Modernization

CA

850,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Peninsula Corridor Joint
Powers Board

Burlingame Broadway
Grade Separation Project

CA

3,150,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

San Mateo County Transit
District

SamTrans Bus Stop Amenity Improvements

CA

250,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

North County Transit District

Bus Stop Security and Enhancement Project

CA

250,000

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

San Francisco Bay Area
Rapid Transit District
(BART)

Station LED Lighting Program

CA

850,000

Simon

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Riverside County Transportation Commission

Mead Valley Metrolink Station/Mobility Hub Project

CA

850,000

Takano

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Riverside Transit Agency

Veterans Riverside National
Cemetery ADA Bus Stop
Enhancement

CA

250,000

Takano

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Riverside County Transportation Commission

Metrolink Double Track
Project

CA

850,000

Takano

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Los Angeles County Department of Public Works

Link Willowbrook and King
Medical Center Shuttle
Zero Emission Bus
Project

CA

850,000

Waters

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Southern California Regional Rail Authority

Modernizing Rail in CA–27
through Technology Improvements

CA

250,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

North County Transit District

SPRINTER Platform and
Track Enhancement
Project

CA

1,200,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Peninsula Corridor Joint
Powers Board

South County Service Wi-Fi
Project

CA

1,100,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
District (RTD)

Downtown Track Replacement

CO

850,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Lakewood

Colfax Transportation Safety Infrastructure Improvements

CO

250,000

Pettersen

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Colorado Department of
Transportation

Gunnison Valley RTA Bus
Expansion Project

CO

1,508,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00424

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Murkowski

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

S

January 22, 2026

H1777

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of New London

Water Street Garage and
Transit Station in New
London

CT

3,500,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pinellas Suncoast Transit
Authority

Ferry Dock at the St. Pete
Pier

FL

850,000

Castor

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Florida Regional
Transportation Authority
(LYNX)

LYNX Bus Shelter Program
Project

FL

850,000

Frost

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Florida Regional
Transportation Authority
(LYNX)

LYNX Bus Acquisition
Project

FL

500,000

Frost

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pinellas Suncoast Transit
Authority

Ferry Dock Reconstruction
at Dunedin Marina

FL

828,000

Luna

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Jacksonville Transportation
Authority

JTA Autonomous Transit Deployment

FL

4,096,000

Rutherford

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Florida Regional
Transportation Authority
(d/b/a LYNX)

LYNX Digital Signage Program

FL

250,000

Soto

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Cobb County

South Cobb Transit Center

GA

1,200,000

McBath

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid
Transit Authority

MARTA Securing Rail and
Bus Facilities Project

GA

400,000

Scott (GA)

Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid
Transit Authority
(MARTA)

Securing Rail & Bus Facilities

GA

250,000

Williams (GA)

Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Champaign-Urbana Mass
Transit District

Champaign-Urbana Real
Estate Procurement for
Transit Station Expansion

IL

850,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Village of Glen Ellyn

Village of Glen Ellyn Metra
Station and Multimodal
Access Improvements
Project

IL

2,000,000

Casten

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pace, the Suburban Bus
Division of the Regional
Transportation Authority

Pace Harlem Avenue Transit Signal Priority

IL

840,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pace, the Suburban Bus
Division of the Regional
Transportation Authority

Pace North Avenue Transit
Signal Priority

IL

250,000

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority

79th and Halsted Bus
Turnaround Improvement
Project

IL

2,500,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority

CTA-Rail Station Concession Facilities Improvements

IL

1,080,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pace, the Suburban Bus
Division of the Regional
Transportation Authority

Pace Pulse bus queue-jump
for 95th St/Western Ave

IL

530,190

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Commuter Rail Division of
the RTA d/b/a Metra

Metra’s 91st Street/Beverly
Station Improvements
Project

IL

520,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Commuter Rail Division of
the RTA d/b/a Metra

Station Displays Across
Chicago’s South Side
and Suburbs Project

IL

250,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pace, the Suburban Bus
Division of the Regional
Transportation Authority

Pace Golf Road Transit Signal Priority

IL

840,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority

CTA Brown Line-Rockwell
Brown Line

IL

1,200,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority
(CTA)

Belmont Station Red Line
Improvement

IL

500,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Commuter Rail Division of
the RTA d/b/a Metra

Metra’s O’Hare Express Infrastructure Study

IL

1,500,000

Ramirez

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority

Track Reconstruction Design

IL

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Illinois Department of
Transportation

Transit Improvements

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Bloomington Normal Public
Transit System (dba
Connect Transit)

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Illinois Department of
Transportation

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00425

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Durbin

H

2,000,000

Durbin

S

IL

3,711,000

Durbin

S

Transportation Center Pedestrian Access Improvements

IL

1,600,000

Durbin

S

Station Improvements

IL

134,000

Durbin

S

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1778

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Indianapolis Public Transportation Corporation
(IndyGo)

Fixed Route Fleet Replacement

IN

1,200,000

Carson

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Transit Authority of River
City

Paratransit Vehicle Replacement

KY

850,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Woburn

Anderson Regional Transit
Center Pedestrian Bridge
Project

MA

500,000

Clark

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Woods Hole, Martha’s Vineyard and Nantucket
Steamship Authority

Steamship Authority Shuttle
Bus Replacement

MA

2,000,000

Keating

Warren

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Maryland Department of
Transportation

Bowie State MARC Station
Joint Development
Project

MD

250,000

Ivey

Alsobrooks

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT)
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA)

West Baltimore MARC Station Replacement—NonAmtrak Funded Station
Amenities

MD

250,000

Mfume

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Montgomery County Department of Transportation

Georgia Avenue Bus Lanes

MD

3,150,000

Raskin

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Maryland Transit Administration

Southern Maryland Rapid
Transit

MD

5,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Oakland County

Oakland County Transit
Fleet Expansion

MI

2,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Interurban Transit Partnership

The Rapid’s Collision
Avoidance and Pedestrian Alert System
Project

MI

750,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transit Authority
of Southeast Michigan

Woodward Avenue Dedicated Transit Lanes

MI

2,600,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Ann Arbor Area Transportation Authority (AAATA)

Ypsilanti Transit Center
Safety and Security Improvements

MI

750,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

St. Louis County

Operation SmartStreet—
Roadside and Vehicle
Equipment Upgrades

MO

1,200,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Gulfport

Memorial Hospital Gulfport/
Coast Transit Authority
Intermodal Center

MS

2,029,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Research Triangle Regional
Public Transportation
Authority, d/b/a
GoTriangle

Triangle Mobility Hub

NC

2,000,000

Foushee, Ross

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Long Branch

Elberon Station and Pedestrian Improvements

NJ

250,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Borough of Carteret

Carteret Ferry Building
Project

NJ

3,500,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

North Central Regional
Transit District

Chama, NM Transit Operations Facility

NM

750,000

Leger Fernandez

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Las Vegas

Vision Zero School Zone
Safety Improvements

NV

500,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

RTC Dual Direction Bus
Shelters

NV

250,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada—Dual Direction
Bus Shelters

NV

250,000

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

Dual Direction Bus Shelters

NV

850,000

Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

Transit Infrastructure Safety Improvements

NV

3,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

New York State Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Interborough Express Light
Rail Transit Project (IBX)

NY

850,000

Clarke

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

New York State Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Long Island Rail Road
Bellerose ADA Upgrade
and Station Renewal

NY

250,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Metropolitan Transportation
Authority

Interborough Express Light
Rail Transit Project (IBX)
Preliminary Engineering

NY

250,000

Goldman

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00426

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

H

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen
Stevens

H

Bell

H

Hyde-Smith

Booker, Kim

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

S

S

S

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1779

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority

NFTA Paratransit Vehicles

NY

1,888,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

New York State Metropolitan Transportation Authority

179th Street Station Renewal (Queens Boulevard
Line)

NY

500,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rochester Genesee Regional
Transportation Authority

Rochester Genesee Regional
Transportation Authority:
Hydrogen Fueler Boil Off
Capture System

NY

850,000

Morelle

Gillibrand

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Roosevelt Island Operating
Corporation (RIOC)

Roosevelt Island Tram Modernization

NY

250,000

Nadler

Gillibrand

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

New York State Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Broadway Station ADA Upgrades

NY

2,000,000

Ocasio-Cortez

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rockland County

Village of Kaser—Bus
Transit

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Town of Ramapo

Town of Ramapo—Ready
Transit

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Ohio Transit Authority

COTA Paratransit and
COTA//Plus Vehicles

OH

250,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Greater Cleveland Regional
Transit Authority
(GCRTA)

GCRTA Light Rail Track Reconstruction Program

OH

250,000

Brown

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Toledo Area Regional Transit Authority (TARTA)

New State-of-the-Art TARTA
Garage & Zero Emission
Bus Transition

OH

2,450,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Tri-County Metropolitan
Transportation District of
Oregon (TriMet)

LIFT Vehicle Replacement
Project

OR

500,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Clackamas County

Mt. Hood Access to Transit

OR

500,000

Dexter

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Tri-County Metropolitan
Transportation District of
Oregon (TriMet)

Traffic Signal Efficiency
Improvements

OR

931,200

Dexter

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rogue Valley Transportation
District

Zero Emission Paratransit
Vehicles and Charging
Improvements

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rhode Island Public Transit
Authority

Passenger and Operations
Technology Improvements

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rhode Island Public Transit
Authority

RIPTA Bus Purchases

RI

3,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Cleveland

Relocation of the Cleveland
Urban Area Transit System Depot

TN

1,500,000

Fleischmann

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Corpus Christi Regional
Transportation Authority

Architectural Services for
CCRTA’s New Maintenance Facility

TX

1,943,000

Cloud

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Dallas Area Rapid Transit

DART Ledbetter Light Rail
Station Facility Modernization Project

TX

250,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Dallas Area Rapid Transit

Cityplace/Uptown Station
Inclinator Replacement
and Modernization
Project

TX

850,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

North Central Texas Council
of Governments

City of Coppell Circulator

TX

1,500,000

Van Duyne

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Fort Worth Transportation
Authority

Bus Stop Improvements

TX

2,000,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Utah Transit Authority

Utah Transit Authority TRAX
Light Rail Vehicles

UT

5,000,000

Moore (UT)

Curtis

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Hampton Roads Transit

Hampton Roads Transit
Paratransit Fleet

VA

850,000

Scott (VA)

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Community Transit

Swift Green Line Extension
Southern Terminal Facility

WA

2,000,000

DelBene

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Puget Sound Regional Transit Authority

Link Reliability Improvements

WA

4,000,000

Jayapal

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Washington State Department of Transportation

Seattle Ferry Terminal
Shoreside Electrification

WA

1,200,000

Jayapal

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00427

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Merkley, Wyden

H

H

H

Murray

H/S

H

H22JAPT2

H1780

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Snohomish County Public
Transportation Benefit
Area Corporation

Bus Replacement Project

WA

2,000,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Washington State Ferries

Washington State Ferries
Southworth Terminal Redevelopment

WA

850,000

Randall

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Community Transit

Swift Gold Line Bus Rapid
Transit Expansion Service between Everett and
Arlington

WA

3,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Milwaukee County Department of Transportation

Bus Replacement project

WI

1,000,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Madison

City of Madison Metro
Transit Safety Initiative

WI

850,000

Pocan

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

West Virginia University Research Corporation

Personal Rapid Transit
Guideway Rehabilitation
Project

WV

6,400,000

Moore (WV)

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Ouzinkie

Harbor Modernization

AK

1,100,000

Begich

Murkowski

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Homer

Homer Port FREIGHT: Critical Float System Replacement

AK

250,000

Begich

Murkowski

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Kodiak

St. Hermans Harbor Infrastructure

AK

5,000,000

Begich

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Municipality of Anchorage

Port of Alaska Modernization Program Electric
Substation

AK

1,750,000

Begich

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Seldovia

Jakolof Bay Dock Replacement

AK

482,000

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Alabama State Port Authority

Facilities Modernization—
Pier D2 Berth Completion

AL

850,000

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Alabama State Port Authority

McDuffie Coal Terminal
Modernization

AL

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

American Samoa Department of Port Administration

Port of Pago Pago Reconstruction Initiative

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Monterey

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Department of
Transportation

Murray

S

Murkowski

S

Figures

Britt

H

2,000,000

Moore (AL)

Britt

H

AQ

1,000,000

Radewagen

H

Monterey Wharf Critical Repairs

CA

1,920,000

Panetta

H

Diamond State Port Corporation

Port Wilmington Infrastructure Improvement and
Revitalization

DE

2,000,000

McBride

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Miami-Dade County Seaport
(PortMiami)

Reefer Yard Expansion
Project

FL

5,000,000

Salazar

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Hawaii Department of
Transportation

Port Improvements to Support Farmers

HI

2,400,000

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Lake Providence Port Commission

Delta Link Louisiana Regional Ports Improvement Project

LA

5,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Lake Charles Harbor & Terminal District

Lake Charles Harbor & Terminal District Improvements

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Port of Monroe

Strategic Cargo Infrastructure Project

MI

3,600,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Duluth Seaway Port Authority

Gantry Crane Refurbishment Project

MN

5,000,000

Stauber

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Yellow Creek State Inland
Port Authority

Yellow Creek Port Wharf
Reconstruction and Rail
Project

MS

4,000,000

Kelly (MS)

Hyde-Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

South Jersey Port Corporation

High Mast Lighting for Expanded Cargo Storage

NJ

250,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Erie County Industrial Development Agency

Buffalo Port Modernization
Project

NY

850,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Port of Garibaldi

Engineering for Seawall Replacement

OR

2,000,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Port of Beaumont Navigation District of Jefferson
County, Texas

Port of Beaumont Island
Park Terminal Stabilization Project

TX

5,000,000

Babin

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00428

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

H

Hirono, Schatz

Letlow

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H/S

S

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1781

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Port of Seattle

Pier 86 Grain Terminal
Switcher Locomotive Replacement Project

WA

250,000

Jayapal

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

The Northwest Seaport Alliance

Northwest Seaport Alliance
Berth Deepening on the
Blair Waterway

WA

2,000,000

Randall

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

The Northwest Seaport Alliance

Terminal 18 Shore Power
Expansion

WA

8,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Petersburg Borough

Banana Point Breakwater
Improvements

AK

2,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Soldotna

Marydale Avenue Improvements

AK

2,387,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Native Village of Diomede

Teacher Housing Renovation

AK

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairbanks Youth Advocates

The Door Youth Shelter

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yukon Koyukuk School District

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Senate
Cantwell

H

H

Murray

S

Begich

Murkowski

S

Begich

Murkowski

H/S

1,500,000

Murkowski

S

AK

700,000

Murkowski

S

Minto Teacher Housing

AK

608,000

Murkowski

S

Cordova Family Resource
Center

Cordova Shelter

AK

750,000

Murkowski

S

Community Development
Fund

Anchorage Community Land
Trust

Nonprofit Hub & Service
Center Repairs

AK

750,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Nome

Rural Teacher and Police
Housing

AK

4,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Thorne Bay

Thorne Bay EMS Hall

AK

1,574,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Council of the
Tlingit & Haida Indian
Tribes

Village Public Safety Officer
Quarters Project

AK

2,500,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Anchorage Neighborhood
Housing Services dba
NeighborWorks Alaska

Fire Alarm System Upgrade

AK

287,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northwest Arctic Borough
School

Teacher Housing Renovations

AK

330,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nulato Village

Waterfront Transportation
Infrastructure Development

AK

4,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Helping Ourselves Prevent
Emergencies (HOPE)

Building Acquisition

AK

900,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Denali Commission

Emmonak Women’s Shelter

AK

4,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Catholic Social Services

Shelter Safety and Accessibility Improvements

AK

320,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Covenant House Alaska

Dena’ina House

AK

1,600,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Native Village of Unalakleet

Housing for Victims of Violent Crimes

AK

255,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sunshine Station Child
Care Center

New Childcare Center

AK

4,500,000

Murkowski

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00429

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1782

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Star Council on
Aging

Rehabilitation of MLH
Manor

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Angoon

Angoon Harbor Access Improvements

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Naknek Village Council

Affordable Housing Construction

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kake Tribal Corporation

Dock Replacement

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yakutat Borough

Forest Highway Housing
Project

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ketchikan Indian Community

KIC S’eenáa Hit Navigation
Center

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairbanks Neighborhood
Housing Services Inc.

Cowles Street Affordable
Housing

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southeast Alaska Independent Living, Inc.

SE Alaska Disability Resource Center

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saint Paul

Fire Station Renovations

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sitkans Against Family Violence

Domestic Violence Shelter

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Haines

Early Childhood Education
Building

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lauderdale County Agriculture Center Authority

Lauderdale County, AL Agriculture Multipurpose
Complex

AL

1,500,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wallace State Community
College

Hanceville Affordable Housing

AL

2,540,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winston County

Winston County Road 57
and County Road 61 Resurfacing and Rehabilitation

AL

1,553,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montgomery

Montgomery Regional Tech
& Innovation Ecosystem
Initiative (MRTIEI) Hub

AL

1,650,000

Figures

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Auburn University

Rural Studio’s Development
and Housing Construction in Africatown

AL

2,500,000

Figures

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monroe County Commission

Monroe County Economic
Industrial Park Phase I

AL

1,000,000

Figures

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Auburn University

Advanced Manufacturing
Center for Workforce Development

AL

6,500,000

Rogers (AL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gadsden

Regional Fire, EMS, & Police Substation Replacement

AL

6,300,000

Rogers (AL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jacksonville State University

JSU Center for Manufacturing Support

AL

6,500,000

Rogers (AL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jacksonville State University

JSU Law Enforcement
Training Center

AL

1,500,000

Rogers (AL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Selma

Alabama Avenue Redevelopment Project

AL

1,656,000

Sewell

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00430

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Britt

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1783

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bessemer Housing Authority

Bessemer Dream Center

AL

850,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pleasant Grove

Pleasant Grove Sidewalk &
Safety Upgrades

AL

700,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tuscaloosa

Tuscaloosa Public Library

AL

250,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Auburn University

Selma Resilient Housing

AL

500,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hueytown

Hueytown Streetscaping

AL

850,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jefferson County Greenways
Commission

Red Mountain Park

AL

250,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Homewood

Homewood Culvert Project

AL

250,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Athens State University

Workforce Development and
Multipurpose Center

AL

1,000,000

Strong

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Talladega

Accessibility Infrastructure

AL

300,000

Britt

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Abbeville

Public Safety Firefighting
Equipment

AL

1,500,000

Britt

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Alabama in
Huntsville

Artificial Intelligence Research Infrastructure

AL

10,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Memphis

Utility Infrastructure Power
Substation and Water
Tank Upgrades

AR

1,000,000

Crawford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi County

Blytheville—North End
Clean Up

AR

3,200,000

Crawford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jonesboro

Lost Creek Drainage and
Flood Mitigation Infrastructure

AR

1,000,000

Crawford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of Arkansas

ACTI Remediation

AR

9,234,000

Westerman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tontitown

Water System Improvements

AR

12,200,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Benton County

Fire Station Improvements

AR

1,250,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mountainburg

North Central Crawford
County Water System
Improvements

AR

4,400,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Huntsville

Water System Improvements

AR

3,000,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Farmington

Bridge Repairs

AR

6,500,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mulberry

Mulberry Food Pantry

AR

500,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Benton County Water District #1 PWA of Arkansas

Benton County Water System Improvements

AR

1,750,000

Womack

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00431

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1784

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fort Smith

Water System Improvements

AR

3,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southern Arkansas University Tech

Technology Innovation Center

AR

15,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Arkansas Division of Agriculture

University of Arkansas Food
Safety, Science, and Research

AR

30,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Arkansas Pulaski Technical College

Project LIFT

AR

20,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Phoenix Emergency Shelter

AZ

830,000

Ansari

Gallego, Kelly

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Guadalupe

Biehn Colony Park Reconstruction

AZ

2,000,000

Ansari

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Alternative Fuel Vehicle Fire
Mitigation and Acquisition Project

AZ

800,000

Ansari

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Phoenix Fire Department
Wildland and Emergency
Response Acquisition

AZ

2,175,000

Ansari

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glendale

Glendale Arizona CD–03
Transportation Improvements and Streetscaping

AZ

850,000

Ansari

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Pima

High School Road Construction

AZ

1,000,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Casa Grande Elementary
School District #4

Community Center Revitalization

AZ

1,000,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Casa Grande Union High
School District

Affordable Workforce Housing Construction

AZ

1,800,000

Ciscomani

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Phoenix Fire Member Services Building Renovation

AZ

1,500,000

Hamadeh

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chandler

Chandler Sewer Rehabilitation

AZ

2,000,000

Stanton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

City of Phoenix—Fire Station Improvements

AZ

850,000

Stanton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tempe

City of Tempe—Affordable
Housing Development
and Construction

AZ

850,000

Stanton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dishchii’bikoh Community
School

Cibecue Teacher Housing
Construction

AZ

1,275,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Graham County

Graham County Affordable
Housing

AZ

345,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fort Thomas Unified School
District 7

Mt. Turnbull Elementary
School Teacher Housing

AZ

900,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arizona Department of
Housing

Spanish Trail Village Transitional Housing

AZ

3,000,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Avondale

Avondale Heat Mitigation

AZ

639,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Flagstaff

Flagstaff Shelter

AZ

2,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00432

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Womack

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1785

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Apache County

Ganado School Bus Loop
Reconstruction

AZ

2,155,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Veterans Center Renovation
Project

AZ

1,000,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
County of San
Bernardino

Arrowhead Grove Inclusive
Redevelopment Project
Phase V

CA

3,000,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Bernardino County

Bloomington Animal Shelter
Construction

CA

2,000,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fontana

Aldea Apartments Acquisition and Development

CA

1,200,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Redlands

Texonia Park Modernization
Renovations

CA

1,000,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Normandale Park Upgrades

CA

3,000,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles

Torrance Boulevard Safety
Improvements

CA

1,500,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles

Normandie Avenue Bus
Stop and Shelter Improvements

CA

1,500,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles

Wishing Tree Park Shade
Enhancement

CA

1,200,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Normandie Avenue Sidewalk
and Green Corridor Improvements

CA

1,000,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Los Angeles Fire Station 79
Critical Infrastructure
Repairs

CA

850,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles Harbor College

Los Angeles Harbor College
Center for Community
Engagement and Workforce Development

CA

850,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Houghton Park Improvements

CA

850,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lynwood

Lynwood Community Center
Improvements

CA

850,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paramount

Paramount Park Community
Center Expansion

CA

500,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South Gate

South Gate Electric Buses
and Charging Infrastructure

CA

250,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Scherer Park Signature
Playground

CA

250,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carson

Carson Safe Routes to
School

CA

250,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Wilmington Athletic Complex Lighting and Security

CA

250,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sacramento County

Watt Avenue Safe Stay Facility—Furnishing and
Equipment Acquisition

CA

1,500,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rio Linda Elverta Recreation and Park District

Central Park Rehabilitation—Phase 1

CA

2,000,000

Bera

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00433

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1786

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sacramento, Parks
and Community Enrichment Department

Del Paso Heights Sports
Complex Development,
Construction, and Equipment

CA

1,000,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

American River College of
the Los Rios Community
College System

Increasing Food Access via
Fleet Replacement & Facility Expansion

CA

260,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

California State University,
Sacramento

North Sacramento Technology Center

CA

850,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fulton-El Camino Recreation and Park District

Bohemian Park Community
Center Expansion

CA

850,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Citrus Heights

San Juan Avenue Phase 2
Development and Construction

CA

500,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clean Power Alliance

Clean Power Alliance Power
Ready Program for Critical Public Facilities Improvements

CA

250,000

Brownley

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Calabasas

Citywide Green Street
Project

CA

850,000

Brownley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Agoura Hills

City of Agoura Hills Affordable Housing Microgrid

CA

850,000

Brownley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Ventura

Ventura County Agricultural
Training, Resource, and
Community Center Development and Reconstruction

CA

250,000

Brownley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Indian Wells

Whitewater Channel Lining

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norco

Recycled Water Distribution
and Transmission Mainline Construction

CA

2,400,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Eastern Municipal Water
District

Quail Valley Septic to
Sewer Conversion Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Palm Desert

Cook Street Bridge Project

CA

5,671,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rancho Mirage

Via Vail Roadway Improvements

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lake Elsinore

Lake Elsinore Water Quality
Project

CA

8,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Quinta

Washington Street Improvement Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Corona

Trails Improvement Project

CA

1,700,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Maria

City of Santa Maria—Fire
Department Station 1
Expansion Project

CA

1,200,000

Carbajal

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Barbara,
CA

Santa Barbara County
Lompoc Animal Shelter

CA

850,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carpinteria

City of Carpinteria Community Center

CA

850,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santa Barbara County

Santa Barbara Sexual Assault Response Team
Cottage Relocation

CA

236,375

Carbajal

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00434

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Padilla, Schiff

Schiff

H22JAPT2

H

H

January 22, 2026

H1787

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Ventura

Ventura County Meiners
Oaks Botanical Park

CA

850,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Barbara

City of Santa Barbara
Eastside Library Improvements

CA

850,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Buenaventura
(Ventura)

City of San
Buenaventura—New Beginnings Interim Shelter

CA

250,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Morro Bay

Morro Bay Storm Drain Resiliency Project

CA

250,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Gabriel Valley Regional
Housing Trust

San Gabriel Valley Regional
Housing Trust Project
Pipeline

CA

250,000

Chu

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles Department of Consumer
and Business Affairs

Altadena Community Center
Facility Improvements
and ADA Upgrades

CA

500,000

Chu

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pasadena

Pasadena Jackie Robinson
Community Center—Facility Improvements and
ADA Upgrades

CA

1,000,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Claremont

Claremont South Village
Public Infrastructure Improvements

CA

850,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Arcadia

Arcadia and U.S. Forest
Service Joint Fire Training Center

CA

2,000,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Monterey Park

Fire Station 63 Reconstruction Project

CA

250,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rosemead

Garvey Community Center
Renovations

CA

500,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Baldwin Park, CA

Baldwin Park Family Services Center

CA

3,150,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Monte, CA

Pioneer Park Construction
Project

CA

2,000,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glendora, CA

Sandburg Middle School
Park Field and Track
Conversion

CA

1,200,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Irwindale, CA

Irwindale Dan Diaz Recreation Center Improvements Project

CA

850,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Covina, CA

Fire Station #1 Replacement

CA

250,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Puente, CA

La Puente Park Access Initiative Project

CA

820,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South El Monte, CA

New Temple Park Facility
Improvements

CA

500,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Stanton

Community and Senior
Center Complex Enhancement

CA

250,000

Correa

Padilla

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fullerton

Fire Stations Rehabilitation
Project

CA

250,000

Correa

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Ana

Chepa’s Park Reconstruction and Upgrades

CA

2,000,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Anaheim

OC River Walk—Santa Ana
River Impoundments
Project

CA

1,200,000

Correa

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00435

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1788

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Anaheim

Boysen Park Expansion, Improvements, and Facility
Development and Construction

CA

1,000,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Anaheim

Haskett Branch Library Improvements

CA

850,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orange

Orange County Riverwalk
Upland Habitat Restoration

CA

500,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fullerton

Independence Park Revitalization

CA

250,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santa Ana College

Automotive, Diesel-Electric
Transportation Technology and Robotic Manufacturing/Welding Program Infrastructure

CA

850,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central California Food
Bank

Central California Food
Bank Volunteer Center
Expansion

CA

1,000,000

Costa

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fresno

San Joaquin River Parkway
Project

CA

2,000,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Reedley College

Reedley College Ag Innovation Center

CA

2,000,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Tulare

Neighborhood Village Salt
and Light Phase II
Project

CA

1,200,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fresno

Clean Air Mobility Network

CA

850,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Exeter

Exeter Street Improvement
Project

CA

500,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fresno

Fresno Area Business Development Incubator

CA

250,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Visalia

Riggin Avenue Widening
and Streetscaping

CA

250,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Contra Costa County Fire
Protection District

East Bay Regional Communications System Improvements and Upgrades Project

CA

1,915,000

DeSaulnier

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Bay Regional Park
District

South of Bailey Road Community Development

CA

850,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Kings

Fire and Office of Emergency Services Headquarters

CA

3,000,000

Fong

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kern Council of Governments

Centennial Corridor SB 99
to WB 58 Connector

CA

3,000,000

Fong

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Burbank

Burbank Central Library

CA

3,000,000

Friedman

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

PATH Villas Hollywood—Infrastructure Improvements

CA

850,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glendale

Central Park Block

CA

2,000,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Hollywood

Hart Park Improvements
Project

CA

850,000

Friedman

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00436

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schiff

Padilla

Schiff

H22JAPT2

H/S

H

H/S

January 22, 2026

H1789

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Fire
Department

Los Angeles County Fire
Station 8 Replacement

CA

500,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Hollywood Active Transportation Improvements

CA

250,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Greater Wilshire Street Repairs and Safety Upgrades

CA

850,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Contra Costa County Library

Bay Point Library

CA

2,000,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Long Beach Community
College District

Childcare Development
Center Rehabilitation

CA

1,500,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

California State University
Long Beach, Research
Foundation (CSULB Research Foundation)

Long Beach Research Center and Special Collections Archives Development and Construction

CA

2,175,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bell Gardens

Ford Park Gym And Community Building Renovation

CA

250,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cudahy

Lugo Park Facilities Rehabilitation

CA

500,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Downey

Downey Downtown Development and Revitalization

CA

1,000,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Downey

Rio San Gabriel Park Facilities Upgrades

CA

250,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Signal Hill

Walnut Bluff Workforce Affordable Housing, Community Facility, and Outdoor Facilities—Development, Construction and
Equipment

CA

2,000,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Maywood

Maywood Teen Center

CA

850,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Admiral Kidd Park Improvements

CA

750,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Colorado Lagoon and Marina Vista Park

CA

850,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Broadway Improvements

CA

850,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Washington Neighborhood
Youth Center Facility Development and Construction

CA

250,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bellflower

Simms Park Community
Center Renovation
Project

CA

250,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Development Authority

Nueva Maravilla Extreme
Heat Measures—Cooling
Equipment and Installation

CA

1,200,000

Gomez

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of California Department of Parks and
Recreation

Bowtie State Park Enhanced Welcome Center

CA

2,000,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Air Conditioners at Estrada
Courts

CA

2,000,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Ramona Gardens Air Conditioners

CA

2,000,000

Gomez

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00437

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Padilla, Schiff

H22JAPT2

H

H1790

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Project Homekey Transitional Housing Hotel
Conversion

CA

850,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Clark Residence

CA

850,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Fast Tracking Affordable
Housing in El Sereno

CA

850,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mountains Recreation and
Conservation Authority
(MRCA)

Elyria Canyon Park Wildfire
Education and Workforce
Development Community
Center Improvements

CA

500,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Benjamin Franklin Library
Renovations Phase II

CA

500,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Union Towers, The View at
Soto, and Ramona Gardens Computer Lab Renovations and Technology
Upgrades

CA

850,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mendota

Mendota Community Center
Project

CA

2,000,000

Gray

Padilla

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Modesto

City of Modesto Fire Station
#1 Rehabilitation

CA

850,000

Gray

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Joaquin

County Service Area 44—
Sewer Treatment Consolidation and Infrastructure Improvements

CA

1,000,000

Gray

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Merced

Bear Creek Infrastructure
and Flood Protection

CA

3,150,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Madera

City of Madera Avenue 13
Sewer Rehabilitation,
Phase III

CA

2,000,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Fresno

Biola Community Sidewalk
and Lighting Upgrades

CA

230,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Huron

Huron Avenue Improvements

CA

850,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Fresno

Caruthers Complete Streets

CA

250,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Madera

Courthouse Park Renovation
Phase 3 Project

CA

250,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Merced

Childs Avenue and Canal
Street Roadway and Active Transportation Safety Improvements in
South Merced, California

CA

850,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Byron Bethany Irrigation
District

Wicklund Cut Water Supply
Reliability Improvements

CA

3,000,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South San Joaquin County
Fire Authority

South San Joaquin County
Fire Authority (SSJCFA)
Regional Fire Training
Facility

CA

2,000,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Joaquin Delta Community College District

Cyber Innovation Hub Facility Development and
Construction

CA

850,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Joaquin

San Joaquin County Food
Security Hub Facility Expansion

CA

1,150,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Manteca

Animal Shelter Enhancement Project

CA

850,000

Harder

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00438

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1791

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
County of San Joaquin

French Camp Crossings

CA

500,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Joaquin

San Joaquin County’s Be
Well Campus

CA

250,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Marin

Fairfax-San Anselmo Children’s Center Safety Upgrades

CA

850,000

Huffman

Padilla

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Marin

Point Reyes Workforce
Housing Development
and Construction

CA

2,000,000

Huffman

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sonoma County

Spud Point-Bodega Bay
Ice-Making Plant

CA

1,200,000

Huffman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marin County Public Financing Authority

Oak Hill Workforce Housing

CA

250,000

Huffman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Barona Group of the Capitan Grande Band of Mission Indians of the
Barona Reservation

Water Infrastructure Improvements

CA

1,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Miguel Consolidated
Fire Protection District

Fire Station 19 Construction

CA

1,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Cajon

Community Outreach Center
Reconstruction, Improvements, and Installation
Project

CA

1,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Diego

Expanding Affordable Child
Care Facilities

CA

2,000,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego State University

Child Care Facility for
Former Foster Youth

CA

1,500,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Housing Commission

Linda Vista Affordable
Housing—Via Las
Cumbres Redevelopment

CA

2,000,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego State University

Child Care for Children
with Disabilities

CA

1,000,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego County Office of
Education

Linda Vista Innovation Center Support

CA

850,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Unified School
District

Mobile Washer and Dryer
Units for Homeless San
Diegans

CA

850,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Miguel Consolidated
Fire Protection District

San Miguel Aerial Apparatus

CA

500,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Cajon

El Cajon Emergency Operations Center Development and Construction

CA

250,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Diego

Safe Sleeping Pilot Program
Site Expansion

CA

1,200,000

Jacobs, Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Inside Safe Program—Acquisition and Capital
Improvements

CA

850,000

Kamlager-Dove

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Culver City

Culver City Crossroads
Community Connector—
Active Transportation Infrastructure Improvements

CA

1,000,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Blackwelder Community
Greenbelt

CA

200,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00439

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Padilla

H22JAPT2

H

H1792

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles Department of Military and
Veterans Affairs

Veteran Wellness Facility

CA

250,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Urban Awnings

CA

850,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Culver City

Jubilo Village Affordable
Housing Construction

CA

850,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Vermont Ave. and Manchester Ave.—Infrastructure Improvements

CA

500,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Broadway Sur: Transportation Safety Improvements and Community
Development

CA

250,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Pueblo Del Rio Housing
Units Climate Control
Upgrades

CA

250,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County

South LA Community Food
Hall Facility Redevelopment

CA

250,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Clara

Restoration of Emergency
Shelter and Transitional
Housing for Homeless
Veterans

CA

3,150,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Milpitas Unified School District

MUSD Workforce Development Center

CA

500,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fremont

Automall Pkwy Median
Project

CA

850,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Berryessa Union School
District

Berryessa Youth Center
Renovation and Improvements Project

CA

250,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South Lake Tahoe

Lake Tahoe Boulevard
Apartments

CA

1,000,000

Kiley

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mission Viejo

Oso Creek Trail Accessibility Improvement
Project

CA

500,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orange

Fire Station 3 Improvement
Project

CA

1,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County Fire Authority

Mission Viejo Fire Station
#9 Renovation

CA

1,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Laguna Hills

Citywide Intersection Safety
Enhancements

CA

1,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santiago Canyon College

Classroom Retrofitting

CA

1,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Marysville

Site Cleanup and Preparation

CA

3,500,000

LaMalfa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southern Cascades Community Services District

Emergency Services Enhancement Project

CA

2,605,000

LaMalfa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Clemente

Mariposa Walkway and
Coastal Trail Improvement Project, San
Clemente, CA

CA

3,000,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vista

Vista’s New Navigation
Center Facility

CA

850,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vista

Emerald Drive Complete
Streets Project, Vista, CA

CA

2,000,000

Levin

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00440

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schiff

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1793

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dana Point

Coast Highway Sidewalk
Improvements and
Streetscaping, Dana
Point, CA

CA

850,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Oceanside

Pier View Bridge, Oceanside, CA

CA

2,000,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Solana Beach

Glencrest Safe Routes to
School Infrastructure Improvements

CA

500,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mountain View

Evelyn Avenue Affordable
Housing Redevelopment

CA

2,000,000

Liccardo

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Mateo

Mirada Road Resiliency
Project

CA

850,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Los Gatos

West Valley Mobile Navigation Center Van Acquisition and Upgrades

CA

200,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Jose

Seismic and Climate Resiliency Rental Unit Preservation

CA

2,000,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pacifica School District

Pacifica School District
Workforce Housing
Project

CA

2,000,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Palo Alto

Fire Station #4

CA

850,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Half Moon Bay

Eastside Parallel Trail, Segment 2

CA

250,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palos Verdes Peninsula
Unified School District

Miraleste Intermediate
School Modernization
Project

CA

2,000,000

Lieu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles Housing
Department

Hotel to Homes Conversion

CA

850,000

Lieu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Redondo Beach

Affordable Housing Acquisition to Lease Project

CA

250,000

Lieu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of California, Los
Angeles

EV Buses Project

CA

250,000

Lieu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Soledad

City of Soledad Streetscape
Enhancement Project

CA

250,000

Lofgren

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of King City

City of King City Downtown
Streetscape

CA

850,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Clara

Agricultural Resource Center Development

CA

850,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Benito County Office of
Education

Renewable Energy Infrastructure and Improvements

CA

850,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Monterey

Salinas Regional Soccer
Complex Expansion

CA

500,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hartnell Community College
District

Hartnell College Child Development Center Outdoor Learning Environment Renovation

CA

250,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gonzales

Dennis and Janice Caprara
Community Center Complex

CA

250,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Cruz, Department of Parks

Watsonville Veterans Hall

CA

1,200,000

Lofgren

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00441

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Padilla, Schiff

Padilla

H22JAPT2

H

H

H1794

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sacramento

Sacramento Stitch Park
Riverfront Reconnection
Project

CA

3,150,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

California State University,
Sacramento

Downtown Campus Revitalization and Expansion

CA

2,000,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Sacramento

Mosaic Village Housing and
Community Development
Campus

CA

2,000,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Sacramento

Florin Safe Stay Community
Facility Project

CA

1,000,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cosumnes Community Services District

William Perry Schulze Fire
Training Center Improvements

CA

250,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of California,
Davis

UC Davis MIND Institute Intellectual/Developmental
Disability (IDD) Workforce Development
Project

CA

500,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sacramento

Wah Avenue Homeownership Housing Development

CA

250,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Laguna Beach

South Laguna Beach Fire
Station Replacement

CA

850,000

Min

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Irvine

Center of Innovation and
Entrepreneurship Development and Construction

CA

1,000,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Orange

Newport Harbor Facility and
Infrastructure Renovations

CA

2,000,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Costa Mesa

Costa Mesa Senior Center
Renovation, Roof, and
HVAC Replacement

CA

250,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newport Beach

Balboa Branch Library and
Fire Station #1 Replacement

CA

850,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Golden West College

Facilities Reconstruction
and Improvements

CA

500,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Huntington Beach

Huntington Beach Navigation Center Renovation
and Upgrades

CA

850,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of San
Francisco

Visitacion Valley Family
Center Improvements

CA

959,982

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Mateo

City of San Mateo Lakeshore Community Day
Care Center

CA

1,200,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South San Francisco

South San Francisco
Westborough Early Childhood Education Center

CA

850,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of San
Francisco

San Francisco Crocker
Amazon Playground—
Purple Playground
Project

CA

250,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Barstow

Barstow Route 66 Main
Street Rehabilitation for
Tourism and Highway
Circulation

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Crestline Village Water District

Water Efficiency and Infrastructure Update

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Redlands

Public Safety Hall Construction

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00442

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Padilla

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1795

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Jose

Yerba Buena Bridge Reconstruction

CA

2,000,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Jose

Guadalupe River Trail Construction and Expansion

CA

1,000,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Atascadero

Atascadero Police Station
Improvements Project

CA

850,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Seaside

San Pablo Bridge Project

CA

850,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paso Robles

Pine Street Affordable
Housing

CA

850,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Jose

Traffic and Road Safety
Improvements in South
San Jose

CA

500,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Capitola

Capitola Traffic Safety Improvements

CA

250,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Clara

Martial Cottle Park Improvements Project

CA

250,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Cruz

Santa Cruz Wharf Resilience and Rehabilitation
Project

CA

3,150,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Department
of Homelessness and
Supportive Housing

Jerrold Commons Site and
Facility Upgrades

CA

2,000,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Municipal
Transportation Agency

San Francisco MTA Transit
Stop Lighting Infrastructure

CA

1,200,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Recreation
and Park Department

Blue Heron Boathouse Replacement and Expansion

CA

850,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Office of
Employment and Workforce Development

CityBuild Facility Acquisition, Development and
Improvements

CA

850,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Department
of Homelessness and
Supportive Housing

San Francisco SafeHouse
Facility Renovations

CA

850,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Department
of Disability and Aging
Services

Self-Help for the Elderly
Safe Passage Program—Vehicles Acquisition

CA

850,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Office of
Economic and Workforce
Development

Code Tenderloin’s Workforce
Facility Development and
Construction

CA

500,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Office of
Economic and Workforce
Development

Treasure Island Job Corps
Facility Modernization
and Redevelopment

CA

250,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Department
of Disability and Aging
Services

Home for Good—Housing
Development and Construction

CA

250,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Franciso Bay Area
Rapid Transit (BART)

BART LED Lighting Replacement

CA

250,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Francisco

772 Pacific Avenue Community and Housing Development Project

CA

250,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Escondido

Downtown Escondido Economic Development
Project

CA

1,000,000

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Marcos

Mission Road Lighting Upgrades

CA

850,000

Peters

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00443

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1796

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Marcos

City of San Marcos Comprehensive Park Restroom Upgrades

CA

500,000

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Diego

La Jolla Streetscape

CA

850,000

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of San Diego

B Street and Broadway
Piers—Above Pier Infrastructure Repairs and
Upgrades

CA

250,000

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Fire
Department

Los Angeles County Fire
Department’s Pacoima
Warehouse Renovation

CA

968,000

Rivas

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles Mission College

Los Angeles Mission College’s Pacoima Center
Land Acquisition Project

CA

2,000,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles, Council
District 7

City of Los Angeles’s
Sylmar Fire Station
(FS31)

CA

850,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles, Council
District 6

City of Los Angeles’s
Pacoima Wash Bridges
Safety Mitigation

CA

850,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Parthenia Place Computer
Lab Renovation and
Tech Upgrade Project

CA

750,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Housing Authority of Los
Angeles’s San Fernando
Gardens Housing’s Energy Efficiency Project

CA

850,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles, Council
District 6

City of Los Angeles’ Wakefield Sidewalk Improvements

CA

250,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles, Council
District 6

City of Los Angeles’
Parthenia Place Median
Improvements

CA

250,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brawley

Main Street Rehabilitation
and Water Main Extension Project

CA

850,000

Ruiz

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Imperial

Community Regional Park
Project

CA

1,500,000

Ruiz

Schiff

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Desert Recreation District

Air Filtration Improvements
at Critical Community
Facilities in the
Coachella Valley

CA

850,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Coachella Valley Public
Cemetery District

Road Rehabilitation Project

CA

1,000,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Calexico

Heber Park Expansion
Project

CA

500,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Holtville

City of Holtville Public
Safety Building

CA

2,000,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Mirada

City of La Mirada Neff Park
Infrastructure Improvements

CA

1,500,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Whittier

Broadband Infrastructure
Expansion

CA

250,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pico Rivera

Durfee Avenue Community
Center Development and
Construction

CA

850,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Walnut

Suzanne Park Improvements

CA

1,200,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Downey

Water Treatment Plant
North

CA

250,000

Sánchez

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00444

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Padilla

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1797

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norwalk

Holifield Park Parking Lot
Site Development and
Construction

CA

500,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montebello

City of Montebello Fire Department Brush Fire Station Development and
Construction

CA

1,000,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Walnut Valley Water District

Emergency Operations Center (EOC) Equipment Acquisition

CA

850,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Fe Springs

River Parcel Passive Park
Redevelopment

CA

850,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Habra Heights

Park and Gymnasium Improvements, Renovations, and Equipment

CA

250,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Department of Military and
Veterans Affairs

The West Los Angeles VA
Modular Home Construction

CA

850,000

Sherman

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles Pierce College

The Community Engagement & Enrichment Center at LA Pierce College

CA

250,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles City Fire Department

Los Angeles Fire Department Station Renovations

CA

2,000,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Southwest Valley Park Improvements

CA

850,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles Department of Economic
Opportunity

Labor Community Services
Food Bank Equipment
and Facility Upgrades

CA

1,200,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Grancell Village Affordable
Senior Housing Development and Construction

CA

850,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Oakland

Brooklyn Basin Blight Removal and Shoreline Improvements

CA

250,000

Simon

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Oakland

Capital Improvements for
Core Service Providers

CA

250,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Emeryville

40th Street Multimodal Infrastructure Improvements

CA

500,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Berkeley

East Bay Regional Fire
Training Facility

CA

850,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Peralta Community College
District

Peralta Community College
District (PCCD) Manufacturing and Fabrication Pathway (FabLab)

CA

250,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albany

East Bay Regional Fire
Training Center Development and Construction

CA

250,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Berkeley

Adeline Complete Street
and Ashby BART Transit
Plaza

CA

850,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Union City

Fire Equipment Enhancements

CA

850,000

Swalwell

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Union City

Safer Streets with Enhanced Lighting Replacements

CA

250,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Livermore

Open Heart Food Bank Expansion

CA

226,026

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Livermore

Aviation and Manufacturing
Workforce Igniter

CA

1,200,000

Swalwell

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00445

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schiff

Padilla, Schiff

Padilla

H22JAPT2

H

H

H

H1798

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pleasanton

West Las Positas
Multimodal Improvement
Project

CA

250,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Alameda County Community
Development Agency

Improved Broadband Access in Downtown Castro
Valley

CA

500,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dublin

Sunflower Hill at Grace
Pointe

CA

2,000,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Alameda County Community
Development Agency

Sunol Downtown Revitalization Plan Implementation

CA

500,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Perris

Fire Safety Project

CA

850,000

Takano

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Riverside

Northside Agriculture Innovation Center

CA

250,000

Takano

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Riverside Community College District

Riverside Community College District Community
Sites

CA

500,000

Takano

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Moreno Valley

Business and Employment
Resource Center Expansion

CA

850,000

Takano

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vacaville

Solano-Napa Habitat for
Humanity Harmony Village Affordable Housing

CA

250,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sonoma County Community
Development Commission

Tierra de Rosas Public
Plaza, Park Furnishings
and Equipment

CA

250,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Yountville

Yountville Resiliency

CA

250,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winters Joint Unified School
District

Winters JUSD Facility Modernization and Equipment

CA

850,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habematolel Pomo of Upper
Lake

Habematolel Pomo of Upper
Lake Community Center

CA

3,150,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of American Canyon

Napa River Ecology Center
Project

CA

2,000,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Eastvale

Eastvale Library & Innovation Center

CA

3,100,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fontana

Cypress Grove Supportive
Housing

CA

2,000,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chino

Chino Valley Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Center

CA

2,000,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ontario

City of Ontario Vista Verde
II

CA

1,000,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Bernardino

County of San Bernardino
Crisis Response Unit Rehabilitation

CA

1,100,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montclair

City of Montclair Fire Department Tractor Tiller
Truck Acquisition

CA

850,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ontario

City of Ontario ‘‘The Hub
on Holt’’ Facility Construction and Revitalization

CA

1,000,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Palma

City of La Palma—Public
Safety Center

CA

850,000

Tran

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00446

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schiff

Padilla

H22JAPT2

H

H

January 22, 2026

H1799

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fountain Valley

City of Fountain Valley Fire
Station 1

CA

2,000,000

Tran

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County Housing Finance Trust

Orange County Housing Finance Trust Construction
of Affordable Housing
Units

CA

250,000

Tran

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Westminster

Westminster Community
Service and Senior Center Building Renovations

CA

1,000,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County Mosquito &
Vector Control District

Orange County Mosquito &
Vector Control District
Infrastructure Improvements

CA

500,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Garden Grove

City of Garden Grove—Fire
Station 84 Retrofits

CA

1,000,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Buena Park Library District

Buena Park Library District—Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing
Modernization

CA

850,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Placentia

City of Placentia—Old
Town Infrastructure Improvements

CA

250,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
County of Kern

Bakersfield Senior Center
Affordable Housing &
Facility Construction

CA

7,575,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Delano

Water Plant No. 6 Blending
Tank Project

CA

8,145,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Association of
Governments

San Ysidro Transit Center
Improvements

CA

3,150,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chula Vista

Palomar Motel—Permanent
Supportive Housing

CA

1,000,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of National City

El Toyon Multipurpose Community Center

CA

850,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bonita Sunnyside Fire Protection District

New Bonita Fire Engine

CA

850,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southwestern Community
College District

Sustainable Infrastructure
at Southwestern College

CA

850,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego County Water
Authority

Moosa Canyon Pipeline
Project

CA

250,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Unified Port District

Marina Way Road Realignment

CA

1,200,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Community College District

Utility and Water Improvements at San Diego College of Continuing Education—Phase 2

CA

500,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Diego

Tijuana River Revitalization

CA

1,000,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles
(HACLA)

HACLA Digital Equity & Infrastructure Renewal for
South LA Public Housing

CA

3,150,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gardena

Mas Fukai Park Renovation
Project

CA

1,000,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hawthorne

Hawthorne Civic Park Development and Construction

CA

850,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Torrance

Torrance Community Parks
Accessibility Improvements

CA

850,000

Waters

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00447

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1800

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Compton Community College

Compton College Facilities
Improvements

CA

1,200,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Compton

Compton Public Works Corp
Yard Rehabilitation

CA

250,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Algin Sutton Restroom Replacement Project

CA

500,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Fire
Department

Los Angeles County Fire
Station 81 Replacement

CA

1,000,000

Whitesides

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santa Clarita Community
College District, College
of the Canyons

Renovations and Expansion
for Community College
Student Basic Needs
Center

CA

850,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lancaster

National Soccer Center
Safety Lighting Upgrades

CA

850,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Cerrito

Community HousingWorks
Development

CA

3,000,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles House of Ruth

Sister Cedars Senior Housing

CA

815,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Diego

San Diego Homeless Shelter

CA

1,000,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The People Concern

The Village Renovation
Project

CA

1,000,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Del Norte

Veterans Memorial Hall Improvements Project

CA

1,500,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Salinas

Salinas Firefighter Training
Tower Facility

CA

2,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles Department of Parks and
Recreation

Charles White Park Community Resilience Project

CA

1,682,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Merced Community College
District

Project FIRE (First-Responder Instruction and
Regional Education)
Training Facility

CA

1,500,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of Kern
County

Life & Workforce Readiness
Center

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yosemite Community College District

Construction of a Regional
Fire Training Center

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fresno Housing

Downtown Fresno Affordable Housing Development

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montclair

Montclair Community Park

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Larkin Street Youth Services

Capital Improvements to
Benefit Youth Experiencing Homelessness

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Neighborhood Housing
Services of Los Angeles
County

Wildfire Relief and Home
Repair

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jurupa Valley

School of Nursing Building

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Aurora

Aurora Fire Rescue Fire Apparatus Acquisition

CO

850,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00448

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Crow

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schiff

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1801

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arapahoe County

High Line Canal Safety and
Accessibility Improvements

CO

850,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Aurora

Fire Flashover Simulator
Acquisition

CO

250,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arapahoe County

Arapahoe County Supportive
Housing

CO

1,000,000

Crow

Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arapahoe County School
District #6

LPS Elementary Schools
Playground and Facilities
Upgrades

CO

1,000,000

Crow

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community College of Aurora

CCA Center for Applied
Science and Technology—Expanding Critical Workforce Training
Equipment Acquisition

CO

919,000

Crow

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Adams Arapahoe School
District 28J

APS Sixth Avenue Elementary School Renovation
and Expansion

CO

469,000

Crow

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Adams Arapahoe School
District 28J

Aurora Public Schools Sable
Child Development Center Revitalization and
Expansion

CO

851,000

Crow

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Denver

Central Utility Plant Critical
Infrastructure

CO

1,200,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Denver

Shelter for People Experiencing Homelessness

CO

2,000,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Denver

Electrification, Energy Efficiency, and Resiliency
Improvements

CO

1,000,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Denver

Energy Efficiency Improvements at Public Facilities

CO

850,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Colorado Coalition for
the Homeless

Renaissance at Civic Center Apartments

CO

5,000,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City and County of Denver, CO

655 Broadway Windows Replacements

CO

2,000,000

DeGette

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community College of Denver

Lower Downtown Denver
Campus Expansion Development

CO

850,000

DeGette

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Thornton

Northstar Neighborhood Mobility Improvements

CO

1,000,000

Evans (CO)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Aims Community College

Oil and Gas Demonstration
Wellhead Project

CO

1,197,000

Evans (CO)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mead

Weld County Road 7 Paving
Project—Mead to Berthoud

CO

1,000,000

Evans (CO)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Westminster Public Schools

Expanding Quantum Workforce by Creating Advanced Manufacturing
Pathways

CO

1,000,000

Evans (CO)

Bennet

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Colorado State University

Agricultural Facility Improvements

CO

1,000,000

Hurd

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Colorado Northwestern
Community College

Rangely Airport Terminal
Hangar/Lab Renovation

CO

643,000

Hurd

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Upper Pine River Special
Fire District

Upper Pine River Community Room Construction

CO

1,000,000

Hurd

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00449

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Bennet

Bennet

H22JAPT2

H

H

H1802

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Patrick A. Lucero Public Library

Renovations and Expansion

CO

500,000

Hurd

Bennet

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Summit County Sheriff’s
Office

Pine Cove Ranger Station
Facility Development and
Construction

CO

1,129,322

Neguse

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Boulder

East Boulder Community
Center Improvements

CO

1,000,000

Neguse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Colorado Mountain College

Colorado Mountain College
Trades Center, CO

CO

250,000

Neguse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Larimer County Sheriff’s
Office

Larimer County Sheriff’s
Office Emergency Operations Center, CO

CO

850,000

Neguse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lakewood

The Commons at Emory Facility Expansion

CO

1,500,000

Pettersen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Foothills Regional Housing

Senior Affordable Housing—Demolition, Development and Construction

CO

850,000

Pettersen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Eagle County Government

Housing Energy Independence Project

CO

585,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NeighborWorks Southern
Colorado

Pikes Peak Park Affordable
Homeownership Project

CO

3,743,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Steamboat Springs

Childcare and Workforce
Housing Site Work
Project

CO

1,300,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Saguache County

Energy Independence
Project

CO

1,041,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Paradox Community Trust

Ouray County Affordable
Housing Neighborhood

CO

1,462,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harrison School District 2

Bricker Community Schoolyard Project

CO

1,500,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northwest Colorado Innovation Center

Northwest Colorado Innovation Center Building

CO

1,050,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Urban Peak

Housing for Youth Experiencing Homelessness

CO

3,078,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

La Puente Home, Inc.

PALs Childcare Facility

CO

750,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Food Bank of the Rockies

Food Bank Delivery Vehicles
and Equipment

CO

920,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Weld Food Bank

Food Rescue and Distribution Project

CO

400,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dream Centers of Colorado
Springs

Dream Centers Early Care
and Education Center

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Fraser

St. Louis Landing Community Housing and Early
Childhood Education
Center

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

La Plata Economic Development Alliance

Bayfield Early Childcare
Center

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

CARE Communities

Heartside Hill Early Childhood Education & Community Center

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00450

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1803

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Carbondale

Carbondale Affordable
Housing

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

We Fortify

Colorado Springs Affordable
Housing for Teachers

CO

1,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

TEENS, Inc.

Nederland Early Childhood
Education Center

CO

1,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Commún Denver Inc.

Loretto Heights Community
Center

CO

1,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stonington

Pawcatuck Village Community Park

CT

850,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New London

New London Addition to
Early Childhood Center
at B.P. Mission

CT

850,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of Connecticut Department of Housing

Colchester Country Place
Housing Upgrades

CT

2,000,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Vernon

Rehabilitation of the Rockville Public Library

CT

1,200,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Thompson

Town of Thompson Blighted
Property Reuse for Economic Development

CT

732,007

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Vernon

Town of Vernon Daniel’s
Mill Remediation and
Renovation

CT

250,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hebron

Hebron Church Street Housing Rehabilitation

CT

250,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norwich

Public Dock Replacement
at Howard Brown Park

CT

600,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New Haven

Westville Manor Redevelopment

CT

2,000,000

DeLauro

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Naugatuck

Borough of Naugatuck
Connectivity & Transit
Oriented Development
Project—Phase II Pedestrian Bridge

CT

2,500,000

DeLauro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Woodmont

Borough of Woodmont—
Stormwater Outlet Structure

CT

750,000

DeLauro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southern Connecticut State
University

The Hive at Southern: Community-Based Innovation, Sustainability, and
Emerging Technologies

CT

2,254,329

DeLauro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Southbury

Southbury Public Library
Restoration and Infrastructure Improvements

CT

1,500,000

Hayes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Connecticut State
University

Central Connecticut Workforce and Innovation
Hub

CT

850,000

Hayes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Thomaston

Seth Thomas Park Revitalization

CT

850,000

Hayes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Stamford

Glenbrook Community Center Rehabilitation and
Upgrades

CT

250,000

Himes

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Stamford d/b/a
Charter Oak Communities

Oak Park Phase 2

CT

2,000,000

Himes

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00451

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Blumenthal, Murphy

Blumenthal, Murphy

H

H

H

H22JAPT2

H1804

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Park City Communities

Beardsley Street Housing
Reconstruction and Development

CT

1,100,000

Himes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Ridgefield

Venus Building Complex
Parking Lot & Pedestrian
Improvements

CT

1,000,000

Himes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bridgeport

Bridgeport Police Headquarters Design

CT

850,000

Himes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of East Hartford Fire
Department

Town of East Hartford Fire
Station 2

CT

850,000

Larson

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bristol Fire and Police Department

Bristol Fire and Police Department CPAT and
ASHER Training Facility

CT

3,150,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of East Hartford

Hockanum Linear Park Trail
Improvements

CT

2,000,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of East Hartford

Infrastructure Improvements to Downtown
Main and Church Corners/Center Cemetery
National Historic Districts

CT

2,000,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Goodwin University Educational Services (GUES)

Goodwin University CTRA
Magnet Middle School
Building Construction

CT

250,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hartford

City of Hartford Road
Phase of Hartline Project

CT

1,200,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hartford

Hartford Public Library
(HPL) Downtown Location
Restoration and Renovation

CT

500,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hartland

Inclusive Playground Development and Construction

CT

250,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hartford Department
of Public Works

North Main Street Drainage
Improvements

CT

250,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Britain Housing Authority

Redevelopment of Public
Housing

CT

4,325,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mercy Learning Center of
Bridgeport, Inc.

HVAC System Replacement

CT

877,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Curtis Home

Campus Renovation

CT

1,100,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Health Resources

Affordable Supportive Housing

CT

2,740,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

HOPE Partnership

Construction of the William
F. Palmer Site

CT

1,406,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Norwalk

Construction of Affordable
Housing

CT

1,020,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Goshen Housing Trust, Inc.

Accessible Affordable Housing

CT

550,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Housing Collective

Fairfield County Coordinated Access Network
Housing Stability Program

CT

600,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Juan Center, Inc.

Construction of El Pocito
Dulce Residences

CT

1,050,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00452

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Blumenthal, Murphy

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1805

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

H.O.P.E., Inc.

Affordable Housing Renovations

CT

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Beulah Land Development
Corporation

Dixwell Redevelopment Affordable Housing Initiative

CT

2,638,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Forge City Works

Culinary Training Center

CT

900,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ledge Light Health District

The Place for CommUNITY
Wellbeing

CT

675,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

American Legion Post 17

Facility Renovations

CT

400,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Warren Affordable Housing
Corporation

Affordable Housing

CT

800,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

National Veterans Council
for Legal Redress Inc.

Veterans Living Community
Initiative

CT

1,862,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mercy Housing and Shelter
Corporation

Facility Improvements

CT

1,500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Cornerstone Foundation, Inc.

Facility Renovations

CT

1,332,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Way of Greater New
Haven

State & Chapel Affordable
Housing

CT

1,500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northeastern Connecticut
Community Development
Corporation

Renovations to Senior LowIncome Housing Facility

CT

484,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Britain Museum of
American Art

Facilities Reinvestment

CT

2,611,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rivera Memorial Foundation, Inc.

Rehabilitation Project

CT

600,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Thames Valley Council for
Community Action Inc.

Expansion of Early Childhood Education Center
in New London

CT

450,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Keeping North Stonington
Affordable, Inc.

Main Street Housing

CT

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Neighborhood Housing
Services of Waterbury
DBA NEST

Property Acquisition

CT

250,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Vincent de Paul Middletown, Inc.

Construction of St. Vincent’s Commons

CT

1,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hilliard-Jones-Cookson
American Legion Post 66

Facility Renovations

CT

1,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

District of Columbia

Lederer Gardens Facility
Improvements

DC

850,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

District of Columbia

Duke Ellington Park

DC

850,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

District of Columbia

Riggs & South Dakota Triangle Park Upgrades

DC

600,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

District of Columbia

Carver Langston Park Upgrades

DC

500,000

Norton

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00453

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1806

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of the District of
Columbia

University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) Research Facility Infrastructure Upgrades

DC

2,000,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of the District of
Columbia

University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) Firebird
Farm Infrastructure Upgrades

DC

1,200,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of the District of
Columbia

University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) Food
Hubs Infrastructure Upgrades

DC

2,000,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of the District of
Columbia

University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) Aviation
Maintenance Facility Infrastructure Upgrades

DC

1,000,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Magnolia

Town of Magnolia Water
Storage Tower Infrastructure Improvements

DE

1,200,000

McBride

Blunt Rochester

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of Delaware Criminal
Justice Council

Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of Delaware’s
Family Justice Centers

DE

2,600,000

McBride

Blunt Rochester

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Castle County Vocational Technical School
District

Workforce Development at
the Delaware Skills Center and New Castle
County Vo-Tech Adult
Education Division Facility Acquisition and Renovations

DE

1,000,000

McBride

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Capital City Transformation
Alliance, Inc.

Downtown Redevelopment
Project

DE

500,000

Blunt Rochester

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Children’s Beach House

Capital Improvements

DE

500,000

Blunt Rochester

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

REACH Riverside Development Corporation

Affordable Housing Development

DE

5,284,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West End Neighborhood
House, Inc.

Neighborhood and Housing
Development

DE

3,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Interfaith Community Housing of Delaware, Inc.

Affordable Housing Development and Revitalization

DE

2,500,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Delaware Affordable Housing Group, Inc.

Affordable Housing Renovation and Development

DE

2,500,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Children And Families First
Delaware, Inc.

Seaford House Renovation
and Expansion

DE

632,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Police Athletic League of
Wilmington

Wilmington Education Resource Center

DE

3,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Delaware HIV Services, Inc.

Delaware Housing Assistance Program

DE

300,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Anthony’s Housing for
the Elderly, Corp.

Capital Improvements

DE

600,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Castle County

New Castle County Hope
Center Capital Improvements

DE

2,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Todmorden Foundation

Affordable Housing Development and Preservation

DE

2,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Latin American Community
Center

Early Learning Center

DE

1,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
New Castle County

Empowerment through Affordable Housing

DE

1,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00454

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1807

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wilmington Neighborhood
Land Bank

Affordable Housing Acquisition and Rehabilitation

DE

500,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Better Homes of Seaford

Affordable Housing Development

DE

716,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Friendship House, Inc.

Housing Development and
Renovations

DE

1,585,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Green Beret Project

Capital Improvements and
Expansion

DE

300,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Delaware

Capital Improvements

DE

1,915,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Education
Building Corporation

Capital Improvements

DE

5,000,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Milford Housing Development Corporation

Affordable Housing Development

DE

750,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Delaware Habitat
for Humanity, Inc.

Affordable Housing in Central Delaware

DE

1,008,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NeighborGood Partners

Affordable Housing Development

DE

2,000,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ministry of Caring, Inc.

Affordable Housing Development and Renovations

DE

2,000,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sussex County Habitat for
Humanity

Southern Delaware Affordable Housing Development

DE

1,000,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

School District of Hernando
County, Florida

Hernando County Incubation Center

FL

1,000,000

Bilirakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pasco County

Affordable Supportive Housing for Seniors

FL

4,000,000

Bilirakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of South Florida

Center for Entrepreneurship

FL

3,000,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Manatee County

Gateway Greenway Rails to
Trails

FL

1,500,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Manatee County

Veterans Service Center

FL

2,800,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bradenton

Stormwater Facilities

FL

3,000,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Holmes Beach

Spine Flood Improvements

FL

1,500,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of St. Petersburg

Ed White Senior Housing
Redevelopment

FL

3,150,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Petersburg College
(grants accepted under
‘‘Board of Trustees of St.
Petersburg College’’)

SMART Tech Industry 4.0
Lab

FL

850,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tampa Housing Authority

Robles Park Village Critical
Infrastructure Upgrades

FL

1,200,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hillsborough Community
College

Hillsborough Community
College Training Center
Facility

FL

250,000

Castor

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00455

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1808

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hillsborough County Public
Schools

HCPS Family Community
Center Expansion and
Equipment

FL

2,000,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hillsborough County Public
Schools

Chamberlain High School
Technical Training Center Development and
Construction

FL

250,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of South Florida

Veterans, Military Families,
and First Responder
Services Complex

FL

3,000,000

Castor, Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Collier County

Veterans Community Center

FL

9,000,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Everglades City

Everglades City Community
Center

FL

7,200,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Miami Lakes

Miami Lakes Big Cypress
Drainage Improvements

FL

973,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hialeah

City of Hialeah Southeast
Stormwater Improvements

FL

4,900,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Fort Myers Beach

Stormwater and Utilities
Improvements

FL

3,000,000

Donalds

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bonita Springs

Rosemary Drive Stormwater
Drainage and Pedestrian
Safety Project

FL

2,000,000

Donalds

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Panama City-Bay County
Airport and Industrial
District

Northwest Florida Beaches
International (ECP)—
North Access Road

FL

2,000,000

Dunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tallahassee

Tallahassee International
Airport (TLH) Improvements

FL

2,850,000

Dunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Panama City Beach

Potable Water Redundancy
Improvements—Phase 2

FL

2,000,000

Dunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Panama City

Area Q/R–1: Critical Infrastructure Improvements

FL

2,000,000

Dunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Delray Beach

Palm Beach County, Critical Infrastructure Improvements

FL

1,450,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Palm Beach

Fern Street Extension and
Rail Safety Project

FL

2,000,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake Worth Beach Community Redevelopment
Agency

Lake Worth Beach Affordable Housing Program

FL

850,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Palm Beach

Dreher Park Water Quality
and Habitat Restoration

FL

1,000,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palm Beach State College

Palm Beach State College
Quantum Computing
Center Facility Development and Construction

FL

2,050,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bowling Green

Wastewater Treatment Facility Advanced Wastewater Treatment Improvements

FL

4,987,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Moore Haven

Moore Haven Water Plant
Expansion and Improvements

FL

2,000,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wauchula

Wastewater Improvements

FL

1,000,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hendry County

Hendry Country CR 78
Roadway Improvements

FL

1,000,000

Franklin

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00456

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1809

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orlando

Women and Families Homeless Shelter Redevelopment and Construction

FL

3,000,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Winter Park

Tuscany at Aloma Interior
Renovation

FL

1,260,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County, Florida

IDignity Facility Construction

FL

750,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Orlando

Roof Replacements at West
Oaks Apartments

FL

1,200,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Orlando

Villas at Carver Park Elevator and Shower Improvements Project

FL

974,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County, Florida

Orange County Innovation
Center in Pine Hills
Project

FL

850,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orlando, Florida

Lake Eola Park Improvements Project

FL

850,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Orlando

Griffin Park Apartments Redevelopment

FL

850,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Valencia College West
Campus

West Campus Building 7
Roof Replacement

FL

250,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County

Orange County Green
PLACE Environmentally
Sensitive Lands Acquisition Project

FL

850,000

Frost, Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monroe County School District

Historic Reynolds School
Renovation Project

FL

3,000,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami-Dade County

Housing and Community
Development’s Sweetwater Housing Development Project

FL

6,000,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Homestead

Pump Station 11 Upgrades

FL

2,200,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Indian River County

Fellsmere Public Library
and Community Resource Center—Public
Facilities Development

FL

2,000,000

Haridopolos

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lakeland

Fire Station 8 Construction

FL

984,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tampa

City of Tampa Fire Station
#24

FL

3,000,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Petersburg College

Lab Construction

FL

1,000,000

Luna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palm Beach County

Peanut Island Coast Guard
Facility and Kennedy
Presidential Bunker Restoration

FL

1,500,000

Mast

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Indian River State College

Veterans Center Expansion

FL

1,800,000

Mast

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Boca Raton

Jeffrey Street Highway
Grade Crossing Project

FL

2,000,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Parkland

Park Improvements for
Parkland

FL

1,500,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fort Lauderdale

Las Olas Corridor Improvements Project

FL

1,200,000

Moskowitz

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00457

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1810

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palm Beach County

Burt Aaronson South County Regional Park Improvements

FL

850,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Coral Springs

Everglades Memorial Loop
Phase 2

FL

800,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Escambia County

South Navy Boulevard Infrastructure Improvement

FL

3,000,000

Patronis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jacksonville Beach

13th Avenue South Access
Improvements

FL

875,000

Rutherford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kids Hope Alliance

Youth Crisis Center Youth
Multi-Purpose Recreation
Center

FL

534,000

Rutherford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Miami

Senior Activity Center

FL

1,000,000

Salazar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miami

Auburndale Flood Improvements

FL

5,000,000

Salazar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Osceola County

Buenaventura Lakes
Stormwater Project

FL

2,000,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orlando, Florida

Narcoossee Road and Vista
Lake Stormwater Improvements

FL

2,000,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kissimmee

Columbia Avenue Complete
Street Improvements and
Revitalization

FL

1,200,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Belle Isle

Belle Isle Floodwater Mitigation Project

FL

850,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Polk County, Florida

Poinciana Children and Pedestrian Safety Project

FL

850,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tohopekaliga Water Authority

Poinciana Village Water
Main Replacement
Project

FL

250,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Valencia College Osceola
Campus

Valencia College Outdoor
Learning Project

FL

500,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edgewood

Edgewood Pedestrian and
ADA Safety Sidewalk
Project

FL

850,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Osceola County

Oakwood Senior Housing
Construction

FL

850,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami-Dade County

Miami-Dade County Saving
Rosewood

FL

2,000,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fort Lauderdale

City of Fort Lauderdale
Public Safety Complex

FL

1,000,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Broward College

Broward College: Aviation
Training Center Remodel
and Expansion

FL

1,000,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miramar

Pembroke Road Expansion
and Streetscaping

FL

1,050,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Winter Garden

Lake Apopka Shoreline Restoration Project Phase 1

FL

3,000,000

Webster

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miramar

Miramar Youth Center

FL

850,000

Wilson (FL)

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00458

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1811

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miami

Liberty Square Launchpad:
Small Business Incubator

FL

850,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami-Dade County Homeless Trust

Mia Casa Senior Housing
Expansion

FL

250,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miami Beach

City of Miami Beach Fire
Station #1 Development
and Construction

FL

250,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami-Dade County Public
Schools

Parkway Educational Complex Upgrades

FL

1,000,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami Dade College

Dyer Federal Courthouse
Revitalization for Education Facilities

FL

850,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Americus

Downtown Americus
Streetscape Project

GA

1,700,000

Bishop

Warnock

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Macon County

Macon County Multipurpose
Facility Development,
Construction and Equipment

GA

1,000,000

Bishop

Warnock

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albany

Albany Medical District
Housing

GA

1,129,036

Bishop

Warnock

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plains

City of Plains Streetscaping
and Public Facilities Upgrades

GA

302,000

Bishop

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Crawford County

Crawford County Youth
Center

GA

1,000,000

Bishop

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Whigham

Designing Future-Ready
Sewage Infrastructure
for a Sustainable Community

GA

1,000,000

Bishop

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Savannah-Georgia Convention Center Authority

Riverwalk Renovation and
Critical Infrastructure
Improvements Project

GA

4,200,000

Carter (GA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Murray County

Sidewalk Construction

GA

1,000,000

Greene (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cedartown

Davis Road Widening

GA

1,000,000

Greene (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of West Georgia

Love Valley Stormwater
Pipe Replacement

GA

638,000

Jack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Thomaston

Pedestrian Safety Downtown Redesign Project

GA

3,000,000

Jack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pike County Parks and
Recreation Authority

Infrastructure Improvements

GA

1,900,000

Jack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tucker, Georgia

Greenway Connector Project
Development and Acquisition

GA

850,000

Johnson (GA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Stone Mountain

City of Stone Mountain
Medlock Park Improvements

GA

1,000,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks and
Cultural Affairs

Avondale Dunaire Soccer
Field

GA

1,985,160

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metro Atlanta Rapid Transit

MARTA Rail & Bus Facilities Safety and Security
Upgrades

GA

400,000

Johnson (GA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brookhaven, Georgia

Ashford Forest Preserve Facilities & Restoration

GA

560,000

Johnson (GA)

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00459

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Warnock

Warnock

Ossoff, Warnock

H22JAPT2

H

H

H

H

H1812

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks &
Cultural Affairs

Arabia Mountain Bridge Improvements

GA

349,475

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks and
Cultural Affairs

County Line Park Improvements Phase II

GA

250,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks and
Cultural Affairs

Rowland Park Construction

GA

1,200,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks and
Cultural Affairs

Wade Walker Park Improvements

GA

850,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Government

Development, Construction,
Furnishings and Equipment for Service Center
for Children Impacted by
Domestic Violence

GA

250,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gwinnett County

Gwinnett County Loop Trail
Segments 3 and 4

GA

850,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cumberland Community
Improvement District

New Day Palisades Phase 2
Funding

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

Ossoff, Warnock

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mableton

Mableton Economic Development Project - Acquisition, Remediation, and
Blight Removal

GA

250,000

McBath

Warnock

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Douglasville

Fowler Field Improvements

GA

250,000

McBath

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austell

Austell Recreation Center
Development and Construction

GA

3,150,000

McBath

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jonesboro

City of Jonesboro Pedestrian Improvements
Project

GA

3,028,359

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Newton County Water and
Sewage Authority

Newton County Salem Road
Utility Relocation Project

GA

850,000

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Henry County Government

Henry County Panola Road
Resurfacing

GA

1,200,000

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockdale County

Rockdale River Trail Improvements

GA

500,000

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockdale County

Rockdale Veteran Transportation Program Vehicle
Acquisition

GA

165,200

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gwinnett County

Gwinnett County Harvest
Gwinnett Mobile Kitchen
Vehicle Acquisition

GA

250,000

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clayton County Government

Small Business Incubator
Facility in Clayton County, GA

GA

1,200,000

Williams (GA)

Ossoff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlanta Public Schools

Building Two New Schoolyards in the Atlanta
Area

GA

700,000

Williams (GA)

Ossoff, Warnock

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Atlanta

Food Ecosystem—Farms
and Gardens Development and Expansion

GA

850,000

Williams (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Atlanta

Thomasville Heights Apartments Green Infrastructure

GA

2,000,000

Williams (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County

Howard Park and Community Center Expansion

GA

3,491,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00460

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Ossoff

H22JAPT2

S

January 22, 2026

H1813

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Amount
($)

Requesters
Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Hall County

New Homes Construction in
Hall County

GA

1,005,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Atlanta

Bowen Homes Chivers
Street Plaza & Community Transformation

GA

1,500,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Salvation Army of Gainesville

Homeless Resource Center
Upgrades

GA

1,800,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fulton County Government

Senior Centers Modernization

GA

2,015,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Valdosta

Burn Building Training Facility

GA

845,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ser Familia

A Place for Familia: Renovations to Expand Programming

GA

1,894,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baldwin County

Affordable Housing Development

GA

1,312,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chickamauga

Historic Downtown Chickamauga Blight Remediation

GA

1,450,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockdale County Board of
Commissioners

Senior Center Satellite
Project

GA

1,900,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hancock County Board of
Commissioners

Recreational Park Renovation

GA

1,750,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlanta Braves Foundation

Hank Aaron Academy at
Southside Park

GA

1,000,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cobb & Douglas Public
Health

South Cobb Integrated
Health Campus

GA

3,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlanta Technical College
Foundation, Inc.

Center for Transportation
and Logistics

GA

1,500,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Augusta/CSRA Habitat for
Humanity

Building Affordable Homes
in Turpin Hill

GA

1,850,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Metropolitan Atlanta, Inc.

Upgrading YMCA Facilities

GA

1,039,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chatham County

East Savannah Early Childhood Learning Center

GA

1,678,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Georgia College and State
University

GCSU Bobcat Business Incubator: Library Renovation

GA

360,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of LaGrange

Ladder Truck for LaGrange
Fire Department

GA

1,150,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity North
Central Georgia

Affordable Homes in the
City of Holly Springs

GA

830,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Butler Street Community
Development Corporation, Inc.

John Lewis Memorial Park

GA

2,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Columbus Housing Initiative, Inc.

Newman’s Crossing

GA

1,800,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Savannah

Housing Acquisition Initiative

GA

1,500,000

Warnock

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00461

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1814

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Club of Baldwin and Jones Counties,
Inc.

Facility Revitalization

GA

100,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Stephen Siller Tunnel to
Towers Foundation

Atlanta Veterans Village

GA

1,500,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

MicroLife Institute, Inc.

Lyons Affordable Workforce
Housing

GA

1,232,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chatham County

Chatham County Workforce
Housing

GA

1,120,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Valdosta-Lowndes County
Habitat for Humanity,
Inc.

Building Bridges to Affordable Housing

GA

1,500,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rainbow Village, Inc.

Rainbow Village Phase II

GA

1,100,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlanta Land Trust, Inc.

Expanding Affordable
Homeownership and Access to Economic Development

GA

1,000,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Honolulu

Waikiki Vista Redevelopment Project—Shelter
and Housing Development and Construction

HI

1,000,000

Case

Schatz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Department of Land and
Natural Resources

Hawaii Nature Center Facility Upgrades and Expansion

HI

250,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kalihi Waena Elementary
School

Construction of a SingleSpan Bridge for the
Kalihi Elementary School
Project

HI

850,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Highlands Intermediate
School

Enhancement of Highlands
Intermediate School’s
Media Center Infrastructure

HI

300,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Honolulu

Safe Harbor Support for
Housing Survivors of Domestic Violence Project
Housing Acquisition

HI

850,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hawaii Broadband Office

Broadband Infrastructure
Development

HI

250,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hawaii Department of
Transportation

Aloha Tower Repair

HI

2,000,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hawaii Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism

Tropical AgTech Center
Project—Facilities and
Equipment

HI

250,000

Tokuda

Hirono

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kauai County Housing
Agency

Lima Ola Affordable Housing Project

HI

3,150,000

Tokuda

Hirono, Schatz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Maui

Maluaka Affordable Rental
Housing Development
and Construction

HI

250,000

Tokuda

Hirono, Schatz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Kauai

Kilauea Town Expansion
Project

HI

2,000,000

Tokuda

Hirono, Schatz

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Maui

Lanai Affordable Housing
Project

HI

1,200,000

Tokuda

Schatz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palama Settlement

Palama Settlement Revitalization Project

HI

3,000,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hawaii Foodbank, Inc.

Hawaii Foodbank Waipahu
Facility

HI

1,600,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Child and Family Service

Maui Family Strengthening
and Resilience Center

HI

5,000,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00462

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1815

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dynamic Community Solutions

Pu’uhonua O Wai’anae Village Infrastructure

HI

1,987,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Girl Scouts of Hawaii

Camp Pi’iholo Renovations

HI

1,120,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Statewide Office on Homelessness and Housing
Solutions

Expanding Crisis, Outreach,
Response and Engagement (CORE) Homeless
Services Program

HI

1,200,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Helping Hands Hawai’i

Facility Renovation

HI

2,088,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Parents And Children Together

PACT Community Hub Property Improvements

HI

2,011,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Hawaii

Kukuiola Supportive Housing

HI

1,892,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Honolulu

Honolulu Low-Income Housing Improvements

HI

2,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Food Basket, Inc.

Commercial Building for
Hilo Farmers

HI

2,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hope Services Hawaii

Mountain View Supportive
Housing

HI

1,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lanakila Pacific

Lanakila Pacific Air Conditioning Replacement

HI

1,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Young Women’s Christian
Association of Oahu

Kaneohe Transitional Housing

HI

1,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kirkwood Community College

Swine Career and Technical
Education Barn

IA

3,716,000

Hinson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cerro Gordo County

North Iowa Corridor Workforce Housing Initiative

IA

3,000,000

Hinson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ely

Urban Renewal Initiative

IA

2,000,000

Hinson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Clinton

North River Drive Connector
Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tipton

Montgomery Drive Improvement Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southeast Iowa Regional
and Economic Port Authority

Lee County Career Center
Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jefferson County

110th Street FDR and Asphalt Paving Project

IA

3,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Iowa Western Community
College

Flexible Learning and Experiential Training Lab
Project

IA

900,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Des Moines

Iowa Confluence Water
Trails (ICON)

IA

2,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mitchellville

Mitchellville-Center Ave
Streetscape Project

IA

640,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ottumwa Community School
District

Ottumwa Youth Hub

IA

500,000

Nunn

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00463

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1816

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Des Moines Area Community College

Diesel, HVAC, Building
Trades, and Fire Science
Facility Support

IA

2,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Polk County

Des Moines Homeless Youth
Building

IA

1,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mountain Home School District #193

Stephensen Elementary
School Build

ID

6,409,000

Simpson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Idaho

Idaho Water Center

ID

3,853,000

Simpson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Muddy Township

Reconstruction of N 600th
Street

IL

540,000

Bost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Oblong

South Range Street Replacement Project

IL

2,236,000

Bost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carbondale

Poplar Street Restoration
Project

IL

900,000

Bost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Piatt County

Piatt County Buildings
Capital Improvements

IL

250,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Brooklyn

Brooklyn Community Center
Development

IL

2,000,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Champaign Park District

Parkland Way Reconstruction

IL

850,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Illinois

Integrated Bioprocessing
Research Laboratory Expansion

IL

1,200,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Urbana Park District

Urbana Park District Prairie
and Weaver Park Site
Rehabilitation

IL

250,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Countryside

City of Countryside Public
Works Facility

IL

250,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Worth Park District

Worth Park District Park Infrastructure

IL

302,500

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Willowbrook

75th Street Water Main Improvements

IL

850,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DuPage Water Commission

DuPage Regional Source
Water Project: Electric
Supply and Grid Improvements

IL

500,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Westmont Park District

Ty Warner Park Permeable
Paver Parking Lot

IL

500,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Palos Hills

City of Palos Hills Reservoir
Rehabilitation

IL

1,200,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education of the
City of Chicago

Sutherland Elementary
School Outdoor Space

IL

1,000,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Palos Park

Main Pump Station Improvements

IL

500,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DuPage County Health Department

Residential Group Homes
Energy Efficiency Project

IL

600,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Salt Creek Sanitary District

Salt Creek Sanitary District
Wastewater Treatment
Plant

IL

850,000

Casten

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00464

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1817

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Lombard

Village of Lombard Underground Infrastructure

IL

250,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Crestwood

Carriage Lane Water Main
Replacement

IL

250,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Ogden Park Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago

Franciscan Outreach Shelter Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago

Olive Branch Mission Shelter Infrastructure Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community College District
no. 508 DBA Malcolm X
College

West Side Learning Center—Facility Renovation
and Expansion

IL

1,000,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Aurora

Homelessness Prevention
Project for the City of
Aurora

IL

1,000,000

Foster

Durbin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DuPage County Division of
Transportation

91st Street Infrastructure
Improvement Project

IL

750,000

Foster

Durbin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Woodstock

Illinois Route 47 Expansion
and Water Main Relocation Project

IL

3,150,000

Foster

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hampshire Fire Protection
District

Hampshire Second Fire Station

IL

1,000,000

Foster

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Aurora Public Library District

Eola Road Branch Library
Renovation

IL

850,000

Foster

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Batavia

Batavia Fox River Bike Path

IL

1,200,000

Foster,
Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Summit Public Library District

Library Capital Improvements

IL

452,408

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Franklin Park

Downtown Streetscape Expansion

IL

250,000

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Richard J. Daley College—
City Colleges of Chicago

Richard J. Daley College Inclusive Classrooms Upgrades and Accessibility
Improvements

IL

446,250

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of North Riverside

North Riverside Public Infrastructure Flood Mitigation Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Cultural Center Upgrades
and Improvements,
Hamilton Park

IL

2,000,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago

Sustainable Updates to
CPS’ Outdoor Spaces

IL

250,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago, Department of Family and Support Services (DFSS)

Margaret’s Village Maria
Shelter Infrastructure
Improvements

IL

850,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago Department
of Housing

Park Manor Senior Development and Construction

IL

250,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago, Department of Housing

Joyce Chapman Apts. Housing and Community Development and Construction

IL

250,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority

Site Infrastructure and Security Camera, Software,
and Lighting Upgrades

IL

750,000

Jackson (IL)

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00465

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1818

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cook County Department of
Transportation and Highways

Pulaski Road Corridor Reconstruction and
Multimodal Improvements

IL

500,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of South Holland

South Holland Neighborhood Revitalization
Project—South Holland,
IL

IL

500,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Jackson Park Safety and
Accessibility Improvements

IL

1,200,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Rantoul

Broadmeadow Road Extension Project—Rantoul, IL

IL

850,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paxton, Illinois

Paxton Downtown
Streetscape

IL

850,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Hazel Crest

Water/Sewer Repairs and
Upgrades

IL

850,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Prairie State College

Prairie State College Workforce Development Education Facility Expansion

IL

250,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Elgin Community College

Advanced Manufacturing
Workforce Pipeline:
Equipment for ECC’s
Manufacturing and
Technology Center

IL

2,000,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Mount Prospect

Elk Grove Rural Fire Protection District Enhancements

IL

850,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Itasca Park District

Itasca Community Recreation & Fitness Center
Expansion

IL

250,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Peoria

Galena Road Industrial
Park

IL

600,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Illinois Regional
Airport Authority

Construct New Air Cargo
Road

IL

1,500,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Fire Department

Chicago Fire Department
Equipment

IL

2,959,800

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Public Schools,
Board of Education City
of Chicago

Sustainable Updates to
CPS Outdoor Spaces

IL

850,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palatine Township

Palatine Township Center—Haven Project

IL

500,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Oak Street Underpass Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Horner Park Field House
Renovation

IL

2,000,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago Department
of Housing

Belray Apartments (Mercy)

IL

850,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Lincoln Park Rowing Lagoon

IL

250,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago, Department of Housing

Encuentro Square Phase II

IL

3,150,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DuPage Housing Authority

Affordable Homeownership
Infrastructure and Development

IL

2,000,000

Ramirez

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00466

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1819

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Technology Center of
DuPage

DuPage Regional Advanced
Manufacturing Hub Development, Construction
and Equipment

IL

500,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Von Steuben Metropolitan
Science Center High
School Facilities Upgrades and Expansion

IL

500,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Patrick Henry School Playground and Infrastructure Upgrades

IL

250,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Renovation of Goethe Elementary School’s Outdoor Playspace and
Equipment

IL

850,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Dever Elementary Outdoor
Space Upgrades

IL

850,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Camras Elementary School
Outdoor Space Upgrades

IL

250,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northeastern Illinois University Foundation

Simulation Equipment Acquisition and Training
Facility Development and
Construction

IL

1,200,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Bell Park Improvements,
Expansion and Facility
Development and Construction

IL

850,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Hanson Park Stadium Renovations and Upgrades

IL

850,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wheaton

Turf, Countryside & Ranch
Floodprone Improvements

IL

250,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wayne Township Road District

Wayne Township Powis
Road Improvements

IL

250,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Niles Township Government

Niles Township Respite
Center Renovation
Project

IL

1,250,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of McHenry

McHenry County Police Social Work Program Headquarters Project

IL

1,200,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Fire Department

CFD Engine House 71 Ambulance Annex

IL

850,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McHenry County Conservation District

McHenry County Conservation District Fox Bluff
Conservation Area Public
Access Enhancement
Project

IL

850,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fremont Township Highway
Department

Fremont Township Critical
Road Resurfacing Project

IL

250,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education of the
City of Chicago

Chicago Public Schools Mosaic School Improvements Project

IL

250,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Evanston

Evanston Beck Park Expansion Project

IL

250,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Antioch

Antioch Downtown Improvement—Lake and Main

IL

580,694

Schneider

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake County

Lakeside Tower Rehabilitation

IL

1,000,000

Schneider

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Waukegan Park District

Waukegan Park District
Adaptive Recreation Upgrades and Equipment
at Roosevelt Park

IL

250,000

Schneider

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00467

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1820

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rockford

Rockford Family Peace Center Reconstruction, Facility Upgrades and Equipment

IL

250,000

Sorensen

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Waubonsee Community College

Center for Parenting Students

IL

450,000

Underwood

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lockport Township

Lockport Township Emergency Shelter and Training Facility

IL

1,950,000

Underwood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Illinois University

Education for Parents
Project

IL

850,000

Underwood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

White Oak Library District

Senior Outreach and Care

IL

850,000

Underwood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Plainfield Park District

Bentley Road Pathway Connection

IL

250,000

Underwood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

People for Community Recovery

Hazel Johnson Job Training
and Community Center

IL

900,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

BEDS Plus, Inc.

Triage Transitional Shelter

IL

650,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Lawndale Catalyst
Initiative, Inc.

North Lawndale Community
Revitalization with Economic Empowerment
Hub

IL

1,600,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of Chicago

True Value Boys & Girls
Club Accessibility Upgrades

IL

750,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carbondale

Homeless Center Facility
Development

IL

2,000,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Illinois Facilities Fund

Home First Housing

IL

1,000,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Volunteers of America Illinois

Hope Manor Village Joliet
Housing Expansion

IL

1,000,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Outlet Mentoring Program

Outlet Mentoring Program
Center

IL

1,000,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of Chicago

Capital Improvements

IL

500,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lincoln Presidential Foundation

Facility Improvements

IL

450,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of Illinois

Land Remediation

IL

3,000,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Illinois Institute of Technology

Construction of the National Institute for Advanced Manufacturing

IL

2,500,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Full Circle Communities

Supportive Housing Development

IL

750,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hamilton

Food Security Project

IL

2,500,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Carbondale Community
Arts, Inc. dba Artspace
304

Economic Hub Project

IL

693,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of North Chicago

Fire Truck

IL

861,000

Durbin

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00468

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Duckworth

H22JAPT2

H/S

January 22, 2026

H1821

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois University

Facilities Improvements
and Technology Upgrades

IL

500,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Navy Pier Inc.

Equipment Upgrades

IL

722,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Lawndale Employment Network

Workforce Accelerator Program

IL

1,000,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Indianapolis

Master Leasing Homelessness Housing

IN

850,000

Carson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ivy Tech Community College

Indianapolis Flex Lab—
Workforce Training Center Development, Construction and Equipment

IN

850,000

Carson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Indianapolis

City of Indianapolis Shepherd Community Center
Expansion, Equipment
and Furnishings

IN

250,000

Carson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Georgetown

Georgetown State Road 64
Sidewalks

IN

975,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Indiana University

10th Street Safety Improvements

IN

1,200,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mitchell

Monon South Trail—Orleans to Mitchell

IN

1,000,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Floyd County

Sam Peden Community
Park Improvements

IN

175,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlestown

Charlestown Blight Elimination Project

IN

4,000,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Michigan City

Michigan City Westside Opportunity Hub

IN

625,000

Mrvan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gary

West Side Community Stabilization—Demolition of
Former Ivanhoe Elementary School

IN

1,100,000

Mrvan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Unified Government of Wyandotte County and Kansas City, Kansas Public
Works

Kansas Avenue Bridge Design and Environmental
Clearance

KS

1,200,000

Davids

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Johnson County, Kansas

Johnson County Facility Security Panel Access Modernization

KS

850,000

Davids

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Unified Government of Wyandotte County and Kansas City

Mount Marty Park Refurbishment

KS

250,000

Davids

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kansas City Board of Public Utilities

BPU Electric Grid System
Improvements

KS

250,000

Davids

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Osawatomie

John Brown Park Infrastructure Refurbishment

KS

250,000

Davids

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Prairie Village

Public Facilities Improvements

KS

250,000

Davids

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kansas Department of
Transportation

Route 92 Centennial Bridge
Replacement

KS

4,000,000

Schmidt

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Unified Government of Wyandotte County and Kansas City, Kansas

Union Pacific Bridge Underpass

KS

2,063,000

Schmidt

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mennonite Housing Rehabilitation Services, Inc.

Wichita Affordable Housing
Rehabilitation

KS

825,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00469

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Moran

H

H

Moran

H

H

Moran

H22JAPT2

S

H1822

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cerebral Palsy Research
Foundation of Kansas
Inc

The Timbers Housing Renovation Project

KS

2,500,000

Moran

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Prairie Band Potawatomi
Nation

Head Start Facility

KS

4,968,000

Moran

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kansas State Historical Society

John Brown Memorial Park
& Visitors Center

KS

2,000,000

Moran

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McPherson Housing Coalition

McPherson Affordable
Housing Development

KS

2,000,000

Moran

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Scott County Fiscal Court

Triple Crown Business Park
Development

KY

2,000,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mercer County Fiscal Court

Wilkinson Farm Megasite—
Industrial Park Improvements

KY

2,000,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Versailles

Road and Utility Infrastructure Improvements

KY

1,400,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County Fiscal
Court

Industrial Park Improvements

KY

1,400,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Berea

Kenway Extension for Community Safety and Mobility

KY

1,000,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Estill County Fiscal Court

Water District 12 Water
System Improvements

KY

1,200,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Oak Grove

Oak Grove Water Infrastructure Project

KY

1,000,000

Comer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hickman County Industrial
Development Authority

Business Commerce Building

KY

4,050,000

Comer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Springfield Water and
Sewer Commission

Springfield Industrial Park
Waterline Improvements

KY

1,000,000

Comer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Edmonson County Water
District

Brownsville Water Intake
Tower Improvements

KY

14,000,000

Guthrie

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Green River Valley Water
District

Northwestern Hart County
Water System Improvements

KY

2,000,000

Guthrie

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisville-Jefferson County
Metro Government

Young Adult Shelter and
Transitional Housing

KY

1,000,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisville-Jefferson County
Metro Government

Vacant to Vibrant Program

KY

1,500,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisville-Jefferson County
Metro Government

St. Mary’s Church Renovation

KY

1,000,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jefferson Community &
Technical College

Jefferson Rising Parking Lot
Project

KY

850,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jeffersontown

Jeffersontown Garage Purchase and Rehabilitation

KY

850,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Simmons College of Kentucky

Simmons College Westover
Campus Expansion

KY

850,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wolfe County Fiscal Court

Emergency Facility Construction

KY

5,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00470

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Davids

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1823

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McCreary County Fiscal
Court

Firehouse Construction

KY

2,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pikeville

Industrial Building Construction

KY

6,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harlan County Fiscal Court

Water System Improvements

KY

4,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clay County Fiscal Court

Livestock Marketplace Construction

KY

1,030,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Owensboro Family YMCA

Owensboro and Daviess
County Community
Childcare Center

KY

6,600,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McCreary County Heritage
Foundation

Historic Stearns Revitalization

KY

11,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Somerset-Pulaski Economic
Development Authority

Barnesburg Road Bridge
Construction

KY

1,450,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Barren County

Cave City Area Agriculture
Exposition Center

KY

20,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Covington

Riverfront Podium and
Land Bridge Infrastructure

KY

4,500,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisville-Jefferson County
Metro Government

Belvedere Transformation

KY

7,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

BioDistrict New Orleans

BioDistrict New Orleans—
Education Facility

LA

3,700,000

Carter (LA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

England Airpark

Aviation Career and Education (ACE) Initiative
Building Construction

LA

4,500,000

Fields

Kennedy

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lafayette Consolidated Government

Lafayette Emergency Operations Center

LA

5,000,000

Fields

Kennedy

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Natchitoches

Rue de Gabriel Extension
Project

LA

2,000,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Baker

Jefferson Avenue Youth
Ballpark and Sportsplex

LA

250,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Recreation and Park Commission for the Parish of
East Baton Rouge

Gardere Community Facility
for Youth—Development,
Construction and Equipment

LA

250,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Shreveport

Kings Highway Reconstruction, Parking Improvements and Street Corridor Upgrades

LA

850,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southern University A&M
College

Egress Development and
Infrastructure for Southern University Baton
Rouge Campus

LA

850,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisiana Fire and Emergency Training Academy

Flood Rescue Training Facility

LA

3,500,000

Letlow

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of St. Francisville

Commerce Street
Multimodal Revitalization
Project

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Monroe

City-Wide Storm Drainage
& Sanitary Sewer Project

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Grand Isle Port Commission

Oak Lane Dock Facility and
Shrimp Dock Facility

LA

2,700,000

Scalise

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00471

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Kennedy

H

H

H22JAPT2

H1824

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Baton Rouge-Parish
of East Baton Rouge

Canal Retrofit Project

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of New Orleans

Shea Penland Coastal Research Educational Facility Upgrades

LA

1,500,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Monroe

Benoit Community Center
Improvements

LA

4,500,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nicholls State University

Engineering Workforce Development Center

LA

6,500,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Abbeville

Riverfront Revitalization

LA

4,500,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lincoln Parish Police Jury

Rough Edge Road Interchange

LA

7,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Terrebonne Churches United
Food Bank

Food Bank Improvements

LA

2,500,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Second Harvest Food Bank
of Greater New Orleans
and Acadiana

Second Harvest Food Bank

LA

2,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fall River

Columbia Street
Streetscape and Parklet
Rehabilitation

MA

1,300,000

Auchincloss

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Attleboro Massachusetts

Attleboro Recreation Center
Improvements

MA

2,000,000

Auchincloss

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mansfield

Mansfield Council on Aging
Senior Center Development and Construction

MA

850,000

Auchincloss

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Attleboro

Attleboro Downtown
Streetscape Improvements

MA

850,000

Auchincloss

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Berkley

Berkley Town Common Pedestrian Infrastructure
and Safety Improvements

MA

850,000

Auchincloss

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Medford

Willis Avenue Community
Center Project

MA

250,000

Clark

Markey, Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Framingham

Framingham Community
Center

MA

3,150,000

Clark

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Malden, Massachusetts

Malden Roofs Project

MA

850,000

Clark

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stoneham

Stoneham High School Wetlands Restoration Project

MA

850,000

Clark

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Watertown

Walkable Watertown Square
Project

MA

500,000

Clark

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Winthrop

Winthrop Old Middle School
Redevelopment Project

MA

250,000

Clark

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Melrose

Melrose Public Address
System Repairs and Improvements

MA

250,000

Clark

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Revere

Revere Community Boatyard
Remediation Project

MA

250,000

Clark

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth

Northeast Coastal Ocean
Forecast System Computer Upgrade Project

MA

850,000

Keating

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00472

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Markey

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1825

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Massachusetts Maritime
Academy

Training Equipment Acquisition

MA

250,000

Keating

Markey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe

Plaza Del Sol Transitional
Housing Project

MA

1,152,000

Keating

Markey, Warren

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Barnstable County

Children’s Cove Child Advocacy Center Project

MA

3,150,000

Keating

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Bridgewater

Bridgewater MBTA Platform
Relocation Project

MA

1,000,000

Keating

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boston Housing Authority

Redevelopment of the Mary
Ellen McCormack Community

MA

850,000

Lynch

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Massachusetts
Boston

Salt Water Pump House
Cooling Capacity Project

MA

1,000,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Weymouth

Weymouth Veterans Resource Center

MA

1,200,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hingham

Hingham Public Safety Facility

MA

850,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Braintree

Braintree Fire Headquarters
Renovation

MA

2,500,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stoughton

Historic Stoughton Train
Depot

MA

1,000,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hingham

Hingham Inner Harbor Resiliency

MA

250,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Walpole

Walpole High School Transportation Improvement
Plan

MA

850,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Weymouth

Weymouth Iron Hill Park
Redesign and Reconstruction

MA

250,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brockton

Salisbury Brook Box Culvert
Repair

MA

850,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Ashfield

Ashfield Retaining Wall

MA

250,000

McGovern

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Amherst

Town of Amherst Shelter
and Supportive Housing

MA

1,000,000

McGovern

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Worcester

128 Providence Street
Housing Remediation
Project

MA

1,200,000

McGovern

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Northampton

Northampton Community
Resilience Hub Facility
Development and Construction

MA

500,000

McGovern

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Burlington

Burlington Multi-Use Pathway

MA

1,000,000

Moulton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Georgetown

Georgetown Middle-High
School Heating and
Cooling System

MA

850,000

Moulton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Salem State University

Salem State Science Labs

MA

500,000

Moulton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Reading

Reading Lower Downtown
Streetscape Enhancement

MA

250,000

Moulton

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00473

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Markey

Markey, Warren

H22JAPT2

H

H

H1826

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Berkshire Community College

Berkshire Community College Trades Academy

MA

995,000

Neal

Markey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Springfield City Library

East Springfield City Library Renovation and
Expansion

MA

500,000

Neal

Markey, Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Springfield

Forest Park Horticultural
and Learning Center

MA

1,000,000

Neal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Holyoke

Holyoke Farr Alpaca Mill
Renovation

MA

250,000

Neal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Massachusetts College of
Liberal Arts

MCLA Early Education Center Facility Development
and Construction

MA

1,200,000

Neal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boston Housing Authority

Fairmount Modernization
Project

MA

1,000,000

Pressley

Markey, Warren

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Somerville

Union Square Plaza and
Streetscape Phase 1

MA

500,000

Pressley

Markey, Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chelsea

Former Forbes Lithograph
Manufacturing Company
Site Redevelopment in
Chelsea

MA

850,000

Pressley

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Everett

Gateway Park Boardwalk
Development and Construction, Everett

MA

850,000

Pressley

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chelsea

Renovation of Massachusetts Veterans Home at
Chelsea

MA

3,150,000

Pressley

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Massachusetts
Lowell

Property Acquisition in Support of the Lowell Innovation Network Corridor

MA

850,000

Trahan

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lowell, Massachusetts

Lowell Priority Intersections
Project

MA

2,000,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Haverhill, Massachusetts

Merrimack Downtown Redevelopment Project

MA

1,000,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fitchburg, Massachusetts

Water Street Gateway Corridor Sidewalk and
Lighting Replacement
Project

MA

850,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mount Wachusett Community College

North Central Massachusetts Auto Technician
Training Center Expansion Project

MA

850,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Methuen, Massachusetts

Methuen Intersections Safety Improvements

MA

850,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gardner, Massachusetts

Gardner Community Center
Upgrades and Improvements

MA

250,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Marlborough, Massachusetts

Bolton Street (Route 85)
and Union Street Intersection Infrastructure
Improvements and
Streetscaping

MA

250,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Boxborough, Massachusetts

Sheltered Bus Stops for
Boxborough/Acton InterTown Bus System

MA

250,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Easterseals Massachusetts,
Inc.

The Bridge Center

MA

1,393,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Francis House

Shelter Renovations

MA

200,000

Markey, Warren

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00474

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Markey, Warren

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1827

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Amount
($)

Requesters
Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cape & Islands Veterans
Outreach Center, Inc.

Veterans Affordable Housing—Pitchers Way
Hyannis

MA

853,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hope for Youth and Families Inc.

Youth Arts Center

MA

5,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

People Incorporated

Expansion of People Incorporated Early Education
Center

MA

2,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Peace Properties, Inc.

Ayer Commons Affordable
Housing Development

MA

4,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

UTEC, Inc.

UTEC Workforce Development Infrastructure

MA

773,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louis D. Brown Peace Institute

Louis D. Brown Peace Institute Construction

MA

2,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Children’s Services of
Roxbury, Inc.

Center for Family Wellbeing

MA

2,909,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Victory Programs

Residential Facility

MA

2,600,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Centerboard

Young Parent Living Program

MA

373,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Waltham Boys & Girls Club,
Inc.

Kitchen Project for Childhood Food Insecurity

MA

1,524,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Revitalize Community Development Corporation

Healthy Homes for Low-Income Families

MA

250,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

La Colaborativa

Chelsea Apprenticeship Institute

MA

750,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lawrence CommunityWorks

Marriner Mill Community
Service Facility

MA

1,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Leominster

Leominster Senior Center
Renovation

MA

893,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

2Life Communities Development, Inc.

Treehouse at Olmsted Village Community Center

MA

1,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Breaktime United, Inc.

The Hub for Solving Young
Adult Homelessness

MA

2,107,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

CitySpace Inc.

Restoration of Easthampton
Old Town Hall

MA

3,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of Dorchester, Inc.

Marr-McLaughlin Campus
Revitalization Project

MA

1,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Mary’s Center for
Women and Children

Permanent Supportive
Housing for Families
Exiting Homelessness in
Dorchester

MA

2,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Shore Young Men’s
Christian Association

Germantown Food Pantry
Expansion

MA

1,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

FamilyAid Boston, Inc.

FamilyAid’s West Newton
Family Navigation Center

MA

1,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YWCA of Western Massachusetts

Facilities Renovation, Infrastructure Upgrades, and
Equipment

MA

1,223,000

Warren

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00475

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1828

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Anne Arundel County

Crownsville Meyer Building
Rehabilitation

MD

3,150,000

Elfreth

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mount Airy

Infrastructure Improvements and Upgrades at
The Flat Iron Building,
Phase 2

MD

850,000

Elfreth

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Howard County Housing
Commission

Artists Flats Apartments

MD

2,000,000

Elfreth

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Howard County, Maryland

Facilities Upgrades and
Equipment for Public
Safety During Storms

MD

1,250,000

Elfreth

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Maryland Center for Environmental
Sciences

Facility Upgrades and Expansion in Annapolis

MD

800,000

Elfreth

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore County

Middle River Fire Company
Improvements and Upgrades

MD

9,000,000

Harris

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Mary’s County

YMCA Great Mills

MD

850,000

Hoyer

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Mary’s Housing Authority

St. Mary’s County Affordable Housing Acquisition
and Relocation

MD

850,000

Hoyer

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redevelopment Authority of
Prince George’s County

The Arc Prince George’s
County Affordable Housing Rehabilitation/Preservation

MD

1,840,909

Ivey

Alsobrooks

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Greenbelt, MD

Greenbelt Youth Center
Roof Replacement

MD

1,554,969

Ivey

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redevelopment Authority of
Prince George’s County

The Arc Prince George’s
County Full-Service Community Center

MD

850,000

Ivey

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Prince George’s County
Government

North Prince George’s
County Animal Shelter

MD

850,000

Ivey

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of College Park

Housing Authority of the
City of College Park MD
Renovation of Attick
Towers Apartments

MD

3,150,000

Ivey

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of District Heights

City of District Heights, MD
Police Station

MD

1,000,000

Ivey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hyattsville

David C. Driskell Community Park Expansion—
Acquisition, Development, and Preservation

MD

850,000

Ivey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Frederick, Maryland

Frederick Youth Center Furnishings, Equipment and
Security Enhancements

MD

3,000,000

McClain Delaney

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Frederick County

Taney Avenue Senior Center
and Senior Affordable
Housing

MD

1,000,000

McClain Delaney

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore County

Turner Station Resiliency
Improvements

MD

3,150,000

Mfume

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Maryland Economic Development Corporation

Baltimore Harbor Public Facility Improvements

MD

250,000

Mfume

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Carroll Community College

Carroll Community College
Applied Technology and
Trades Center Equipment
and Furnishings

MD

850,000

Olszewski

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore County Government

The Reisterstown Main
Street Lamppost Replacements

MD

250,000

Olszewski

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Workforce Development and
Technical Training Center Upgrades and Expansion

MD

2,000,000

Raskin

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00476

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1829

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County Department of Transportation

US 29 Critical Bike & Pedestrian Safety Improvements

MD

500,000

Raskin

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Low-Income Home Weatherization Project

MD

850,000

Raskin

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County Department of Transportation

Security Cameras for Parking Garages

MD

850,000

Raskin

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Greenbelt

Greenbelt Springhill Lake
Recreation Center Expansion

MD

250,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Latin American Youth Center

LAYC Prince George’s County Site Renovation

MD

1,500,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Arc Baltimore

Home and Building Renovations and Accessible
Vehicles

MD

644,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Maryland Deaf Community
Center

Community Center Renovations

MD

500,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Aberdeen

Aberdeen Activity Center
Outdoor Recreation Improvements

MD

300,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore Museum of Industry

Echoes from the Key Bridge
Facility

MD

730,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Meals on Wheels of Central
Maryland, Inc.

Capital Improvements

MD

1,500,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ivy Community Charities of
Prince George’s County,
Inc.

Ivy Village Incubator for
Nonprofit Excellence

MD

2,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sanctuary AP3 Co.

The Sanctuary Garden

MD

2,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Chimes Foundation,
Inc.

Chimes Home Safety and
Accessibility Renovation

MD

1,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery Housing Partnership, Inc.

Amherst Affordable Housing
Redevelopment

MD

1,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Parity Baltimore Incorporated

Parity Homes Strategic Acquisition Fund

MD

1,524,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cedar Lane Senior Living
Community III Inc.

Cedar Lane Senior Living
Community Development

MD

1,500,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Robert W. Johnson Community Center

Community Center Revitalization Project

MD

500,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

AfriThrive Inc.

Community Food Center
Renovation

MD

800,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Easterseals DC MD VA, Inc.

Easterseals Hagerstown
Child Development Center

MD

2,000,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore County Public Library

Essex Branch Construction

MD

2,000,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stonington

Stonington Commercial Fish
Pier Improvement Project

ME

2,000,000

Golden

King

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Jay

Town of Jay Alden Hill Road
Economic Development
Enhancement Project

ME

565,000

Golden

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00477

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H

H22JAPT2

H1830

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Swan’s Island

Town of Swan’s Island
Town Dock

ME

1,400,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Jonesport

Jonesport Working Waterfront Access at Henry
Point

ME

1,200,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Maine Community
College

Central Maine Community
College Public Service
Simulation Center Expansion

ME

500,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Fort Kent

Fort Kent Public Works Garage Expansion Project

ME

850,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mi’kmaq Nation

Mi’kmaq Environmental
Laboratory

ME

850,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Auburn

Auburn Tech Hub Infrastructure Expansion

ME

250,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Damariscotta

Town of Damariscotta Community and Pedestrian
Connector

ME

850,000

Pingree

King

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Waterville

Waterville Downtown Development

ME

850,000

Pingree

King

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Millinocket Historical Society

ADA Compliance Upgrades

ME

580,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sanford

Public Safety Facilities

ME

5,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Easton

Fire Station

ME

3,600,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Patriarchs Club

Harmony Facility Construction

ME

230,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Down East Community Hospital

Down East Community Hospital Workforce Housing

ME

2,190,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Eagle Lake

Fire Department Substation

ME

150,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Auburn

Auburn Area Infrastructure
for Workforce Housing

ME

8,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sanford Housing Authority
Development Corporation

York County Workforce and
Senior Housing

ME

2,500,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Passamaquoddy Tribe at
Indian Township

Indian Township Passamaquoddy Housing Initiative

ME

2,985,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Island Falls

Fire and Ambulance Department

ME

1,603,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brooks Historical Society

Pilley House Restoration

ME

100,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Kenduskeag

Kenduskeag Fire Station

ME

3,500,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Aroostook Agency on Aging

Aroostook Agency on Aging
Facility Renovation

ME

1,370,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Dixmont

Fire and Rescue Station

ME

2,332,000

Collins

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00478

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1831

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Amount
($)

Requesters
Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rumford Center Village Improvement Society

Meeting House Restoration

ME

232,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Forest Center Inc

Maine Woods Housing Initiative

ME

2,500,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Brownville

Brownville Fire Station

ME

2,770,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winter Harbor Historical Society

Facility Restoration

ME

1,150,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lincoln Memorial Public Library

Lincoln Memorial Library
Expansion

ME

2,400,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Rumford

Childcare and Community
Center

ME

3,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of North Berwick

Fire and Rescue Station

ME

3,400,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stacyville

Fire Station

ME

2,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mars Hill

Community Center Renovation

ME

2,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Kittery

Community Center Renovation

ME

1,500,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Monson

Fire Station

ME

3,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Van Buren

Small Business Incubator
and Community Hub

ME

1,737,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Care

Shaw House Youth Shelter
Renovation

ME

848,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of East Millinocket

Paper Mill Cleanup and Rehabilitation

ME

5,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Lincoln

Lincoln Technology Park

ME

4,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wesley Volunteer Fire Department, Inc.

Volunteer Fire Station

ME

2,520,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of
Southern Maine

Boys & Girls Club Expansion

ME

3,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

York County Community
College

Workforce and Student
Housing

ME

6,500,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Maine MILL

Maine MILL Renovation

ME

3,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Maine at Fort
Kent

Computer Training Facility

ME

885,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Quoddy Tides Foundation

Masonic Hall Rehabilitation

ME

2,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SeniorsPlus

Older Adult Education and
Nutrition Facility

ME

1,000,000

Collins, King

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00479

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1832

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Chapman House

Affordable Housing

ME

1,317,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Youth and Family Outreach

Childcare Facility Expansion

ME

500,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YWCA Central Maine

Childcare Facility Expansion

ME

1,689,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Avesta Housing Development Corporation

Affordable Housing Property
Acquisition and Remediation

ME

2,000,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dignity First

Homeful Village Infrastructure

ME

2,000,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brighton

Water Treatment Plant Generator Replacement

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

Slotkin

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Eaton Rapids

Horner Mill Demolition &
Redevelopment

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Maple Rapids

Bridge Replacement

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clinton County Road Commission

Chandler Road—Coleman
Road to Stoll Road

MI

2,500,000

Barrett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oakland County Road Commission

Drain Culvert Replacement

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shiawassee County Road
Commission

New Lothrop Road Bridge
Replacement

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Menominee

Circle Lane 3 Subdivision
Infrastructure Improvements

MI

1,178,000

Bergman

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saline

Saline Community Center
Rehabilitation Project

MI

2,700,000

Dingell

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pittsfield Charter Township

Pittsfield Township Public
Safety Facility Improvement Project

MI

2,000,000

Dingell

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ann Arbor

Ann Arbor Fire Station #3
Demolition, Development
and Construction

MI

250,000

Dingell

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plymouth

Plymouth Cultural Center
Improvements

MI

850,000

Dingell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Northville

City of Northville High
Street Bridge Project

MI

850,000

Dingell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Novi

Novi Public Safety Facility
Construction

MI

250,000

Dingell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Macomb County

Reconstruction of Mound
Road from 8 Mile Road
to I–696

MI

8,000,000

James

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Saginaw Valley State University

Cardinal Square
Streetscaping

MI

250,000

McDonald Rivet

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Genesee County Land Bank
Authority

Removing Blight and Restoring Land in Genesee
County (MI)

MI

850,000

McDonald Rivet

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Flint Community Schools

Flint Community Schools’
Workforce and Career
Campus Development
and Construction

MI

1,200,000

McDonald Rivet

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00480

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1833

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fruitland Township

North Scenic Drive Non-Motorized Pathway

MI

9,074,000

Moolenaar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shelby Township

Shelby Acres

MI

1,200,000

Moolenaar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Grand Rapids—Kent County Convention and Arena
Authority

Grand River Neighborhood
Enhancement and Accessibility Bridge

MI

250,000

Scholten

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Fruitport

Village of Fruitport Shoreline Access and Trails—
Infrastructure Upgrades,
Expansion and Revitalization

MI

464,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Muskegon County

Learn. Transform. Thrive:
Building a Home for Literacy

MI

500,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Interurban Transit Partnership

Central Station Early Childhood Education Development and Construction

MI

1,000,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Muskegon Heights

Broadway Avenue Reconstruction &
Streetscape—Phase II

MI

2,000,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Michigan State Housing
Development Authority

Pleasant Hills Phase 3

MI

250,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Muskegon Area Intermediate School District

Advanced Manufacturing
Training Equipment Acquisition

MI

750,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Farmington Hills

Farmington Hills Senior
Center

MI

850,000

Stevens

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pontiac

City of Pontiac Youth
Recreation Center Project

MI

2,000,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Birmingham, Michigan

Birmingham Senior/Recreation Center

MI

1,200,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Royal Oak

Royal Oak Community
Wellness Hub: Multi-Purpose Indoor Field Facility

MI

850,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Madison Heights

Roadway asphalt overlay on
Avis Drive from East 14
Mile to Dequindre

MI

520,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oakland County

Oakland County Critical Infrastructure Improvements at the Detroit Zoo

MI

500,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Troy

Troy Community Center—
Building Generator

MI

250,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Charter Township of Commerce

Commerce Township/Wixom
community connection

MI

250,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ecorse

City of Ecorse Fire Station
Renovation

MI

680,592

Thanedar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Michigan State Housing
Development Authority

Thome Rivertown Senior Affordable Housing

MI

250,000

Thanedar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southgate

Downriver Miracle Field and
Playground

MI

250,000

Thanedar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wayne State University

WDET Community Broadcast Center

MI

250,000

Thanedar

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00481

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Peters, Slotkin

Slotkin

H22JAPT2

H

H

H1834

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Livonia

Bike/Walk Livonia Stark
Road Widening and Active Transportation Infrastructure

MI

850,000

Tlaib

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southfield

Hope Apartments—Supportive Housing and Site
Development and Construction for Youth Aging
out of Foster Care

MI

850,000

Tlaib

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redford Charter Township

Redford Charter Township
Lead Service Lines Replacement

MI

2,000,000

Tlaib

Peters, Slotkin

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

School District of the City
of Dearborn

Michael Berry Career Center
and Green Schoolyards
Facilities and Site Improvements

MI

1,200,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southfield

City of Southfield Aging in
Place Critical Home Repairs

MI

3,150,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Westland

City of Westland New Fire
Station No. 4 Development and Construction
and New Fire Engine Acquisition

MI

2,000,000

Tlaib

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Detroit Public Schools Community District

Cooley High School Redevelopment and Construction

MI

1,000,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Charter County of Wayne

Wayne County Youth Facility Capital Improvements

MI

850,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Inkster

Harvest River Square Revitalization, City of Inkster

MI

500,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southfield

Mt. Vernon Street Reconstruction and
Streetscaping

MI

250,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Beverly Hills

Village of Beverly Hills Beverly Park Improvements

MI

250,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Franklin

Village of Franklin Irving
Apple Tree Lane Pathway
Development and Construction

MI

250,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Adrian Public Schools

Drager Early Education
Center Boiler Replacement

MI

2,200,000

Walberg

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Niles

Indiana-Michigan River
Valley Trail Project

MI

2,000,000

Walberg

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Detroit Housing and
Revitalization Department

Archdale Senior Affordable
Housing

MI

500,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Downriver Community Conference

Ecorse Creek Bridge and
Culvert Replacement

MI

2,500,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians

Housing Facility to Support
Substance Abuse Recovery

MI

574,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albion

Early Learning STEM Center

MI

500,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southfield

Garner Street Housing Development

MI

1,200,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Flint

Flint Eastside Market and
Residential Units Project

MI

2,000,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bay City

Fire Station Clean-Up

MI

959,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00482

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Slotkin

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1835

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Flint

Berston Field House Expansion and Renovation
Project

MI

6,320,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Housing Network

Lincoln Avenue Lofts

MI

500,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marquette County

Short Term Emergency Recuperative Care Shelter
and Long Term Housing
Initiative

MI

750,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ecorse

Ecorse Creek Connector
Trail and Revitalization
Project

MI

2,538,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Communities First, Inc.

Mixed Use Development

MI

2,000,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Oakland Shelter dba
Lighthouse MI

Lighthouse Campus Redevelopment and Expansion

MI

1,000,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lakeville

Lakeville FiRST Center

MN

1,000,000

Craig

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dakota County

Dakota County Regional
Household Hazardous
Waste and Recycling Facility Acquisition, Development and Construction

MN

500,000

Craig

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carver

Levee Modernization

MN

4,000,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saint Paul

Hayden Heights Library Reconstruction Phase II

MN

3,150,000

McCollum

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Maplewood

East Metro Public Safety
Training Center Expansion Project

MN

2,000,000

McCollum

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saint Paul

Burn Building Restoration
and Reconstruction

MN

1,250,000

McCollum

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Excelsior

WAFTA Site Cleanup

MN

1,200,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edina

Fire Training Tower Burner
Replacement

MN

600,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brooklyn Park

Brooklyn Park Trunk Highway Watermain Crossings

MN

850,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Deephaven

Deephaven Park Improvements

MN

250,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Maple Grove

Animal Facility Expansion
and Reinvestment

MN

850,000

Morrison

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Independent School District
286, Brooklyn Center
Community Schools

Brooklyn Center STEAM Elementary Community
Schoolyard

MN

1,500,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hilltop

City of Hilltop Emergency
Tornado Shelter

MN

850,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hennepin County

Hennepin County Emergency Shelter System

MN

500,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Golden Valley

Golden Valley East Fire
Station Development and
Construction

MN

250,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00483

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

H1836

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Crystal

MAC Wildlife Area Phase 3
Trail and Boardwalk
Walking Loop—Crystal

MN

1,200,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saint Anthony Village

Saint Anthony Village Public Safety Facility Expansion

MN

250,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Columbia Heights

Columbia Heights Municipal Vehicle Facility Reconstruction

MN

850,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Robbinsdale

Robbinsdale Public Works
Facility—Development
and Construction

MN

850,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Women’s Advocates

Expanding Capacity at the
Nation’s First Domestic
Violence Shelter

MN

3,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Accessible Space, Inc.

Rehabilitation for Affordable Housing Sites in
Greater Minnesota

MN

700,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Red Wing Housing and Redevelopment Authority

Haven of Hope Shelter
Project

MN

977,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YouthLink

YouthLink Building Roof
Replacement

MN

989,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greater Bemidji

Bemidji Rail Corridor Redevelopment

MN

2,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Morrison County

Partnership with Little Falls
School District

MN

234,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sandstone Economic
Development Authority

Sandstone School Workforce
Housing

MN

850,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Otter Tail County Housing
and Redevelopment Authority

New York Mills Affordable
Senior Housing Project

MN

600,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Minnesota Housing
Partnership, Inc.

Hilltop Square Apartments

MN

3,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albert Lea

Blazing Star Remediation

MN

2,600,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Family Freedom Center

Business Incubator in Central Hillside Duluth

MN

835,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing and Redevelopment Authority of Sleepy
Eye

Ross Park Apartments
Parking & Community
Home Project

MN

222,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Minnesota Habitat
for Humanity

Westwood Development

MN

450,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Alexandria Housing and Redevelopment Authority

Woodhill Townhomes

MN

966,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northwoods Battered Women’s Shelter

Shelter Expansion

MN

300,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Madison

Westview Housing Development

MN

2,370,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Little Earth Residents Association

Akiins Pejuta Hub

MN

2,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Minneapolis Public Housing
Authority

Missing Middle Construction Project

MN

2,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00484

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1837

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Saint Paul Public Housing
Agency

Seal Hi-Rise Modernization

MN

2,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

One Roof Community Housing

New Model—Reentry Housing

MN

1,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State Fair Community College

Workforce Training Center
for Agriculture Advancement

MO

6,000,000

Alford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Parks and
Recreation District of St.
Louis

Metropolitan Parks and
Recreation Brickline
Greenway District of St.
Louis—Cortex Metrolink
Station to Forest Park

MO

850,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

South Riverfront Redevelopment

MO

250,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ferguson, Missouri

Plaza at 501 Development

MO

1,000,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Northwoods

Northwoods Community
Center Demolition, Development, and Construction

MO

850,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

City of St. Louis—Southside Senior Services
Center Development and
Construction

MO

850,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

City of St. Louis—
Northside Youth and
Senior Service Center
Construction Project

MO

850,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

Upgrades to the City’s
Emergency Management
Simulation Training Lab

MO

250,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

Renovation/Upgrades to the
City’s Fire Training
Tower

MO

250,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kansas City, Missouri

Brush Creek Greenway Improvements

MO

2,000,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Grandview, Missouri

Main Street Market

MO

850,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Community
College

Longview Automotive Institute

MO

850,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of North Kansas City,
Missouri

Town Square Renovation

MO

250,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Missouri

North Missouri Weather
Monitoring Infrastructure

MO

5,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Liberty

Downtown Safety Improvements

MO

5,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Grand River Technical
School

Facilities Construction

MO

2,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jefferson

Police Headquarters Addition

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Charles

Senior Center Construction

MO

500,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Charles

Reconstruction of Harry S.
Truman Boulevard

MO

1,500,000

Onder

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00485

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1838

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jefferson

High Street Viaduct Replacement

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Centertown

Central Wastewater Collection and Treatment System

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jefferson

Fire Command Center

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pearl River Community College

Road Infrastructure Project

MS

2,000,000

Ezell

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jones County Junior College

Educational Building Construction

MS

1,000,000

Ezell

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Perry County

Perry County Street Rehabilitation

MS

1,000,000

Ezell

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pat Harrison Waterway District

Pat Harrison Waterway District Archusa Dam Repair and Rehabilitation

MS

4,000,000

Guest

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi State University

Raspet Flight Research
Laboratory Improvements

MS

4,000,000

Guest

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mathiston

Water System Improvements

MS

4,000,000

Kelly (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jackson Redevelopment Authority

Forward Together Initiative—Community Facilities Development, Construction, and Equipment

MS

850,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Delta Planning & Development District

Mississippi Student Facilities and Community Revitalization

MS

850,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Washington County Board
of Supervisors

Washington County Sacred
Homeless Shelter Facility
Improvements

MS

850,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tougaloo College

Natchez Community Facilities Rehabilitation

MS

850,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yazoo County Board of Supervisors

Yazoo Parks Improvements

MS

500,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Holmes County Consolidated School District

STEM POWER—STEM Facilities Improvements
and Equipment

MS

250,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Central Planning and
Development District

Miracle Village Development and Construction

MS

250,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Delta Planning and
Development District

Blight Elimination and
Neighborhood Revitalization

MS

250,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gulf Coast Center for Nonviolence, Inc.

Family Justice Center Expansion

MS

5,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Monticello

Police Department Improvements

MS

121,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Cary

Fire Station Improvements

MS

600,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi’s Toughest Kids
Foundation

Facility Improvements

MS

775,000

Hyde-Smith

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00486

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1839

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Forrest County Agricultural
High School

Career and Technical Education Expansion Project

MS

5,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi Food Network

Food Storage Facility Enhancements

MS

3,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Central Community
College

Veteran Center Building
Construction

MS

800,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greenwood-Leflore-Carroll
Economic Development
Foundation

Building Revitalization
Project

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Leflore Water and
Sewer District

Water Storage Project

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vicksburg

Floodwall Closure System
Improvements

MS

3,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Mississippi
Medical Center

Site Preparation and Critical Infrastructure Support

MS

8,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Mississippi

Innovation and Entrepreneurial Fusion Center

MS

10,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi Department of
Archives and History

Vicksburg National Military
Park Improvements

MS

3,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SR1 College Preparatory
and STEM Academy

Learning Center

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Forrest-Lamar Alliance

Infrastructure Improvements

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lee County Board of Supervisors

Learning Center

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greenfields Irrigation District

Mary Taylor Main Canal Bifurcation and Hydropower Project

MT

4,000,000

Downing

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cascade County

Roadway Extension and Future Major Expansion of
Great Falls AgriTech
Park

MT

788,000

Downing

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rosebud County

Castle Rock Road Paving
Completion

MT

3,000,000

Downing

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Seeley Lake Missoula County Sewer District

Seeley Lake Wastewater
Treatment Plant Project

MT

10,000,000

Zinke

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ravalli County Economic
Development Authority

Ravalli County Water Treatment Plant

MT

2,500,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lincoln County

Rural Airport Reconstruction and Emergency
Services Expansion

MT

454,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sanders County

Repaving Marten Creek
Road

MT

1,150,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Flathead County

Flathead County North Fork
Road Guardrails

MT

1,000,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ravalli County

Groff Lane Bridge Replacement

MT

1,000,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ravalli County

Old Corvallis Road Repair

MT

1,000,000

Zinke

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00487

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Sheehy

H22JAPT2

H

H1840

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Schools

Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Schools Educator Community Housing

NC

1,500,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlotte

Housing Development Initiative

NC

1,200,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlotte

Three Sisters Market Food
Cooperative—Development and Equipment

NC

750,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlotte

Wheatley Seniors Apartments Development and
Construction

NC

850,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlotte

United Neighborhoods Facilities Construction, Upgrades and Equipment

NC

250,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Charlotte-Mecklenburg Hospital Authority

The Pearl Underpass Infrastructure Improvements
and Roadway
Connectivity

NC

250,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Williamston, North
Carolina

Williamston Critical Infrastructure Road Repair

NC

250,000

Davis (NC)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Madison County

Madison County Public
Safety Center Construction

NC

3,000,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Swain County

Swain Middle School Water/
Sewer Improvements

NC

3,000,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Robbinsville

Water System Improvements

NC

1,500,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Buncombe County

Swannanoa EMS Base Construction

NC

3,000,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Chapel Hill, North
Carolina

Legion Road Affordable
Housing Development

NC

2,000,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Durham, North
Carolina

Southside Revitalization
Phases III and IV

NC

2,000,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Pittsboro

Pittsboro Downtown Revitalization

NC

850,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harnett Regional Water

Southwest Harnett Wastewater Pump Station and
Force Main

NC

1,000,000

Knott

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Johnston County

Water System Improvements

NC

1,000,000

Knott

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lexington

Joint Fire and Police Public
Safety Center

NC

3,500,000

McDowell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kannapolis

Turn Lane Construction

NC

1,500,000

McDowell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Cornelius

Emerald Necklace Greenway

NC

1,000,000

Moore (NC)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Havelock

McCotter Canal Improvements

NC

6,000,000

Murphy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Holly Ridge

Expansion of the Holly
Ridge Community Center

NC

1,200,000

Murphy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Farmville

Fire Department Headquarters Construction

NC

1,000,000

Murphy

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00488

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1841

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Winterville

Firefighter Training Facility

NC

750,000

Murphy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Winterville

Water Tower and Looping
Project

NC

1,000,000

Murphy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wake County

Wendell North Public Safety
Station

NC

750,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Morrisville

Town Center Economic Development Phase I

NC

250,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Raleigh

Rose Lane Area Flood Safe
and Resilient Access

NC

850,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Garner

Jones Sausage Road Safety
and Capacity Improvements

NC

850,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wake County

Second Street Homeless
Shelter Facility Renovation and Reconfiguration

NC

850,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brunswick County

Longwood Road Water Line
Extensions

NC

5,483,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Elizabethtown

Curtis L. Brown, Jr. Field
Aerospace Workforce Incubator

NC

2,250,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The University of North
Carolina at Pembroke

Renovation and Restoration
of Old Main

NC

1,000,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hickory

Fire Station Upgrades

NC

1,383,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Greater Charlotte

The Johnston Family YMCA
Infrastructure Project

NC

5,000,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winston-Salem Industries
for the Blind, Inc. dba
IFB Solutions

Infrastructure and Facility
Improvements

NC

3,200,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Servant Center, Inc.

Servant House Project

NC

247,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Henderson County

EMS Substations Expansion

NC

2,500,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Carolina Community College

EMS/Fire Training Facility

NC

5,779,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Canton

Fire Department

NC

5,799,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Southeastern
North Carolina, Inc.

Midtown YMCA Expansion
Project

NC

1,500,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lenoir County Government

Water and Sewer Infrastructure Extension

NC

5,182,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gaston County Family
YMCA

Stowe Family YMCA Expansion Project

NC

2,000,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Valley

Water Main Replacement

NE

1,280,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ralston

Burlington Economic Development Infrastructure
Project

NE

2,000,000

Bacon

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00489

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1842

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Omaha

Bluestem Stream Improvement Project

NE

1,000,000

Bacon

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Seward County

Paving 420th Road

NE

1,000,000

Flood

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Polk County

141st Road Paving

NE

1,800,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fremont

North Downtown
Streetscape Revitalization Project

NE

2,800,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Waverly

Oldfield Street Paving

NE

3,000,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lincoln

Center Terrace and Rental
Rehabilitation Public
Connectivity Improvements

NE

2,500,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lancaster County

North 162nd Street Surfacing

NE

5,348,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mid-Plains Community College

Regional CDL Training Facility

NE

2,000,000

Smith (NE)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Clatonia

Fire Hall

NE

1,310,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plattsmouth

Aerial Fire Truck

NE

1,800,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South Sioux City

Aerial Fire Truck and Fire
Equipment

NE

2,500,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Friend

Friend Volunteer Fire and
Rescue Department

NE

1,300,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nashua Community College

Early Childhood Education
Center for Teaching and
Learning at Nashua
Community College

NH

933,500

Goodlander

Shaheen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Claremont

Sugar River Revitalization
and Brownfields Redevelopment Project

NH

850,000

Goodlander

Shaheen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sullivan County

Regional Childcare Facility
Enhancement Project

NH

1,600,000

Goodlander

Shaheen

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Nashua Public
Health & Community
Services

Nashua Shelter and Resource Center

NH

1,200,000

Goodlander

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Nashua, NH

Nashua Commuter Rail Extension Project Development

NH

250,000

Goodlander

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hooksett

Martins Ferry Roadway
Intersection Improvement
and Bridge Project

NH

2,000,000

Pappas

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Portsmouth Housing Authority

Urban Forest Workforce
Housing Project

NH

850,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dover Housing Authority

Garrison Crossing Housing

NH

1,000,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Manchester

JFK Coliseum Chiller Plant
Replacement

NH

850,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Rye

Rye Fuel Island Replacement

NH

250,000

Pappas

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00490

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Fischer

Shaheen

H22JAPT2

H

H

January 22, 2026

H1843

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Barrington

Barrington Commons

NH

250,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockingham Planning Commission

New Hampshire Rail Trail
User Counting Network

NH

250,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Laconia Housing Redevelopment Authority—Union
Avenue Limited Partnership

Laconia Affordable Housing
Expansion

NH

750,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Salem Housing Authority

Salem Area Housing Development

NH

3,000,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NeighborWorks Southern
New Hampshire

Pearl Street Apartments
Manchester

NH

2,212,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gather

Expanding Food Access
Across the Seacoast

NH

345,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Joseph Community Services

Meals on Wheels of
Hillsborough County:
Community Nutrition
Center Project

NH

686,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Avesta Housing Development Corporation

Rural NH Affordable Housing Preservation Project

NH

335,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cross New Hampshire Adventure Trail

Twin State Rails-to-Trails
Project

NH

250,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marguerite’s Place

Nashua Transitional Housing, Child Care and
Family Resource Center

NH

2,500,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

School Administrative Unit
#18

Franklin High School Revitalization Project

NH

461,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Our Place, Inc.

Supportive Housing for
Adults with Disabilities

NH

1,950,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SNHS Management Corps

Community Action Partnership Hillsborough and
Rockingham Opportunity
Center

NH

688,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Families in Transition

Affordable Housing and
Shelter Security Improvement Plan

NH

1,060,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southwestern Community
Services, Inc.

Keene Eastside Housing

NH

198,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monadnock Affordable
Housing Corporation

Monadnock Affordable
Housing Project

NH

2,000,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mark Stebbins Community
Center

Mark Stebbins Community
Center Project

NH

2,000,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Affordable Housing, Education and Development
Inc.

North Country Main Street
Revitalization

NH

1,000,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bridges: Domestic & Sexual
Violence Support Services, Inc.

Emergency Housing Program

NH

1,000,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Hamilton

Firehouse HVAC System Upgrades

NJ

1,325,000

Conaway

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Marlboro

Improvements to the Marlboro Township Free Public Library

NJ

500,000

Conaway

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lumberton Township

Lumberton Municipal
Recreation Field Lighting
Improvements

NJ

250,000

Conaway

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00491

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H

H1844

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Burlington County

The Learning Commons:
Space for Learning,
Meeting and Collaboration Project

NJ

850,000

Conaway

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lawrence Township

Lawrence Township Community Center Improvements

NJ

500,000

Conaway

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Delran

Don Deutsch Soccer Field
Improvements

NJ

250,000

Conaway

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Hainesport

Creek Turn Park Improvements

NJ

850,000

Conaway

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Tenafly

Tenafly Natural Flood Control Improvements

NJ

850,000

Gottheimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Glen Rock

Glen Rock DPW Project

NJ

850,000

Gottheimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Warren County Community
College

Agricultural Educational
and Training Center Improvements

NJ

979,000

Kean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Washington

Police Department Building
Renovations

NJ

560,000

Kean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Summit

Glenside Avenue Sidewalk
Improvements

NJ

530,000

Kean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Phillipsburg

Riverfront Park Revitalization

NJ

2,400,000

Kean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hunterdon County

Senior Center Expansion
and Renovation

NJ

1,500,000

Kean

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newark

Upgrade and Rehabilitation
of the Newark YMCA

NJ

850,000

McIver

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Union

Morris Avenue Smart Traffic
Light Acquisition Installation

NJ

250,000

McIver

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Hillside

Hillside Ladder Truck Replacement

NJ

1,600,000

McIver

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newark

Lincoln Park Facade Restoration and Housing
Development and Construction

NJ

500,000

McIver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newark

Community Microenterprise
and Skilled Trades
Training Center Upgrades and Expansion

NJ

250,000

McIver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of East Orange

East Orange Fellowship
Civic Center Renovations

NJ

250,000

McIver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hoboken

800 Monroe Resiliency Park
Project

NJ

850,000

Menendez

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Union City

Manhattan Avenue Pedestrian Bridge Demolition
and Replacement

NJ

2,000,000

Menendez

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of West New York

West New York Recreation
Center Development and
Construction

NJ

1,200,000

Menendez

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Harrison

Public Safety Building Construction Project

NJ

850,000

Menendez

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Hudson Regional Fire
& Rescue

Facilities Rehabilitation
and System Upgrades

NJ

1,410,000

Menendez

Booker, Kim

H/S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00492

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1845

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Essex County Department
of Parks, Recreation,
and Cultural Affairs

Riverfront Parks Improvement

NJ

250,000

Menendez

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Washington Township

Washington Township Park
Safety and Security Upgrades

NJ

250,000

Norcross

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Camden County College

Electric Vehicle Education
Network

NJ

850,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Camden

Camden City Clean Up Initiative

NJ

850,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pennsauken Township

Pennsauken Public Works
Building/Repair Facility
Enhancement

NJ

850,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Wenonah

Cedar Field Site Improvements and Recreational
Facilities Development
and Construction Improvement Project

NJ

250,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Edison

Minnie B. Veal Senior Services Expansion Project

NJ

2,915,000

Pallone

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Woodbridge

Woodbridge Township Recreational Infrastructure
Development and Construction

NJ

1,200,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Atlantic Highlands

Improvements to Upper
Prospect Road Retaining
Wall

NJ

850,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Neptune Township

Neptune Lake Alberta Improvements

NJ

1,250,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South Amboy

South Amboy Park and
Playground Project

NJ

250,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Secaucus

Secaucus—Recreation Center Renovations

NJ

250,000

Pou

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Clifton

City of Clifton—Holster
Park Rehabilitation

NJ

850,000

Pou

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Haledon

Haledon—Recycling Center
Rehabilitation

NJ

250,000

Pou

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Passaic

River Street Storm Water
Management

NJ

1,200,000

Pou

Booker, Kim

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Passaic

City of Passaic—Infrastructure Improvements

NJ

3,150,000

Pou

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Ridgefield

Ridgefield Community Center Renovation and Efficiency Upgrades

NJ

600,000

Pou

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paterson

Recreation Center Development and Construction
in Paterson, NJ

NJ

250,000

Pou

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Little Ferry

Street Safety Improvements

NJ

250,000

Pou

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Orange Village

South Orange Downtown &
Train Station Streetscape
Improvements

NJ

2,000,000

Sherrill

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Borough of Woodland
Park

Woodland Park Community
Center Improvement
Project

NJ

850,000

Sherrill

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00493

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Kim

Booker, Kim

H22JAPT2

H

H/S

H1846

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Morris

Morris Township Community
Senior and Recreation
Center Redevelopment

NJ

850,000

Sherrill

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Berkeley Township

Historic Manitou Park
School House Rehabilitation

NJ

1,490,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Eatontown

Community Flood Mitigation
Project Part II

NJ

1,000,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Lakewood

Cross Street Safety and
Streetscape Improvements

NJ

2,000,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Middletown

Shadow Lake Stormwater
Management, Conservation and Economic Development Project

NJ

2,000,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlantic County

Aviation Maintenance
Training Academy

NJ

1,000,000

Van Drew

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlantic Cape Community
College

Capital Asset Fund

NJ

3,000,000

Van Drew

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vineland

Emergency Shelter Water
Supply

NJ

1,624,000

Van Drew

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Trenton

Assunpink Greenway

NJ

2,000,000

Watson Coleman

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bound Brook Borough

Bound Brook Memorial Library Renovations

NJ

850,000

Watson Coleman

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of North Brunswick

North Brunswick Community Resilience Hubs—
Development, Construction and Equipment

NJ

1,000,000

Watson Coleman

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Union County

Cedar Brook Park Road and
Pedestrian Bridge Improvements

NJ

1,200,000

Watson Coleman

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Old Bridge

Old Bridge Food Bank Facility Improvements and
Expansion

NJ

500,000

Watson Coleman

Booker, Kim

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plainfield

Plainfield Center of Excellence Project

NJ

3,150,000

Watson Coleman

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Middlesex

Route 28 Streetscape
Phase 2

NJ

850,000

Watson Coleman

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery Township

Otto Kaufman Community
Center HVAC Replacement and Infrastructure
Improvements

NJ

850,000

Watson Coleman

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hillsborough Township

Hillsborough Recreation
Center Renovations

NJ

1,000,000

Watson Coleman

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kean University

Coalport Neighborhood Revitalization and Facility
Redevelopment

NJ

2,000,000

Watson Coleman

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Advocacy Group, Inc.

Nonprofit Innovation Corridor

NJ

800,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Revive South Jersey

Operation HOPE

NJ

500,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Newark Community Street
Team

Trauma Recovery Center

NJ

359,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Warren County Habitat for
Humanity

Affordable Housing Construction and Critical
Home Repair

NJ

500,000

Booker

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00494

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1847

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Veterans of Foreign Wars
Department of New Jersey

Veteran Outreach Initiative

NJ

267,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Trust for Public Land

Sowing Seeds for Change

NJ

287,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Piscataway

Electric Bus for Senior Center

NJ

256,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

HABcore, Inc.

Ocean County Homeless
Shelter Vans

NJ

150,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

HomeWorks Trenton, Inc.

Facilities Upgrades

NJ

150,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hunterdon County

Senior Center Expansion &
ADA Upgrades

NJ

2,000,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plainfield

Milt Campbell Field Detention Basin Improvements
and Flood Reduction
Project

NJ

2,000,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Food Bank of
New Jersey Inc.

Renovation of Warehouse

NJ

2,000,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Covenant House New Jersey

Redevelopment and Affordable Housing Project

NJ

1,000,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lunch Break

Family Promise Apartments

NJ

300,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Woodbridge

Supportive Housing Facility

NJ

800,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paterson

Paterson Homeless Hub
Project

NJ

3,200,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Bergen

Conklin Youth Improvements Project

NJ

500,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of West Milford

West Milford Senior Bus

NJ

100,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Perth Amboy

Second Street Park Rehabilitation Project

NJ

3,000,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winslow Township

Senior Bus Improvement
Project

NJ

250,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gloucester County Habitat
for Humanity

Home Builds for Habitat

NJ

400,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sussex County

Transportation Enhancement Project

NJ

185,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Bergen

Bergen HEARTS Facility Improvements

NJ

116,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Newark Housing Authority

Cottage Place

NJ

900,000

Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wildwood

ADA Access and Security
Improvements

NJ

2,185,000

Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pueblo of Jemez

Hazard Remediation and
Pueblo Revitalization

NM

1,512,000

Heinrich, Luján

H/S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00495

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Leger Fernandez

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1848

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

House

Origination
Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Portales

Portales, NM Waste Transfer Facility Expansion

NM

1,200,000

Leger Fernandez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jicarilla Apache Nation

Jicarilla Apache Nation
Public Safety Housing
Project

NM

2,000,000

Leger Fernandez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lovington

City of Lovington, NM Senior Center Infrastructure
Improvement Project

NM

369,750

Leger Fernandez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pueblo of Sandia

Middle Rio Grande Pueblos
Irrigation and Acequia
Infrastructure Improvements

NM

1,000,000

Stansbury

Heinrich, Luján

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albuquerque

Senior Stability Site

NM

2,000,000

Stansbury

Heinrich, Luján

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority

Transitional Housing for
Women and Children

NM

250,000

Stansbury

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bernalillo County

Bernalillo County Affordable
Housing

NM

250,000

Stansbury

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Anthony Water and Sanitation District

Wastewater Treatment
Plant Improvements

NM

2,500,000

Vasquez

Heinrich

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pueblo of Acoma Senior
Center

Senior Home Improvements

NM

2,900,000

Vasquez

Heinrich, Luján

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albuquerque

Modernization of Gateway
West

NM

2,000,000

Vasquez

Heinrich, Luján

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carlsbad

Carlsbad Police Department
Renovation

NM

250,000

Vasquez

Luján

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Cruces

Las Cruces Innovation &
Industrial Park Expansion and Improvements

NM

850,000

Vasquez

Luján

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Cruces

Creation of the Community
of Hope De-Escalation
Office

NM

660,000

Vasquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albuquerque Economic Development Department

South Valley Commercial
Corridor Revitalization

NM

500,000

Vasquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Deming Silver Linings

Emergency Housing and
Support

NM

440,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Socorro

Waterline Replacement

NM

2,300,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Club of San
Juan County

Aztec Club Capital Improvements

NM

1,500,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mesilla Valley Community
of Hope

Amador Crossing Apartments

NM

200,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DreamTree Project, Inc.

Taos (NEST) Navigating
Emergency Support Together Renovations

NM

1,500,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Albuquerque Housing Authority

Albuquerque Public Housing
Upgrades

NM

850,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Homewise, Inc.

New Homes for New Mexico

NM

4,000,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Rio Grande National Heritage Area

Affordable Housing Pilot
Project

NM

692,000

Heinrich

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00496

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1849

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Serenity Mesa Youth Recovery Center

Facility Expansion

NM

1,000,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Youth Development, Inc.

Early Childhood Development Center

NM

3,000,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

La Cosecha Community
Supported Agriculture

Raı́ces Sagradas EcoWellness and Food Hub

NM

3,000,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santa Fe County

Trauma-Informed Housing
Project

NM

2,500,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tierra Del Sol Housing Corporation

Vado New Horizons Development

NM

1,500,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mountainair

Downtown Mountainair
Roadway Improvements

NM

1,800,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cuidando Los Niños

Facility Expansion

NM

700,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pueblo of Acoma Housing
Authority

Cedar Hills Affordable
Housing

NM

1,000,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Bernalillo

Affordable Housing Development

NM

1,500,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Joaquin del Rio de
Chama Land Grant

Community Center Renovations and Upgrades

NM

605,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lordsburg

Special Events Center Refurbish

NM

500,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Espanola Valley & Los
Alamos

Affordable Home Construction

NM

300,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Mosquero

Housing Project

NM

620,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McKinley County

Red Rock Facility Improvements

NM

500,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Region 9 Education Cooperative

Early Childhood Center

NM

1,000,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Regional Transportation
Commission of Washoe
County

Roadway and pedestrian
walkway improvements

NV

6,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Carson City

Public Works Department’s
5th Street Roundabout
Project

NV

3,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clark County, Nevada

Clark County Lighting and
Safety Improvements

NV

250,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Vegas

Opportunity Village Northwest Campus Development and Construction

NV

850,000

Lee (NV)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nevada System of Higher
Education

Boulder City Community
and Science Center

NV

850,000

Titus

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

Bike Share Equipment Expansion

NV

775,000

Titus

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clark County

Clark County Energy Resilience and Safety Upgrades

NV

250,000

Titus

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00497

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H22JAPT2

H

H1850

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lyon County

Mound House Community
Center

NV

600,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of North Las Vegas

Library Expansion

NV

2,500,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Wendover

Community Center

NV

7,796,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lander County

Assisted Living Center

NV

250,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Elko County

Specialty Court Housing
Program

NV

635,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Vegas

Historic Westside Community Land Trust Affordable Housing

NV

1,850,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Reno

Community Center Wellness
Project

NV

3,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Vegas

Homelessness Prevention
and Diversion Program

NV

1,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

P.S. 12—The Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis Elementary School

Playground and Outdoor
Seating Area Renovations

NY

200,000

Clarke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

P.S. 139—The Alexine
Fenty School

Renovation and Expansion
of School Cafeteria

NY

850,000

Clarke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

PS 92—Adrian Hegeman
Elementary School

Pre-K Playground Renovations

NY

150,000

Clarke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

Dominican Studies Institute
Facility Renovation and
Expansion

NY

3,150,000

Espaillat

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

Bronx Community College
Auto Technology AAS
Building Restoration
Phase 2

NY

1,200,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Patrick Henry Preparatory

Restroom Facilities Renovation Upgrade

NY

500,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

The City College of New
York Skills-Based Workforce Development Training Facilities

NY

2,000,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education (George
Washington Educational
Campus)

George Washington Campus
Auditorium Upgrade

NY

850,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

P.S./I.S. 187 Hudson Cliffs
(06M187)

P.S./I.S. 187 Energy Efficiency Project

NY

850,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Alexander Humboldt
School PS 115

P.S. 115 School Yard Upgrade and Playground
Project

NY

250,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York State Homes and
Community Renewal

Amalgamated Housing Corporation Floor Renovation

NY

250,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Thomas Jefferson Recreation Center Security
Updates

NY

850,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

Lehman College Field Upgrades

NY

820,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York State Homes and
Community Renewal

Inwood Heights Affordable
Housing Renovations

NY

250,000

Espaillat

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00498

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schumer

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1851

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Transportation

Greater Harlem
Streetscapes

NY

250,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Small Business Services

Small Business Energy Efficient Upgrades

NY

850,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Babylon

Downtown Deer Park Revitalization Project

NY

4,000,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Brookhaven

Municipal Landfill Capping
Project

NY

5,000,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Suffolk County Community
College

Advanced Manufacturing
Training Construction

NY

1,500,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Lindenhurst

Road Improvements

NY

750,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Bellport

Road Improvements

NY

500,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Oyster Bay

Salt Shed Construction

NY

1,000,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Islip

Road Improvements

NY

500,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Massapequa Park

Road Improvements

NY

1,500,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Incorporated Village of
Hempstead

Village of Hempstead
Mirschel Park Community Center Rehabilitation, Infrastructure Improvements and Equipment

NY

2,000,000

Gillen

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Franklin Square Public Library

Franklin Square Public Library Roof and HVAC
Replacement

NY

250,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lakeview Public Library

Lakeview Library Renovations

NY

850,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Tower Ladder Truck Acquisition for the Long
Beach Fire Department

NY

850,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Rockville Centre

Hickey Park Accessibility
Upgrades

NY

2,000,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Valley Stream Central High
School District

Valley Stream Creek Upgrades and Repairs

NY

850,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Incorporated Village of Floral Park

Floral Park Hook and Ladder Fire Truck Acquisition

NY

250,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lynbrook Police Department

Lynbrook All Weather Roof
Cover and Related
Equipment Acquisition
and Installation

NY

850,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Incorporated Village of Garden City

Edgemere Fire Station 2
Renovations and Structural Repairs

NY

500,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Building Line Initiative—Red Hook East
Houses

NY

5,000,000

Goldman

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Red Hook East
Community Center Elevator Replacement

NY

1,100,000

Goldman

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00499

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schumer

Gillibrand, Schumer

H22JAPT2

H

H/S

H

H1852

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Lower East Side
Rehab (Group 5) Building Window Replacement

NY

850,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Gowanus Fire Alarm
System Upgrades

NY

850,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Baruch Houses Fire
Alarm System Upgrades

NY

850,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
for the Aging

Older Adult Mobile Vans
Acquisition

NY

500,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Fire Department

FDNY Generator Acquisition
for Engine Company 228

NY

250,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Canarsie Educational Campus Library Renovation

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Critical Facility Upgrades
and Improvements

NY

250,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Athletic Facilities Rehabilitation

NY

2,000,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Playground Rehabilitation

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

PS 345 Capital Improvements

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

South Shore Educational
Complex Athletic Facilities Rehabilitation

NY

1,200,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Van Dyke II Older
Adult Center Roof

NY

500,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Kingsborough Extension security cameras

NY

250,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

Marine Park Nature Trail
Bridge

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Woodson Safety and
Security Project

NY

250,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Fire Department

Renovation and equipment
for Engine 318/Ladder
166

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tonawanda, New
York

Tonawanda’s Kohler Youth
Center Facility Upgrades
Phase 4

NY

850,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Niagara

Back Up Power at the Trott
Access Building in Niagara Falls

NY

250,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Suffolk County

Riverhead Brownfield Remediation

NY

350,000

LaLota

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Huntington

Townwide Repavement
Project

NY

3,500,000

LaLota

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of New York

Office of Parks, Recreation
and Historic Preservation’s York Hall Historical Preservation

NY

1,500,000

LaLota

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Smithtown

Pavement Rehabilitation
and Infrastructure Renewal

NY

5,000,000

LaLota

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00500

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1853

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Brookhaven

Harbor Road/Town of
Brookhaven Resurfacing
Project

NY

5,000,000

LaLota

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Newstead

Community Center Construction

NY

5,000,000

Langworthy

Schumer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mamaroneck

Mamaroneck Town Safety
and Economic Renaissance Roundabout
Project

NY

500,000

Latimer

Schumer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Greenburgh

Greenburgh East Rumbrook
Park Expansion

NY

250,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mount Vernon

Mount Vernon Armory Preservation and Rehabilitation Project

NY

3,000,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New Rochelle

New Rochelle Housing Authority Accessibility Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Port Chester

Port Chester Village Hall
Gymnasium Remodeling
Project

NY

2,000,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Tarrytown

Tarrytown Benedict Avenue
Sidewalk

NY

850,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Tuckahoe

Tuckahoe Depot Square and
Main Street Sign Improvements

NY

850,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Ramapo

Pedestrian safety improvements

NY

5,000,000

Lawler

Gillibrand

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of New Square

Road Infrastructure Improvements

NY

4,000,000

Lawler

Schumer

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockland County Sheriff’s
Department

Law Enforcement RealityBased Training Facility

NY

2,600,000

Lawler

Schumer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Orangetown

Town of Orangetown Revitalization Project

NY

1,300,000

Lawler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Suffern

Memorial Drive Reconstruction

NY

1,000,000

Lawler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Clarkstown

Transit-Oriented Development

NY

5,000,000

Lawler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Berry Houses CCTV Camera
Project

NY

1,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New York

FDNY Engine 284/Ladder
149/Satellite 3 Improvements

NY

1,230,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New York

FDNY Engine 155/Ladder
78 Generator Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New York

New York City EMS Training
Center Project

NY

5,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

College of Staten Island,
City University of New
York

Public Safety Center

NY

2,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

New Lane Area CCTV Cameras

NY

1,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New York

FDNY Squad 8 Firehouse
Renovations

NY

2,000,000

Malliotakis

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00501

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

H1854

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oneida County

St. Luke’s Campus Redevelopment for Affordable
Housing

NY

2,000,000

Mannion

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Syracuse Housing Authority

East Adams Neighborhood
Transformation Development

NY

850,000

Mannion

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Conlon LIHFE Tower
Safety And Security
Project

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA International Tower
Safety and Security
Project

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Shelton House Safety and Security Project

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA International Tower
Fire Alarm System
Project

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Carleton Manor Roof
Tank Replacement

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Transportation

Bayswater Pedestrian Improvements

NY

250,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Transportation

Jamaica Ave Safety &
Streetscape Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NYS Housing Trust Fund
(HTFC)

Power Plant Chiller Replacements

NY

2,000,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The New York City Department of Transportation

Woodhaven Blvd SBS
Project to Improve Bus
and Pedestrian Mobility

NY

850,000

Meeks, Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

Queensborough Community
College Childcare Center

NY

3,150,000

Meng

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Fire Department

Apparatus & Multi-Component Renovation of
Squad 288

NY

2,000,000

Meng

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Fire Department

Multi-Component Renovation of Engine 305/Ladder 151

NY

2,000,000

Meng

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rochester

Rochester Public Market
Upgrades and Expansion

NY

2,000,000

Morelle

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Perinton

Perinton Community Center
& Playground Access Improvement Initiative

NY

2,100,000

Morelle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town/Village of East Rochester

Acquisition & Development
of Linden Park

NY

1,750,000

Morelle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monroe Community College

Monroe Community College
Precision Optics Finishing Lab

NY

850,000

Morelle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

The Central Park Footpath
Restoration

NY

850,000

Nadler

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks & Recreation

Swedish Cottage Historic
Preservation and Facility
Upgrades

NY

3,150,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

High Line 16th Street Accessibility Improvements

NY

850,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks & Recreation

Ralph Bunche Park Renovations

NY

2,000,000

Nadler

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00502

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schumer

Gillibrand

Gillibrand, Schumer

H22JAPT2

H

H/S

H

January 22, 2026

H1855

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Thomas Apartments Safety
Upgrades

NY

2,000,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Harborview Terrace Elevator
Replacement

NY

1,200,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City School Construction Authority

Joan of Arc Educational
Complex School and
Playground Revitalization

NY

500,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hudson River Park Trust

Hudson River Park’s Public
Restroom Rehabilitation

NY

850,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

Seabury Playground Infrastructure and Play Area
Revitalization

NY

850,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Small Business Services

Food Bank Warehouse Upgrades

NY

2,998,000

Ocasio-Cortez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

School Food Forest Hub at
Adlai Stevenson High
School

NY

850,000

Ocasio-Cortez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

District 12 Literacy Hub

NY

720,000

Ocasio-Cortez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Transportation

Southern Boulevard Bus
Stops and Pedestrian
Safety Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Ocasio-Cortez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Research Foundation
for the State University
of New York—Binghamton University

Koffman Southern Tier Incubator Expansion and
Renovation for Manufacturing

NY

1,000,000

Riley

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Greenbush Police Department

East Greenbush Public
Safety Facility Improvements

NY

850,000

Riley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Endicott

Village of Endicott
Streetscape Improvements

NY

500,000

Riley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Shandaken

Pine Hill Wellington Hotel
Renovations

NY

250,000

Riley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hudson

Hudson Public Square Renovations

NY

250,000

Riley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arlington Fire District

Arlington Fire Station 4
Functional Upgrades

NY

1,000,000

Ryan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Poughkeepsie

Hooker Ave. Fire Station
Structural Improvements

NY

850,000

Ryan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kingston

Rondout Riverport Shoreline
Stabilization

NY

250,000

Ryan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of South Blooming
Grove

South Blooming Grove Sidewalk Installation

NY

2,000,000

Ryan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake Champlain—Lake
George Regional Planning Board

North Country Housing Initiative

NY

5,000,000

Stefanik

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Business Development Center Construction

NY

4,000,000

Stefanik

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Cobleskill

Grandview Drive Project

NY

3,000,000

Stefanik

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Huntington

Southgate Affordable Rental Housing Redevelopment

NY

850,000

Suozzi

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00503

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Schumer

H22JAPT2

H/S

H1856

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Incorporated Village of
Lattingtown

East Beach Drive Drainage
Project

NY

2,500,000

Suozzi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SUNY Old Westbury

Welwyn Preserve Revitalization

NY

2,000,000

Suozzi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Lyons

Canal Street District Improvements

NY

2,000,000

Tenney

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lockport

Erie Canal Flight of Five
Locks Rehabilitation—
Phase III

NY

1,000,000

Tenney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wyoming County

Silver Lake Dredging
Project

NY

1,000,000

Tenney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hudson Valley Community
College

Hudson Valley Community
College Applied Technology Education Center
(ATEC)

NY

850,000

Tonko

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Troy Public Library

Troy Public Main Library Indoor Air Quality Systems

NY

2,000,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Glenville Hill Fire District
No. 8

Glenville Hill Fire District
No. 8 Essential Building
Repair and Update

NY

1,000,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albany

Lincoln Park Southwest
Gateway Improvements

NY

850,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Scotia

Village of Scotia Community Park Improvements

NY

500,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Ballston Spa

Village of Ballston Spa ADA
Transition Plan Sidewalk
Improvement Implementation

NY

250,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Housing Preservation
& Development

NYC Neighborhood
Connectivity Expansion
and Equipment

NY

2,000,000

Torres (NY)

Gillibrand

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Building Line Initiative—Patterson Houses

NY

5,000,000

Torres (NY)

Gillibrand, Schumer

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York State Housing Finance Agency—NYS
Homes and Community
Renewal

Concourse Village Domestic
Pipes Replacement

NY

3,150,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA)

NYCHA Gun Hill Fire Alarm
System Upgrades

NY

850,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA)

NYCHA Parkside Fire Alarm
System Upgrades

NY

850,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hostos Community College,
City University of New
York

CUNY Hostos Library Renovations

NY

700,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
For The Aging (DFTA)

DFTA Transportation Vans
Acquisition

NY

660,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

Drew Playground Restroom
Renovations

NY

500,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

Shoelace Park Resilience—
Infrastructure and Facility Upgrades

NY

1,200,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Leaders of Tomorrow Middle
School Hydroponic
Science Lab Development, Construction, and
Equipment

NY

250,000

Torres (NY)

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00504

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Gillibrand

Gillibrand, Schumer

H22JAPT2

H

H

January 22, 2026

H1857

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Bushwick Houses
Roof Tank Replacement

NY

1,200,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Borinquen Plaza II
Exterior Lighting

NY

2,000,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Small Business Services

GMDC 1155–1205 Manhattan Avenue Bulkhead
Replacement, Brooklyn,
NY

NY

850,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Ravenswood Exterior Lighting

NY

3,150,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Cooper Park Houses
Exterior Lighting

NY

1,000,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Whitman Houses
Local Law 11 Brick Work
(Building 14)

NY

2,000,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Whitman Houses
Local Law 11 Brick Work
(Building 15)

NY

850,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mosholu-Montefiore Community Center, Inc.

Facility Renovations

NY

1,371,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Way of Long Island

Training Academy Construction

NY

750,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Long Island

Patchogue Renovation and
Expansion

NY

3,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Asian Americans for Equality

Affordable Housing Development

NY

1,166,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity New
York City and Westchester

Affordable Housing Project

NY

3,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Catholic Charities of Staten
Island, Inc.

Community Center Renovation

NY

2,500,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York Public Library

K–12 Learning Center

NY

3,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York School for the
Deaf

Career and Technical Education Facility

NY

5,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Multi-Craft Apprenticeship
Preparation Program

Workforce Development Facility

NY

2,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

BronxWorks, Inc.

McLaughlin Center Capital
Renovations Project

NY

2,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Uptown Grand Central
Corp.

125th Street Community
Plaza

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Viscardi Center, Inc.

Community Program Hub

NY

400,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

India Home, Inc.

Jamaica Affordable Housing
Project

NY

5,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Building Line Initiative—Douglass I & II
Houses

NY

1,663,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Food Bank For New York
City

Warehouse Renovations

NY

6,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00505

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1858

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Amount
($)

Requesters
Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake Champlain—Lake
George Regional Planning Board

Adirondack Workforce Housing Modular Facility Plan

NY

750,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

FeedMore Western New
York, Inc.

Consolidated Facility

NY

500,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brooklyn Chinese-American
Association

BCA Complex

NY

2,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Variety Boys & Girls Club
of Queens

Creation of Community
Center

NY

2,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York Historical Society

Classroom Space Additions

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Regional Food Bank of
Northeastern New York,
Inc.

Facilities Expansion

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Roundabout Theatre Company, Inc.

ADA Accessibility Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Babylon

Blighted Property Acquisition and Demolition for
Visionary Renewal of
Downtown Copiague

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

RiseBoro Community Partnership Inc.

Affordable Housing Rehabilitation

NY

5,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fifth Avenue Committee,
Inc.

Community Facility Enhancements

NY

3,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Metropolitan Museum
of Art

83rd Street ADA Accessible
Entrance

NY

1,500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Harlem El Barrio Community Land Trust

Building Rehabilitation

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

UnionDocs, Inc.

Elevator and HVAC for
UnionDocs Headquarters

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Machne Gila

Dining Hall at Camp Gila

NY

1,500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

National Comedy Center
Operator Inc.

Comedy Center Capital Improvements

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ridgewood Nepalese Society
Inc.

Community and Cultural
Center Renovation and
Expansion

NY

900,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Joyce Theater Foundation, Inc.

New York Center for Creativity & Dance

NY

650,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Opera Association, Inc.

Elevator Modernization for
ADA Accessibility

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Center for New Jewish Culture Inc.

Community Center Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greater Allen Development
Corporation

Affordable Mixed-Use Housing

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bukharian Heritage Society,
Inc.

Bukharian Jewish Museum
and Community Facility
Expansion

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brooklyn Queens Conservatory of Music

BKCM Campus Expansion &
Renovation

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00506

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1859

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Camp HASC, Inc.

Dining Facility Renovation

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brooklyn Institute of Arts
and Sciences

Fire Alarm System

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of North Hempstead

Town Dock Revitalization
Project

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fordham University

Fordham Road Community
Center

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York Shakespeare Festival dba The Public
Theater

ADA Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rochester Broadway Theatre League

West Herr Performing Arts
Center ADA Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

National Federation of Filipino American Associations

Community Center Expansion

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fund for Public Housing,
Inc. dba Public Housing
Community Fund

Active Living at NYCHA:
Creating Vibrant Intergenerational Spaces for
Health and Wellness

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Immigrant Community
Empowerment

NICE Station—Community
& Training Center

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Albany

Industrial Park Access
Road Project

OH

1,500,000

Balderson

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Reynoldsburg

Brice Road Corridor Redevelopment & Multimodal
Enhancements Project

OH

2,000,000

Beatty

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Columbus Metropolitan
Housing Authority

Reynoldsburg Mixed-Income
Housing

OH

1,000,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Minerva Park

Minerva Park Lake Watershed Rehabilitation—
Reservoir and Path System

OH

850,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gahanna

Creekside Garage Flood
Mitigation & Trail Improvements

OH

250,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Euclid

Shore Cultural Centre Historic Preservation Project

OH

850,000

Brown

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cuyahoga County

The Beulah Park-Euclid
Beach Lakefront Connector

OH

850,000

Brown

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cleveland City Council
Ward 10

Ward 10 (NORA) Economic
Revitalization Recovery
Development

OH

1,000,000

Brown

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cuyahoga Community College District

Center for Entrepreneurs
Equipment and Retrofitting Project

OH

500,000

Brown

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Piqua

Downtown Piqua
Streetscape Improvements

OH

1,000,000

Carey

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Franklin Township

Westland Mall Redevelopment Project

OH

2,500,000

Carey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Troy

Great Miami River Recreation Connectivity
Project

OH

1,000,000

Carey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sidney

Sidney/Shelby Water Sewer
Expansion

OH

800,000

Carey

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00507

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

Moreno

Moreno

H22JAPT2

H/S

H

H1860

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hamilton County

Metropolitan Sewer District
of Greater Cincinnati—
SS 937 Dry Weather
Channel Improvements

OH

800,000

Davidson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Niles

Sanitary Detention Pump
Station Improvements—
Phase 3

OH

600,000

Joyce (OH)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chester Township

Building and Infrastructure
Improvements

OH

3,938,000

Joyce (OH)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Toledo

New SAFE–T City Headquarters

OH

1,250,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Toledo

New Fire Station 16 on Dorr
Street

OH

850,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Park District
of the Toledo Area

Metroparks Toledo
Riverwalk Construction
and Glass City Enrichment Center Building
Upgrades

OH

2,000,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Toledo Public School District

Scott Park Campus Revitalization

OH

3,061,099

Kaptur

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cincinnati, Ohio

Northside Affordable Housing Renovation and Construction Project

OH

2,000,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Mariemont, Ohio

Mariemont Parks Improvement Project

OH

936,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hamilton County, Ohio

Walnut Hills Housing and
Workforce Development
Hub Project

OH

850,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Greater Cincinnati
Development Authority

Crosley Building Revitalization Project

OH

850,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Greater Cincinnati
Development Authority

West End Mixed-Use Renovation Project

OH

850,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cincinnati Metropolitan
Housing Authority

Winton Terrace Affordable
Housing Renovation
Project

OH

850,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norwood, Ohio

Dorl Field Improvement
Project

OH

500,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Greater Cincinnati
Development Authority

Urban League Community
Resource Hub Renovation and Expansion

OH

250,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montgomery, Ohio

Montgomery Quarter Connector Boulevard Improvement Project

OH

250,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sheffield Lake

Field House Construction

OH

500,000

Latta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Parma Heights

Parma Heights Street Rehabilitation Project

OH

1,000,000

Miller (OH)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Steubenville

Wastewater Building Repair

OH

700,000

Rulli

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Akron

Downtown Akron Main
Street Project

OH

1,200,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Monroe Falls

Guise Park Lodge Renovation Project

OH

450,000

Sykes

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00508

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Moreno

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1861

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Twinsburg

Glen Chamberlin Park Improvement Study

OH

850,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Akron

East Copley District Safe
and Vibrant Streets
Study

OH

250,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Stark County Park District

Ohio & Erie Canal National
Heritage Area Restoration

OH

1,500,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Boston Heights

Village of Boston Heights
Safety Center

OH

850,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Canton

Cleveland Ave. NW
Streetscape

OH

850,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Massillon

Reservoir Park Restoration

OH

250,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fairlawn

Rosemont Preserve Restoration Project

OH

1,200,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tallmadge

Tallmadge Circle Pedestrian
Tunnel Development and
Construction

OH

1,000,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pickaway County Port Authority

State Route 762/Rickenbacker Parkway Roundabout

OH

4,000,000

Taylor

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ironton

Riverfront Improvements

OH

1,000,000

Taylor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dayton

Edwin C. Moses Boulevard
Revitalization Project

OH

3,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dayton

Wright-Dunbar Development
Project

OH

2,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fairborn

Wright-Patterson Council of
Governments Land Acquisition

OH

1,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dayton-Montgomery County
Port Authority

Project Plymouth

OH

1,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wright State University

Facilities expansion, upgrades, and improvements

OH

1,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Wildenhaus Place

OH

1,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Stark State College

CDL Instruction Center

OH

875,000

Husted

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chillicothe

Mary Lou Patton Park Infrastructure Revitalization

OH

1,500,000

Husted

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Franklin Township &
Conesville Village Joint
Recreation Board

Muskingum River Access
Project

OH

247,000

Husted

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vinton County Visitors Center

Capital Improvements

OH

5,000,000

Husted

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Portsmouth

Chillicothe Street Housing
Project

OH

1,500,000

Husted

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Columbus State Community
College

Ohio Center for Advanced
Technology

OH

9,500,000

Husted, Moreno

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00509

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Moreno

H22JAPT2

H

H1862

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Downtown Toledo Development Corporation

ConnecToledo Farmer’s
Market Renovation and
Relocation

OH

2,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edmond

East Edmond Electric Substation Expansions for
Critical Infrastructure

OK

4,000,000

Bice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oklahoma City Redevelopment Authority

Facility and Lab Construction

OK

7,000,000

Bice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ardmore

Ardmore Storm Water and
Street Improvements

OK

7,500,000

Cole

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newcastle

Newcastle Wastewater
Treatment Facility

OK

12,000,000

Cole

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pauls Valley

Pauls Valley Lake Emergency Overflow Spillway
Project

OK

6,286,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fires Innovation Science
and Technology Accelerator

Fires Innovation Science
and Technology Accelerator’s Science and
Technology Convergence
Institute

OK

11,500,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lindsay

City of Lindsay’s New Electrical Substation

OK

3,957,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Walters Public Works Authority

Walters Substation Rebuild
and Capacity Enhancement Project

OK

4,340,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chickasaw Nation of Oklahoma

Chickasaw Nation Water
Quality and Hazardous
Substance Testing Center

OK

8,438,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Goldsby

Goldsby Municipal Water
Improvements

OK

7,000,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lawton

Lawton Alternate Water
Supply

OK

5,000,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oklahoma State University

Facility Construction and
Improvements

OK

5,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Weatherford

Weatherford Community
Center

OK

5,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kingfisher

Kingfisher Firehouse

OK

2,500,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Inola Public Schools

Inola Early Childhood Development and Preschool
Facility

OK

4,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Helens

St. Helens Reservoir Replacement Project

OR

1,000,000

Bonamici

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Beaverton

Beaverton Senior Housing
and Community Space
Construction Project

OR

3,150,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cornelius

Cornelius Community and
Recreation Center

OR

850,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tualatin Hills Park and
Recreation District

Americans with Disabilities
Act Facility Upgrades

OR

250,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Redmond

Cinder Hollow Affordable
Housing Project

OR

2,000,000

Bynum

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00510

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Moreno

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

S

Mullin

S

Merkley, Wyden

H

Merkley, Wyden

H22JAPT2

H/S

January 22, 2026

H1863

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gladstone

Gladstone Early Childhood
Center Development and
Construction

OR

1,500,000

Bynum

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Happy Valley

Happy Valley Community
Center

OR

1,200,000

Bynum

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Portland

The Ellington Apartments
Redevelopment

OR

2,000,000

Dexter

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gresham

Main City Park Revitalization Project

OR

850,000

Dexter

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Home Forward

Peaceful Villa Housing Construction, Equipment
and Furnishings

OR

1,975,000

Dexter

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Centennial School District

Centennial Transition Center Permanent Location

OR

500,000

Dexter

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Umpqua Community College

Affordable Housing for Students

OR

3,150,000

Hoyle

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lincoln City

Fernwood Village Housing
Development and Construction

OR

2,000,000

Hoyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Florence

Siuslaw River Slope Stabilization Project

OR

250,000

Hoyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sheridan School District
48J

Barbara Roberts Career
Technical Education
Center

OR

850,000

Salinas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Salem

Emergency Power Generation for Low-Income Senior Housing

OR

500,000

Salinas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Western Oregon University

Western Oregon University
Data Center

OR

250,000

Salinas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Woodburn

Woodburn’s Historic
Settlemier Park Improvements

OR

250,000

Salinas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Klamath Tribes

Tribal Housing

OR

2,820,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Linn-Benton Community
College Foundation

Periwinkle Child Development Center

OR

105,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Portland

Mass Timber and Housing
Innovation Campus Infrastructure Project

OR

3,200,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Medford

Santos Center Discovery
Preschool Expansion

OR

500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oregon Center for Creative
Learning

Early Childhood and Interactive Learning Center

OR

1,200,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Warehouse

Furniture Bank Expansion

OR

2,200,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Albina Vision Trust, Inc.

Affordable Housing Land
Acquisition

OR

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Network for Oregon Affordable Housing

Affordable Homeownership
Loan Program

OR

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Corvallis Neighborhood
Housing Services, Inc.
dba DevNW

Affordable Housing Construction in Linn County

OR

752,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00511

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Merkley, Wyden

H22JAPT2

H/S

H1864

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Everyone Village

Affordable Housing Construction in Lane County

OR

2,465,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sumpter

Sumpter Community Center
Safety Improvements

OR

173,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Columbia Gorge Education
Service District

The Dalles Early Learning
Center

OR

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Farmworker Housing Development Corporation

Affordable Housing

OR

536,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Confederated Tribes of
Coos, Lower Umpqua,
and Siuslaw Indians

Low-Income Multifamily
Housing Project

OR

1,914,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

John Day School District #3

Grant Early Learning Center

OR

1,450,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McKenzie Community Land
Trust

Affordable Housing in Blue
River

OR

1,700,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wallowa Resources

Affordable Workforce Housing in Wallowa County

OR

500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bridge Meadows

Intergenerational Housing
Project

OR

750,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Meals on Wheels People

Eastside Resource Center

OR

3,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marion Polk Food Share

Food Bank Warehouse and
Meals on Wheels Kitchen

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Corvallis Daytime Drop-in
Center

Homeless Services Navigation Center

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Big River Community Land
Trust

Hood River Affordable
Housing Project

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Confederated Tribes of
Grand Ronde

tumwata village Project

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Portland

Clara Vista Redevelopment

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bend-Redmond Habitat for
Humanity

Supporting Affordable
Homeownership in Central Oregon

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northwest Community
Housing Foundation

Zig Zag Workforce Housing

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yamhill County Affordable
Housing Corporation

McMinnville Housing Rehabilitation

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity Portland Metro East dba
Habitat for Humanity
Portland Region

Affordable Housing Construction in Multnomah
County

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Philadelphia Water Department, City of Philadelphia, PA

PWD Kensington Lead Service Line Replacement

PA

2,000,000

Boyle

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia—Department of Parks and
Recreation

Pleasant Hill Park Community Center Development
and Construction

PA

250,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia—Department of Parks and
Recreation

Pennypack on the Delaware
Ranger Building Development and Construction

PA

250,000

Boyle

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00512

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1865

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia’s Department of Fleet Services

Shop 134 EV Charging
Equipment Acquisition

PA

250,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia Office
of Transportation and
Infrastructure Systems

Castor Avenue Safety and
Streetscape Improvements

PA

850,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia Office
of Transportation and
Infrastructure Systems

Lehigh Avenue Traffic Safety Improvements

PA

850,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia

McPherson Library Renovations

PA

850,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia Office
of Transportation and
Infrastructure Systems

Market Street Headhouses
Replacements

PA

1,200,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Center City District

Viaduct Greenway Development and Revitalization

PA

2,000,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia

Demolition and Redevelopment of Holmesburg
Prison Site

PA

850,000

Boyle, Evans (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pike County

Wayne & Pike County Career and Technical Center

PA

3,000,000

Bresnahan

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lackawanna County

Veterans Permanent Supportive Housing

PA

1,500,000

Bresnahan

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Collegeville

Collegeville Main St & 9th
Avenue Transportation
Safety & Revitalization
Improvements

PA

750,000

Dean

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kutztown University of
Pennsylvania

Sharadin Farmstead Restoration

PA

250,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County Housing Authority

The Montgomery County
Housing Authority
(MCHA)’s Affordable
Housing Preservation

PA

500,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lower Providence Township

Public Facility Rebuild

PA

750,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cheltenham Township

Rowland Community Center
Revitalization

PA

500,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redevelopment Authority of
the County of Montgomery

Pottstown Anti-Poverty and
Workforce Development
Initiative: TRec District
Phase 1 Completion
Project

PA

800,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Upper Moreland Township
School District

Living Science Laboratory
for Agriculture and
Workforce Development
Facility Development &
Construction

PA

250,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Allegheny County

Panhandle Trail Extension
Acquisition

PA

850,000

Deluzio

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Borough of Sewickley

The Sewickley Road Safety
Improvement Plan

PA

250,000

Deluzio

Fetterman, McCormick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mt. Lebanon

Mt. Lebanon Community
Recreation Center Accessibility Upgrades and
Facility Expansion

PA

850,000

Deluzio

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Churchill Borough

Churchill Borough Community Park Development
and Construction

PA

500,000

Deluzio

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ben Avon Borough

Ben Avon Rooftop Solar
Panels

PA

250,000

Deluzio

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00513

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Fetterman, McCormick

H

H

Fetterman

H22JAPT2

H

H1866

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The School District of
Philadelphia

Anna Blakiston Day
School’s Schoolyard Improvements and Equipment Upgrades

PA

717,593

Evans (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The School District of
Philadelphia

James G. Blaine School’s
Schoolyard Improvements

PA

850,000

Evans (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The School District of
Philadelphia

Richard R. Wright Elementary School’s Schoolyard
Improvements, Infrastructure Upgrades, and
Equipment

PA

850,000

Evans (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Temple University

Temple University’s Community Kitchen

PA

1,500,000

Evans (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community College of
Philadelphia

Community College of
Philadelphia Housing
Development and Renovations

PA

850,000

Evans (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bensalem Township

Fire Station Construction

PA

4,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bristol Township

Homeless Shelter Renovation and Expansion

PA

2,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Middletown Township

Public Works Complex Reconstruction

PA

2,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bucks County

Boone Farm Community
Center

PA

2,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Quakertown Borough

Streetscape Improvements

PA

1,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bristol Borough

Bristol Borough Consolidated Fire Station

PA

2,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bristol Township

HELP Center Construction

PA

1,250,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bristol Township

Edgely Bridge Project

PA

5,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Reading Area Community
College

Schmidt Training and Technology Center Expansion
for Workforce Development

PA

2,000,000

Houlahan

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Goshen Fire Company, West
Chester PA

Goshen Fire Company/ EMS
Station Demolition, Development and Construction

PA

850,000

Houlahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Reading

11th and Pike Recreation
Center Expansion

PA

850,000

Houlahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Grove Borough

West Grove Memorial Park
Expansion

PA

850,000

Houlahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Johnstown

Johnstown Public Safety
Center

PA

2,850,000

Joyce (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Alexandria

Alexandria Borough Revitalization Project

PA

1,500,000

Joyce (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Pittsburgh

Pitt-Johnstown Future
Ready

PA

1,000,000

Joyce (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bedford Borough

Fort Bedford Park Improvements

PA

1,250,000

Joyce (PA)

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00514

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

McCormick

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1867

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Western Pennsylvania Port
Authority

Erie Coke Demolition
Project

PA

2,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Erie

Erie County Industrial Park

PA

3,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Allegheny County

Increasing Affordable Housing Options for People
Exiting Homelessness in
Allegheny County

PA

3,000,000

Lee (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pittsburgh

City of Pittsburgh—Recreating Community at
Thaddeus Stevens Center

PA

250,000

Lee (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Urban Redevelopment Authority of Pittsburgh

Downtown Pittsburgh Office-to-Housing Conversion Construction

PA

1,000,000

Lee (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Allegheny County

Allegheny County Economic
Development—Mon Valley Strategic Blight Removal

PA

1,200,000

Lee (PA)

Fetterman, McCormick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Westmoreland County

Westmoreland County—
Biddle Property Access &
Irwin Discharge Elimination

PA

1,075,000

Lee (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Public Education
of the School District of
Pittsburgh

Greenfield Elementary
School Community
Schoolyard

PA

400,000

Lee (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Mifflin Borough

West Mifflin Borough—
Community & Recreation
Center

PA

850,000

Lee (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Catasauqua Borough

Catasauqua Iron Works Redevelopment

PA

3,683,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wind Gap Borough

Male Rd Bridge Replacement & Pedestrian Improvements

PA

431,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dallas School District

Community Center Improvements

PA

3,500,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lebanon

Downtown Improvements

PA

1,000,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shamokin Coal Township
Joint Sewer Authority

Wastewater Treatment Facility Upgrades

PA

1,400,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pennsylvania College of
Technology

Forest Products Training
Center

PA

250,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Luzerne County

Old Airport Road Improvement Project

PA

700,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redevelopment Authority of
the County of Fayette

Thompson’s Crossing Business Park

PA

7,000,000

Reschenthaler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Indiana

Windy Ridge Business &
Technology Park—Phase
3 Roadway Construction

PA

1,500,000

Reschenthaler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Delaware County Community College

Delaware County Community College Workforce
Success Center

PA

2,000,000

Scanlon

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sharon Hill Borough

Sharon Hill Library and
Recreation Center

PA

1,200,000

Scanlon

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Chester

Chester Township Fire
Company Health and
Safety Renovations

PA

500,000

Scanlon

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Delaware County District
Attorney’s Office

Four Seasons Park Revitalization

PA

1,000,000

Scanlon

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00515

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Fetterman

H

H

H22JAPT2

H

H1868

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The School District of
Philadelphia

Schoolyard Improvements
at Penrose Elementary

PA

860,400

Scanlon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Norristown Public Library
Renovation

PA

850,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nether Providence Township

Providence Road Sidewalk
Improvement Project

PA

500,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Folcroft Borough

Improvements to Montgomery Park

PA

250,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Buffalo Township

West Market Street Pedestrian and Traffic Safety
Improvements

PA

1,800,000

Thompson (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of State College

Calder Way Transportation
Improvements

PA

2,449,000

Thompson (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Bellefonte

Bellefonte Waterfront—
Dunlop Street Construction

PA

1,555,000

Thompson (PA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Steel Rivers Council of
Governments

Blight Remediation in the
Mon Valley

PA

750,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nueva Esperanza, Inc.

Esperanza Stable Affordable Rental Housing
Trust Project

PA

750,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Berks County

Blight Remediation in
Reading

PA

1,610,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lancaster Area Habitat for
Humanity

Affordable Housing Construction

PA

750,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Erie County Community
Land Bank

Erie County Cornerstone
Community Land Trust
Affordable Housing Program

PA

1,100,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Common Roots

Revitalizing Upper Water
Street in Meadville

PA

750,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Broad Street Ministry

Kitchen Renovations

PA

970,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Launch of Philadelphia,
Inc.

Improvements for Launch
Community Education
Facility

PA

450,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dauphin County Redevelopment Authority

Low-Income Housing Development Initiative

PA

650,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

ACTION–Housing, Inc.

Affordable Housing Conversion in Downtown Pittsburgh

PA

500,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Scranton Neighborhood
Housing Services Inc.,
dba NeighborWorks
Northeastern Pennsylvania

Whole Home Repair Initiative for Seniors—Lackawanna, Luzerne, Wayne,
Pike, Monroe Counties

PA

522,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Warren

Community Park Improvement Project

PA

250,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Women’s Community Revitalization Project

Linda Lockman-King Apartments in West Philadelphia

PA

950,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State College Community
Land Trust, Inc.

Expansion of Forever Affordable Homes in State
College

PA

1,500,000

Fetterman

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00516

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1869

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Garden of Health Inc.

Improvements to Garden of
Health’s Hatfield Farm

PA

350,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Young Women’s Christian Association of York

Enhancing Victims and
Survivors Facilities

PA

958,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Amani Christian Community
Development Corporation

Blight Remediation and
Site Preparation in the
Carrick Neighborhood of
Pittsburgh

PA

954,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Caring Cupboard, Inc.

Community Center Construction in Lebanon
County

PA

1,000,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez

Research Center at
UPRM—Phase I

PR

2,000,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of Ponce

YMCA Community Facility
Improvements

PR

2,000,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of Isabela

Facility Redevelopment for
Agri-Business Innovation
Center of Isabela

PR

1,200,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of Barceloneta

Seniors Community and
Housing Development
and Construction in
Barceloneta

PR

1,000,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of San Sebastian

Small Business Advancement in Next-generation
Skills and Entrepreneurship (SANSE) Hub Development and Construction

PR

850,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of Manatı́

Manatı́ Affordable Housing
Revitalization

PR

850,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Cumberland

Cumberland Public Library
Exterior Renovations

RI

850,000

Amo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of North Kingstown

North Kingstown Community Center Revitalization
Project

RI

620,000

Magaziner

Reed, Whitehouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Providence

Conley Stadium Infrastructure, Safety, and Accessibility Improvements

RI

250,000

Magaziner

Reed, Whitehouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Johnston

Johnston Flood Mitigation
and Development of
Woodlake Park Project

RI

850,000

Magaziner

Reed, Whitehouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Providence

Igliozzi Resilience Hub

RI

1,000,000

Magaziner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
Town of South Kingstown

Affordable Housing and
Community Center Development

RI

850,000

Magaziner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of South Kingstown

Enhancing South Kingstown
Town Beach: Resilience
and Accessibility Upgrades

RI

250,000

Magaziner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Burrillville

Burrillville Field House

RI

500,000

Magaziner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Coventry

Municipal Collection Facility
Project

RI

750,000

Magaziner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of South Kingstown

Affordable Housing Initiative

RI

5,000,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Elmwood Housing Development Corporation

Affordable Housing

RI

500,000

Reed

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00517

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1870

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Action Partnership of Providence County

CAPP Housing Improvements

RI

441,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Warwick Public Library

West Warwick Public Library Facility

RI

300,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Meals on Wheels of RI, Inc.

Facility Renovation

RI

600,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Falls Foundation

Food Access

RI

150,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YWCA Rhode Island

Veterans Community Center

RI

600,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NeighborWorks Blackstone
River Valley

Affordable Housing

RI

975,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Aldersbridge Communities

Aldersbridge at East Point

RI

500,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Care Alliance

Facilities and Equipment

RI

200,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newport

Senior Center Modernization
Project

RI

1,000,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fuerza Laboral

Building Upgrades for Child
Care Center and Incubator

RI

500,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pawtucket

Veterans Memorial Park
Pool Renovations

RI

2,500,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Way of Rhode Island, Inc.

United Way Facility Renovation

RI

3,400,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tower Street Center, Inc.

Tower Street Community
Center

RI

4,475,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Trinity Repertory Company

Access for All

RI

525,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sojourner House

Woonsocket Office and
Drop-In Center
Acquistion and Renovation

RI

1,275,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Olneyville Housing Corporation dba ONE Neighborhood Builders

ONB Cumberland Affordable
Housing

RI

2,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Crossroads Rhode Island

Crossroads—Warwick
Housing

RI

2,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Olneyville Housing Corporation dba ONE Neighborhood Builders

Affordable Housing Development

RI

2,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Providence

West End Community Center Project

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Providence

Federal Hill House Improvements

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Central Falls

Jenks Park and Cogswell
Tower Restoration

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Carolina State University

SCSU Military Science Center of Excellence

SC

15,000,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00518

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Clyburn

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1871

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Claflin University

Boulevard Street Economic
Renewal

SC

3,000,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bamberg County, SC

Bamberg County Downtown
Renaissance

SC

1,500,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Summerton

Blight Removal, Capital
Improvements and Community Development

SC

1,500,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Morris College

Small Business Entrepreneur Incubator Center
Acquisition, Development, and Construction

SC

1,250,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clarendon County

Intergenerational Wellness
Complex Facilities Upgrades

SC

1,000,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of South Carolina

Office of Resilience’s
Crooked Creek Channel
Improvements Project

SC

1,500,000

Fry

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of South Carolina

Office of Resilience’s City
of Dillon Stormwater Improvements—Dargan
Street to Washington
Street

SC

1,500,000

Fry

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of South Carolina

Facility Improvements

SC

12,611,000

Graham

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Pageland

Public Safety Facility

SC

5,512,000

Graham

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of South Carolina

Veterans and Military Center of Excellence

SC

10,000,000

Graham

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Magdalene Dakota

Women’s Rehabilitation Facility

SD

829,000

Rounds

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Douglas School District
#51–1

Douglas Elementary School

SD

42,000,000

Rounds

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Crow Creek Housing Authority

Crow Creek Housing Development

SD

3,000,000

Rounds

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Knox County

Veterans Housing

TN

2,000,000

Burchett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shelby County, TN

Historic Clayborn Temple
Restoration Project,
Memphis TN

TN

3,150,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Historic Mason Temple
Renovation Project

TN

1,200,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Covenant Gardens Senior
Apartments Construction
Project

TN

1,000,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Downtown Memphis Commission

Historic Sterick Building
Renovation and Restoration Project

TN

1,200,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Monroe Plaza and Extended
Pedestrian Infrastructure
Improvements Project

TN

850,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Memphis Housing Authority

Electrical Infrastructure Upgrades at Montgomery
Plaza, Memphis, TN

TN

850,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Memphis Homeless Veterans Housing Facility
Renovation

TN

250,000

Cohen

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00519

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1872

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Youth and Families Facilities Renovations

TN

850,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Memphis

Park Avenue Campus Water
and Sewer Line Replacement and Street Improvements

TN

850,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southwest Tennessee Community College

Reimagining Southwest
Tennessee Community
College Facilities Renovations

TN

250,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Middle Tennessee State
University

Transportation Infrastructure Project

TN

1,500,000

DesJarlais

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bledsoe County

Rigsby Elementary School
Upgrades

TN

1,500,000

DesJarlais

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chattanooga

21st Century Waterfront
Revitalization

TN

7,000,000

Fleischmann

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chattanooga

James A. Henry Building

TN

5,000,000

Fleischmann

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cocke County

Fowlers Grove Road Safety
Improvements

TN

650,000

Harshbarger

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cocke County

Safety Improvements for
Joe Reed Road

TN

450,000

Harshbarger

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Memphis

University of Memphis at
Jackson Upgrades

TN

1,250,000

Kustoff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Houston

Houston Airports’ Enterprise
Shuttle Boulevard Extension Project at Ellington

TX

2,200,000

Babin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chambers County

Double Bayou Dredging
Project

TX

3,000,000

Babin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Jacinto Community
College District

Biomanufacturing Workforce
& Industry Growth Initiative

TX

3,000,000

Babin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Coryell County

Straws Mill Road Bridge
Project

TX

3,900,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bell County

Road and Bridge Infrastructure Improvements

TX

15,740,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Temple

Henderson Parkway and
Trail Project

TX

19,000,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Clifton

Waterline Loop

TX

840,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Austin

Santa Rita Courts
Childcare Facility Redevelopment

TX

850,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

VFW Post 76 Renovation

TX

2,000,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

Palacio Del Sol Senior Living Facility Rehabilitation

TX

250,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

Investing in Community Infrastructure Through
NALCAB’s New Headquarters in San Antonio’s Historic Market
Square—Acquisition,
Renovation, and Equipment

TX

1,000,000

Casar

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00520

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1873

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Travis County

The Sasha— Affordable
Housing Development
and Construction

TX

1,000,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of San Antonio, TX

Morris C. Beldon Apartments Site and Building
Improvements

TX

850,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

Ella Austin Community
Center Campus Renovation

TX

500,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Persimmon Point Housing
Development and Construction

TX

250,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Esperanza Community Shelter and Facility Development and Construction

TX

850,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Sir Swante Palm Park Revitalization

TX

850,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hays County

Hays County Sportsplex Improvements

TX

2,000,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Onion Creek Metropolitan
Park All Abilities Playground Development,
Construction and Equipment

TX

3,150,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio
Westside Development
Corporation

Community Economic Opportunity Initiative

TX

250,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Balcones Heights

Balcones Heights Senior
Center Renovations

TX

250,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

San Pedro Springs Park
Upgrades and Equipment

TX

250,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of San Antonio,
Texas

Critical Needs—Multifamily
Roof Replacement

TX

1,124,400

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Antonio Water System

Laterals to People

TX

2,000,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City Public Service Board of
San Antonio

Community Resiliency Initiative

TX

850,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Conroe

Crighton Road Lift Station
and Force Main Upgrade
Project

TX

1,000,000

Crenshaw

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Gene Campbell Road Corridor Drainage and Mobility Improvements

TX

2,000,000

Crenshaw

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas Water Commons Eco Park Project

TX

500,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, TX

City of Dallas Santos
Rodriguez Recreation
Center Project

TX

850,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas Fair Park
and Facilities Improvements

TX

850,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lancaster, Texas

City of Lancaster Roy
Crawford Park Walking
Trail Project

TX

1,000,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of DeSoto, Texas

Public Safety Complex Development and Construction

TX

3,000,000

Crockett

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00521

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1874

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Seguin

Community Center Improvements

TX

2,300,000

De La Cruz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mission

Military Parkway Expansion
Project

TX

2,000,000

De La Cruz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hidalgo County

West Main Drain Project

TX

5,500,000

De La Cruz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Austin Independent School
District

Career and Technical Education Equipment and
Facility Improvements at
Austin ISD

TX

1,500,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Travis County

SAFE Rathgeber Village
Safety and Security Infrastructure Upgrade

TX

2,000,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Cool Corridors: Tree Planting and Equipment to
Reduce Extreme Heat in
Austin’s Hottest Corridors

TX

500,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Sunken Garden Springs
Historic Rehabilitation
and Restoration Project

TX

625,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Mary Lee Campus—Lamar
Square

TX

625,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glenn Heights

Water Infrastructure Improvements

TX

6,300,000

Ellzey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Irving

Domestic Violence Shelter
Construction

TX

5,000,000

Ellzey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glenn Heights

Water System Improvements

TX

8,455,000

Ellzey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

El Paso County

Animal Welfare Shelter
Equipment Acquisition

TX

250,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Paso

Innovation Factory Phase II

TX

250,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

El Paso County

Transforming Juvenile Justice through Education
Facility Expansion

TX

1,000,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montrose Redevelopment
Authority

Northeast Montrose Sidewalk Improvements

TX

850,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Houston Parks and Recreation Department

City of Houston Metropolitan Multi Service Center
(MMSC) for People with
Disabilities Renovation
Project

TX

3,150,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fort Bend County Precinct
4

Mission Bend Senior Center

TX

2,000,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southwest Houston Redevelopment Authority
(SHRA)

Southwest Civic Core Phase
II

TX

2,000,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City Park Redevelopment
Authority (TIRZ12)

12th Street Drainage Upgrades

TX

1,000,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West University
Place

West University Roadway
Reconstruction

TX

850,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County Public Library

Tiny Branches

TX

850,000

Fletcher

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00522

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1875

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Houston

Mason Park Community
Center Repairs and Improvements

TX

1,200,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The University of Texas at
Houston

Strengthening Houston
Housing, Houston, Harris
County, Texas

TX

2,000,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County Precinct 2

Veterans Memorial Park Improvements and Facility
Development and Construction

TX

1,200,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Aldine Management
District

Worsham Elementary Safe
Routes to Schools Infrastructure Improvements

TX

850,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Houston Land Bank

Yellow Cab Site Redevelopment—Mixed-Income
Housing and Community
Revitalization

TX

2,000,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pasadena Parks &
Recreation

City of Pasadena Strawberry Park Improvements

TX

850,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Houston Arte
Publico Press

Humanities Facility Infrastructure Development
and Construction

TX

850,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Houston
Downtown

East End Innovation Incubator Facility Development

TX

250,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County Precinct 2

Facility for Addressing
Community Food Security
Needs in Gulfgate—
Demolition, Development
and Construction

TX

250,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harrisburg Redevelopment
Authority (TIRZ 23)

Harrisburg Trail Improvements

TX

250,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

UTHealth Houston, School
of Dentistry

University of Texas Kitchen
Construction and Equipment Acquisition

TX

250,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Texas at San
Antonio

UTSA Veterans Center

TX

7,500,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hudspeth County

Hudspeth County Community Center

TX

2,000,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The City of San Elizario

San Elizario Community
Center

TX

2,000,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Pecos City

Pecos Housing Project

TX

2,000,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The University of Texas at
El Paso

UAS Drone Workforce Development Center

TX

2,000,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Donna

Donna Multi-purpose Sports
Complex

TX

2,000,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mercedes

City of Mercedes Expansion
of Storm Sewer System

TX

850,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Harlingen, Texas

City of Harlingen New Animal Shelter

TX

1,000,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Feria

La Bonita Pump Station &
Drainage Improvements

TX

1,000,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley (UTRGV)

Cold Storage Facility Training and Logistics Hub

TX

250,000

Gonzalez

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00523

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1876

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kleberg County

Baffin Bay Education, Safety and Ecotourism Boat
Ramp and Fishing Pier

TX

850,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The City of Brownsville

Project Phoenix

TX

250,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Combes

City of Combes—Lift Stations Reconstruction,
Upgrades, and Repairs

TX

850,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brownsville Fire Department

City of Brownsville Fire Department—Training
Field Upgrades

TX

250,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Raymondville

Raymondville City Wide
Park Improvement Plan

TX

965,467

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Sunnyvale

Sunnyvale Collins Road
Widening Project (Phase
2)

TX

1,000,000

Gooden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mineola Independent School
District

The Wood County Special
Education Co-Op MultiDistrict Building

TX

1,000,000

Gooden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jarvis Christian University

Facilities Improvements

TX

3,000,000

Gooden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fort Bend County Precinct
2

City of Arcola Wastewater
Treatment Plant Expansion

TX

250,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Five Corners Improvement
District Harris County
Improvement District
10A

Houston Stand Down Career
Gear Houston Facility Expansion and Upgrades
and Equipment Acquisition

TX

500,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Texas Woman’s University

Equipment Acquisition to
Promote Houston Workforce Development

TX

850,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pearland

City of Pearland Fire Suppression Apparatus

TX

2,000,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Houston Land Bank

Houston Land Bank Land
and Housing Acquisition,
Development, and Construction

TX

1,200,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greater Southeast Management District

The Hermann Park Northeast Connectivity and
Mobility Improvements

TX

850,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Houston—Houston
Public Works

Almeda Genoa Rd. at
Furman Rd. Intersection
Improvements

TX

250,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gulfgate Redevelopment
Authority

Sterling High School Community Improvement
Project

TX

250,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County

Precinct 3’s Memorial Drive
Street and Drainage Reconstruction

TX

6,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County

Precinct 3’s HufsmithKohrville Road Widening
and Bridge Reconstruction

TX

1,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County

Precinct 4’s Voss Rd. Safety Improvements

TX

1,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hedwig Village

West Side Infrastructure
Construction

TX

1,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County Improvement
District 4

Interstate 10 Gateway
Lighting

TX

1,000,000

Hunt

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00524

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1877

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tomball

Phase 2: Road, Utility, and
Drainage Improvements
and Extension of South
Persimmon and Timkin
Street

TX

5,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Denton

Masch Branch Road Wastewater Improvements

TX

2,000,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Donley County

Donley County Emergency
Operations Center

TX

1,600,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wichita Falls

Wichita Falls Airport Industrial Park Access Road
Project

TX

1,000,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas

International District Park
Development and Infrastructure

TX

2,000,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dallas College

Dallas College Aviation
Maintenance Technology
Program

TX

1,500,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Polk County

Commercial Driver License
Training & Examination
Center

TX

3,108,000

Luttrell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Precinct 4’s Willis-Waukegan Mobility Improvements—Nicholson Road
to FM 1485

TX

1,000,000

Luttrell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Precinct 4’s Off-System
Bridge Replacements

TX

2,000,000

Luttrell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County

Precinct 3’s Westgreen
Road Bridge

TX

2,000,000

Luttrell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Texas A&M University System

Energy Proving Grounds
Workforce Deployment
Accelerator

TX

4,000,000

McCaul

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Texas A&M University System

RELLIS Utilities Infrastructure Improvements

TX

4,000,000

McCaul

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Midland

5 Points Highway Safety
and Efficiency Improvements

TX

4,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bell County

Chaparral Road Infrastructure Improvement

TX

1,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Woodway

Old McGregor Road and
Ritchie Road Improvement Project

TX

1,000,000

Sessions

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas—West
Branch Library Upgrades
and Equipment Acquisition

TX

250,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Grand Prairie

Grand Prairie, TX—Main
Street Revitalization

TX

250,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Forest Hill, Texas

City of Forest Hill Smart
City Community Development Program

TX

850,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Grand Prairie

Grand Prairie, TX—I–30
Frontage Rd, Water Lines

TX

850,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Fort Worth, Fort
Worth Housing Authority
dba Fort Worth Housing
Solutions

Former Cavile Public Housing Site—Hughes House
II & III

TX

3,150,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Trinity Park Conservancy

West Dallas Pedestrian/Bike
Land Bridge, Dallas,
Texas

TX

1,000,000

Veasey

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00525

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H1878

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Irving

Domestic Violence Center

TX

850,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas—Five Mile
Creek Trail

TX

2,000,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas—Martin
Weiss Recreation Center
Enhancements

TX

1,200,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lamar State College Port
Arthur

Advanced Terminal Workforce Development Center

TX

2,000,000

Weber

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Columbia

Street Reconstruction—
Phase I

TX

1,000,000

Weber

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Angleton

Rehab for Lexington Square

TX

730,000

Weber

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tarleton State University

Stephenville Innovation and
Incubation Hub

TX

3,575,000

Williams (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Utah Lake Authority

Utah Lake Research Center

UT

4,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orem

Regional Safety and Emergency Training Center

UT

3,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Utah County

Murdock Canal Trail Bridge
Crossing Construction

UT

1,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Park City Municipal Corporation

Electrical Transmission Line
Relocation

UT

1,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Torrey Town

Sand Creek Bridge Replacement

UT

1,200,000

Maloy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rich County

Laketown Roadway

UT

1,500,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Weber County

Storm Drain Infrastructure

UT

1,033,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Ogden City

Community Detention Pond

UT

1,000,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greater Salt Lake Municipal
Services District

Copperton Township
Stormwater Drain Replacement Project

UT

3,000,000

Owens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Utah Lake Authority

Utah Lake Access Points
Project

UT

2,500,000

Owens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Falls Church

City of Falls Church Affordable Housing Acquisition
Strike Fund

VA

925,000

Beyer

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Alexandria

The Square at 511—Preservation

VA

500,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairfax County Government

Opportunity Youth Re-Engagement Center within
the historic Original
Mount Vernon High
School

VA

850,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arlington County

Douglas Park, Phase 2 Improvements

VA

1,800,000

Beyer

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00526

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Kaine, Warner

H22JAPT2

H

January 22, 2026

H1879

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arlington County

Doctor’s Run Park Improvements

VA

250,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairfax County Government

Fairfax County Street Tree
Planting and Heat Island
Reduction

VA

750,000

Beyer, Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fairfax

Strategic Addition and Special Enhancement to the
City of Fairfax’s Public
Safety Facility

VA

1,000,000

Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Virginia Community College

Northern Virginia Community College Annandale
Critical Pipeline Infrastructure Modernization

VA

500,000

Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Vienna

W&OD Trail Redevelopment
& Town of Vienna Trail
Facility

VA

2,000,000

Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairfax County Government

Fairfax County Emergency
Vehicle Preemption (EVP)
Program

VA

850,000

Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Tazewell

Mitigating Against & Preventing Wastewater Bypass

VA

500,000

Griffith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chesapeake

Career Academies of
Chesapeake

VA

1,000,000

Kiggans

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Virginia Beach

Pungo Ferry Road Improvements

VA

1,000,000

Kiggans

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Richmond

Stormwater Management
within the Shockoe Valley & Shockoe Project

VA

850,000

McClellan

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chesapeake

Schooner Trail Park

VA

500,000

Scott (VA)

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chesapeake

Myers Road Sidewalk Extension

VA

1,150,000

Scott (VA)

Kaine, Warner

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hampton

Hampton Recreation Facility
Accessibility Upgrades
and Expansion

VA

850,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norfolk

Norfolk Homeless Housing
Center Improvements

VA

850,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newport News

Safe Haven Empowerment
Center (Facility Improvements)

VA

2,000,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Virginia Peninsula Community College

Virginia Peninsula Community College’s Facilities
Upgrades

VA

500,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newport News

Peninsula Digital Infrastructure Expansion

VA

2,000,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Manassas Park, Virginia

Park Central Complete
Streets Improvements

VA

1,613,968

Subramanyam

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Loudoun County, Virginia

AvonLea Apartments

VA

250,000

Subramanyam

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Virginia Community College

Northern Virginia Community College Manassas
Center for Building and
Construction Trades

VA

1,200,000

Subramanyam

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Dumfries

Quantico Creek Flood Mitigation Upgrades

VA

1,200,000

Vindman

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Culpeper County

Simms Drive Extension
Project

VA

850,000

Vindman

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00527

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Kaine, Warner

Kaine, Warner

H22JAPT2

H

H

H

H1880

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County Public
Schools

Gordon-Barbour Elementary
School Improvements

VA

850,000

Vindman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Virginia Community College

Northern Virginia Community College HVAC Program

VA

250,000

Vindman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of York

Bethel Manor Elementary
School Expansion Project

VA

3,254,000

Wittman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Middle Peninsula Chesapeake Bay Public Access
Authority

Securing Upland Dredge
Material Sites

VA

810,000

Wittman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hampton Roads Ecumenical
Lodgings & Provisions,
Inc

Affordable Housing

VA

700,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Foodbank of Southeastern
Virginia and Eastern
Shore

New Facility

VA

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Affordable Homes & Communities

Affordable Housing and
Community Center

VA

1,175,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Danville

Cunningham and Hughes
Neighborhood Development Center

VA

1,742,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Economic Development Authority of Floyd County

Utilities to Support Affordable Workforce Housing

VA

1,520,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Feed More

Project Nourish

VA

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hopkins House—A Center
for Children and their
Families

Samuel Madden Homes
Success Center

VA

2,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Micah Ecumenical Ministries

Jeremiah Community

VA

2,915,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Clifton Forge

Town of Clifton Forge All
Abilities Park

VA

2,912,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Young Men’s Christian Association of Central Virginia

Transform the Downtown
YMCA

VA

1,423,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Action in Community
Through Service

Rebuilding Westend Domestic Violence Shelter

VA

1,780,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

James City County

Moses Lane Comprehensive
Community Development
Project

VA

925,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity Powhatan

Ballsville Road Neighborhood

VA

500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SupportWorks Housing

Rady Street Apartments

VA

500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Staunton Redevelopment
and Housing Authority

Affordable Housing in
Staunton

VA

500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Alexandria Redevelopment
Housing Authority

Ladrey Apartments

VA

2,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harrisonburg Redevelopment & Housing Authority

Lineweaver Annex Renovation of Permanent Supportive Housing Project

VA

2,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

People Incorporated of Virginia

Manassas Veterans Housing and Post Center

VA

2,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00528

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1881

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norfolk

Affordable Housing Development

VA

1,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Virgin Islands Housing Authority

Donoe Estates Resiliency
Upgrades

VI

2,000,000

Plaskett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brattleboro Housing Authority d/b/a Brattleboro
Housing Partnerships

Melrose Terrace Redevelopment

VT

1,750,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Springfield Housing Authority

Southridge Cottage Court
Workforce Housing Redevelopment

VT

1,200,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vermont Housing & Conservation Board

Hinesburg Windy Ridge
Neighborhood and Housing Development

VT

850,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Burlington Housing Authority

Burlington Housing Authority Elevator Modernization

VT

500,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Fairlee

Bridge and Main Housing
Project—Rehabilitation
and Construction

VT

1,000,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Downstreet Housing &
Community Development

Preserving Affordable Housing and Creating Homeownership Opportunities

VT

1,500,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Windham & Windsor Housing Trust

The Chalet Redevelopment

VT

3,000,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Barre

The Prospect Heights Development Project

VT

3,316,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Good Samaritan Haven

Complex Care Shelter at
the Welcome Center

VT

1,155,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vermont Housing & Conservation Board

Shared Equity Homeownership Expansion

VT

550,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Champlain Housing Trust

Affordable Housing for
Winooski

VT

1,000,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vermont Housing & Conservation Board

Affordable Housing for
Vermont

VT

12,000,000

Sanders, Welch

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brattleboro Development
Credit Corporation

Brattleboro Technology and
Industrial Park

VT

3,250,000

Welch

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ascend Housing Allies Incorporated

Housing at Stonecrop
Meadows

VT

5,250,000

Welch

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vermont Office of Economic
Opportunity

Home Repair and Remediation

VT

2,000,000

Welch

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Stevens County

Fire District #2’s Fruitland
Fire Station Project

WA

1,000,000

Baumgartner

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mountlake Terrace

Mountlake Terrace Community Center Expansion
and Resiliency Improvements

WA

850,000

DelBene

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Snohomish

Snohomish Public Safety &
City Services Campus

WA

3,150,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake Washington Institute
of Technology

The Early Learning Center
Childcare Construction
and Renovations

WA

250,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kenmore

Kenmore Public Works Operations Center

WA

2,000,000

DelBene

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00529

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Kaine, Warner

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

S

H

Cantwell

H22JAPT2

H

H1882

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Snohomish Conservation
District

Snohomish Conservation
District’s Natural Resources Center

WA

1,200,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sno-Isle Intercounty Rural
Library District

Lake Stevens Early Learning Library Renovations

WA

250,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lake Forest Park

Lakefront Park Community
Center Project, Lake Forest Park

WA

2,000,000

Jayapal

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Washington

Campus Building Accessibility Upgrades

WA

500,000

Jayapal

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Department of Transportation, City of Seattle

Third Avenue Revitalization

WA

250,000

Jayapal

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Seattle

Fort Lawton Redevelopment

WA

3,150,000

Jayapal

Murray

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Seattle

Lake City Community Center and Affordable Housing Redevelopment

WA

2,000,000

Jayapal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Burien, WA

City of Burien Public Market Upgrades and Expansion

WA

850,000

Jayapal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edmonds

Edmonds Food Bank and
Community Engagement
Space

WA

850,000

Larsen

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Everett

South Marina Terminal Replacement

WA

250,000

Larsen

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Anacortes

Anacortes Community Event
Center Development and
Construction

WA

250,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Edmonds College

LETI Incubator for Family
Success

WA

2,000,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Edmonds

North Portwalk and Seawall
Reconstruction Project

WA

1,200,000

Larsen

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Whatcom County Health
and Community Services

Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault Services of
Whatcom County Douglas Building Preservation

WA

1,510,295

Larsen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bellingham

Bellingham Central Library
Renovation

WA

850,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Confederated Tribes and
Bands of the Yakama
Nation

Village of Hope

WA

4,265,000

Newhouse

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Moses Lake

Infrastructure Development

WA

600,000

Newhouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tonasket

Reconstruction of US 97—
Phase 2

WA

948,000

Newhouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Benton County

Three Rivers Recovery
Housing Project

WA

3,000,000

Newhouse

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Chinook

Port of Chinook Capital
Dredging

WA

2,700,000

Perez

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wahkiakum County

Upper Grays River Community Forest Acquisition

WA

500,000

Perez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tenino

Regional Meat Processing
Facility Infrastructure

WA

850,000

Perez, Strickland

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00530

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Cantwell

Cantwell

H22JAPT2

H

H

January 22, 2026

H1883

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hoh Indian Tribe

Hoh Tribe Resiliency Center
Development and Construction

WA

3,150,000

Randall

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Makah Indian Tribe

Makah Housing Resilience—Acquisition, Development, and Construction

WA

1,200,000

Randall

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Port Angeles

ixwı́cn (Tse-whit-zen)
Protection Area Restoration

WA

850,000

Randall

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kitsap County Department
of Human Services

Community Respite Center
Acquisition, Development, Construction, and
Equipment

WA

1,736,255

Randall

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chelan County, Department
of Economic Services

Chelan County Chelan River
Heights Housing—Chelan County, WA

WA

1,200,000

Schrier

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Darrington

Darrington Drinking Water
Infrastructure Expansion—Darrington, WA

WA

850,000

Schrier

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cle Elum

City of Cle Elum Second
Street Pathway—Cle
Elum, WA

WA

250,000

Schrier

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Federal Way

Day Center Relocation, Reconstruction, and Equipment

WA

250,000

Smith (WA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Des Moines

Midway Park Reconstruction

WA

850,000

Smith (WA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tukwila

Tukwila Community Center
Facility Upgrades

WA

850,000

Smith (WA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Green River College

Building the Electric Automotive Center of Higher
Education Today

WA

250,000

Smith (WA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South King Fire

Firefighter PPE CO2 Decontamination Unit

WA

850,000

Smith (WA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Highline College

Highline College Community
Soccer and Sports Complex

WA

1,200,000

Smith (WA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Puyallup

Meeker Street Improvements

WA

850,000

Strickland

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tacoma

City of Tacoma Fire Engine
Acquisition

WA

1,000,000

Strickland

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tacoma Housing Authority

Salishan Hillside Phase I
Renovations

WA

850,000

Strickland

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pierce County Public Transportation Benefit Area
Corporation (DBA Pierce
Transit)

Pierce Transit System-Wide
ADA Signage Improvements

WA

250,000

Strickland

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fircrest

Alameda Ave East—44th
Street to Emerson Street
Pedestrian and Bicyclist
Improvements

WA

850,000

Strickland

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of University Place

Chambers Bay Access to
Opportunity—Road and
Sidewalk Safety Improvements

WA

300,000

Strickland

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Olympia

City of Olympia Armory Redevelopment

WA

250,000

Strickland

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edgewood

Interurban Trail Phase III
(Jovita Canyon)

WA

250,000

Strickland

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Skagit County

Agricultural Innovation
Center

WA

1,750,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00531

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Cantwell

Cantwell

Cantwell

H22JAPT2

H

H

S

H1884

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YWCA Yakima

Domestic Violence Shelter

WA

1,500,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Roots Housing

The Jefferson Affordable
Housing Preservation
Project

WA

350,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jefferson County

Workforce Housing

WA

1,500,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northeast Public Development Authority

Childcare and Workforce
Housing Project

WA

2,000,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kelso

Catlin and Main Community Development Project

WA

3,250,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Council for the Homeless

Housing Solutions Center
Expansion

WA

2,500,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bellwether Housing

Thunderbird Nest Affordable
Housing Project

WA

1,800,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Seattle Indian Services
Commission

Native Village & Gateway
Project

WA

1,500,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Friends of Youth

Griffin Campus Affordable
Housing

WA

2,500,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Low Income Housing Institute

University District Transit
Oriented Development

WA

3,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

OPAL Community Land
Trust

Pea Patch Community
Campus

WA

4,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Way of King County

Food Access and Distribution

WA

800,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Children’s Home Society of
Washington dba Akin

Vancouver Family Resource
Center Development

WA

3,400,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Partners Inland Northwest

Resource Center

WA

3,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Pierce and Kitsap
Counties

Bremerton Early Learning
Center

WA

6,200,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Roots Housing

The Helen V Affordable
Housing Project

WA

512,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Spokane Neighborhood Action Partners

Broadway Senior Housing

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shelton Family Center dba
The Youth Connection

Housing Project

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Whatcom Transportation
Authority

Lynden Transit Station Affordable Housing

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Milwaukee Metropolitan
Sewerage District

Milwaukee Schoolyards Improvements and Water
Workforce Development
Project

WI

250,000

Moore (WI)

Baldwin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Bayside

North Shore Library

WI

850,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Milwaukee

Safety and Security Upgrades and Equipment

WI

500,000

Moore (WI)

H

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00532

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1885

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Wisconsin Milwaukee

Improving Health and Living Environment
Project—Facility Renovation, Expansion, and
Equipment

WI

850,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Milwaukee Health
Department

Addressing Lead Based
Hazards in Public Facilities

WI

750,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Milwaukee Port Milwaukee

City of Milwaukee Dock Improvement Program

WI

250,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Milwaukee County

Kosciuszko Community Center

WI

250,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wauwatosa

Fire Training Ground Facility Replacement

WI

250,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Milwaukee

Priority Needs Supportive
Housing

WI

2,000,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edgerton, Wisconsin

City of Edgerton Veterans
Park Site Improvement
Project

WI

400,000

Pocan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Loganville, WI

Village of Loganville Street
and Utility Improvements

WI

250,000

Pocan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mount Ida

Roadway Improvements

WI

175,000

Van Orden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chippewa County

Chippewa County Mortuary

WI

600,000

Van Orden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Green Bay Metro Fire Department

New Fire Station

WI

5,000,000

Wied

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Suamico

Water Infrastructure Improvements

WI

1,000,000

Wied

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kaukauna

Water Treatment System
Improvements

WI

1,000,000

Wied

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ozaukee Food Alliance

Mobile Pantry

WI

246,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kenosha

Affordable Housing Development

WI

3,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Metropolitan Milwaukee Inc.

Health Commons

WI

4,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Veterans 1st of NEW, Inc.

Affordable Housing

WI

480,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Waukesha, Inc.

College Park Workforce
Housing Development

WI

500,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Janesville

Removal of Blight

WI

5,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Communities of Crocus

Affordable Housing

WI

1,500,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wild Rivers Habitat for Humanity, Inc.

Affordable Housing Construction

WI

500,000

Baldwin

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00533

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

Baldwin

H22JAPT2

H/S

H1886

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Acts Community Development Corporation, Inc.

Acquisition Fund

WI

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys and Girls Clubs of the
Northwoods, Inc.

Facility Expansion

WI

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monroe County Board of
Education

Peterstown School Athletic
Facility

WV

3,250,000

Miller (WV)

Capito, Justice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wheeling

Gateway Center and Trail
Connection

WV

2,000,000

Moore (WV)

Capito

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Parkersburg

Municipal Parking Improvements

WV

1,000,000

Moore (WV)

Capito, Justice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fairmont

Watson Fire Station Renovation

WV

1,000,000

Moore (WV)

Capito, Justice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wood County Development
Authority

Spencer’s & Landing Development

WV

1,000,000

Moore (WV)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marshall University

Marshall University Aviation
Martinsburg Expansion

WV

900,000

Moore (WV)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Logan

White Coat Housing Community in Rural Appalachia

WV

1,200,000

Capito

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wheeling Park Commission

Historic Community Building Renovations

WV

5,642,000

Capito

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hinton

New River Center Project

WV

1,919,000

Capito

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Impact Network

Childcare and Economic
Opportunities in Ohio
County

WV

250,000

Capito

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Marlinton

Downtown Trailhead

WV

2,059,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Elkins

Downtown Improvements

WV

503,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery General
Healthcare Systems, Inc.

Montgomery General Hospital Revitalization

WV

7,690,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clay County Commission

911 Center Relocation

WV

4,600,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Appalachia Service Project

Home Repair for Flooding
Victims

WV

500,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Virginia Statewide
Independent Living
Council

The WV Freedom and Independence Project

WV

1,980,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Craik Patton Inc.

Craik-Patton House Site Accessibility Project

WV

250,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ronceverte

Fred Workman Bridge

WV

5,460,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charleston

Charleston Capital Sports
Center

WV

7,000,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Capitol Market Inc.

Capitol Market Safety and
Security

WV

750,000

Capito, Justice

S

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00534

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

H1887

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Region 4 Planning and Development Council

Fruits of Labor Expansion

WV

966,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Facing Hunger Food Bank

Warehouse Distribution
Center Renovation

WV

1,103,000

Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New River Gorge Regional
Development Authority

Meadow River Corridor Improvements

WV

3,200,000

Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rock Springs

Bitter Creek Restoration—
Phase 2

WY

2,000,000

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00535

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Hageman

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.129

H22JAPT2

H

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00536

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/892 here EH220126.254

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1888

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1889

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00537

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/893 here EH220126.255

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00538

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/894 here EH220126.256

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1890

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1891

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00539

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/895 here EH220126.257

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00540

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/896 here EH220126.258

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1892

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1893

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00541

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/897 here EH220126.259

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00542

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/898 here EH220126.260

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1894

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1895

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00543

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/899 here EH220126.261

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00544

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/900 here EH220126.262

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1896

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1897

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00545

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/901 here EH220126.263

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00546

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/902 here EH220126.264

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1898

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1899

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00547

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/903 here EH220126.265

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00548

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/904 here EH220126.266

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1900

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1901

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00549

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/905 here EH220126.267

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00550

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/906 here EH220126.268

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1902

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1903

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00551

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/907 here EH220126.269

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00552

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/908 here EH220126.270

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1904

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1905

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00553

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/909 here EH220126.271

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00554

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/910 here EH220126.272

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1906

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1907

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00555

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/911 here EH220126.273

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00556

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/912 here EH220126.274

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

H1908

VerDate Sep 11 2014

15:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1909

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00557

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.130

H22JAPT2

Insert offset folio 8000/913 here EH220126.275

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE1

January 22, 2026

Thursday, January 22, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate
Chamber Action

Committee Meetings

The Senate met at 11:00:01 a.m. in pro forma session, and recessed at 11:00:16 a.m. until 3 p.m. on
Monday, January 26, 2026.

No committee meetings were held.

h

House of Representatives
Chamber Action

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with DIGEST

Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 40 public bills, H.R. 7195–7234; and 6 resolutions, H.J.
Res. 142–143; and H. Res. 1015–1018 were introPages H1349–51
duced.
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages H1351–52
Report Filed: A report was filed today as follows:
H. Res. 1014, providing for consideration of the
bill (H.R. 7148) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 7147) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; and for
Page H1349
other purposes (H. Rept. 119–462).
Speaker: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he
appointed Representative Valadao to act as Speaker
Page H1175
pro tempore for today.
Recess: The House recessed at 10:16 a.m. and reconvened at 10:30 a.m.
Page H1183
Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026: The House passed H.R. 7147,
making further consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, by a yea-andnay vote of 220 yeas to 207 nays, Roll No. 42.

with none voting ‘‘nay’’, Roll No. 40, and the previous question was ordered by a yea-and-nay vote of
214 yeas to 213 nays, Roll No. 39. Pursuant to section 6 of H. Res. 1014, H. Res. 375 is considered
Pages H1177–83, H1183–85
agreed to as amended.
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026: The
House passed H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, by a yea-and-nay vote of 341 yeas
to 88 nays, Roll No. 45. Pages H1185–H1297, H1332–33
Pursuant to the Rule, the amendment printed in
part A of the report of the Committee on Rules accompanying this resolution shall be considered as
adopted in the House and in the Committee of the
Pages H1193–H1297
Whole.
Rejected:
Massie amendment (No. 1 printed in part B of H.
Rept. 119–462) that sought to prohibit the use of
funds made available by this Act to implement section 24220 of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act, including any requirements enabling or supporting vehicle ‘‘kill switch’’ technology (by a recorded vote of 164 ayes to 268 noes, Roll No. 43);
Pages H1297–99, H1331
and
Norman amendment (No. 2 printed in part B of
H. Rept. 119–462) that sought to prohibit funds for
certain community funding projects (by a recorded
vote of 136 ayes to 291 noes, Roll No. 44).

Pages H1177–83, H1299–H1317, H1330, H1299–H1317

Pages H1298–99, H1331–32

H. Res. 1014, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 7148) and (H.R. 7147) was agreed
to by a recorded vote of 214 ayes to 213 noes, Roll
No. 41, after the amendment by Representative Foxx
was agreed to by a yea-and-nay vote of 427 yeas

H. Res. 1014, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 7148) and (H.R. 7147) was agreed
to by a recorded vote of 214 ayes to 213 noes, Roll
No. 41, after the amendment by Representative Foxx
was agreed to by a yea-and-nay vote of 427 yeas
D105

VerDate Sep 11 2014

11:22 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.PT2

D22JAPT2

D106

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

with none voting ‘‘nay’’, Roll No. 40, and the previous question was ordered by a yea-and-nay vote of
214 yeas to 213 nays, Roll No. 39. Pursuant to section 6 of H. Res. 1014, H. Res. 375 is considered
Pages H1177–83, H1183–85
agreed to as amended.
Pregnant Students’ Rights Act: The House passed
H.R. 6359, to require institutions of higher education to disseminate information on the rights of,
and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, by a yea-and-nay vote of 217 yeas to 211
Pages H1325–30, H1333–34
nays, Roll No. 47.
Rejected the Bonamici motion to recommit the
bill to the Committee on Education and Workforce
by a yea-and-nay vote of 213 yeas to 216 nays, Roll
Page H1333
No. 46.
Pursuant to the Rule, the amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee
on Education and Workforce now printed in the bill
Page H1325
shall be considered as adopted.
H. Res. 1009, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 6945), (H.R. 6359) and the joint
resolution (H.J. Res. 140) was agreed to yesterday,
January 21st.
Directing the removal of United States Armed
Forces from Venezuela that have not been authorized by Congress: The House failed to agree to
H. Con. Res. 68, to direct the removal of United
States Armed Forces from Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress, by a yea-and-nay vote
of 215 yeas to 215 nays, Roll No. 48.
Pages H1317–25, H1334–35

Directing the Clerk of the House of Representatives to make a correction in the engrossment of
H.R. 7147: The House agreed to H. Res. 1016, directing the Clerk of the House of Representatives to
make a correction in the engrossment of H.R. 7147.

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with DIGEST

Page H1335

Work Period Designation: Read a letter from the
Speaker wherein he designated the period from
Thursday, January 22, 2026, through Sunday, February 1, 2026, as a ‘‘district work period’’ under
Page H1335
clause 13 of rule 1.
Discharge Petition: Representative Pressley presented to the clerk a motion to discharge the Committee on Rules from the consideration of the resolution (H. Res. 965) entitled, a resolution providing
for consideration of the bill (H.R. 1689) to require
the Secretary of Homeland Security to designate
Haiti for temporary protected status (Discharge Petition No. 15).
Quorum Calls—Votes: Seven yea-and-nay votes and
three recorded votes developed during the proceedings of today and appear on pages H1183–84,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

11:22 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

January 22, 2026

H1184–85, H1185, H1330, H1331, H1331–32,
H1332–33, H1333, H1333–34, and H1334–35.
Adjournment: The House met at 9 a.m. and adjourned at 7:31 p.m.

Committee Meetings
EXAMINING THE POLICIES AND
PRIORITIES OF THE MINE SAFETY AND
HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
Committee on Education and Workforce: Subcommittee
on Workforce Protections held a hearing entitled
‘‘Examining the Policies and Priorities of the Mine
Safety and Health Administration’’. Testimony was
heard from Wayne Palmer, Assistant Secretary of
Labor for Mine Safety and Health, Mine Safety and
Health Administration, Department of Labor.
LOWERING HEALTH CARE COSTS FOR ALL
AMERICANS: AN EXAMINATION OF
HEALTH INSURANCE AFFORDABILITY
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Subcommittee on
Health held a hearing entitled ‘‘Lowering Health
Care Costs for All Americans: An Examination of
Health Insurance Affordability’’. Testimony was
heard from public witnesses.
CHEMICALS IN COMMERCE: LEGISLATIVE
PROPOSAL TO MODERNIZE AMERICA’S
CHEMICAL SAFETY LAW, STRENGTHEN
CRITICAL SUPPLY CHAINS, AND GROW
DOMESTIC MANUFACTURING
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Subcommittee on
Environment held a hearing entitled ‘‘Chemicals in
Commerce: Legislative Proposal to Modernize America’s Chemical Safety Law, Strengthen Critical Supply Chains, and Grow Domestic Manufacturing’’.
Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Financial Services: Full Committee held
a markup on H.R. 7128, the ‘‘TRIA Program Reauthorization Act of 2026’’; H. Res. 1007, expressing
the sense of the House of Representatives with respect to the use of artificial intelligence in the financial services and housing industries; H.R. 7056, the
‘‘Community Bank Regulatory Tailoring Act’’; H.R.
5877, the ‘‘Combatting Money Laundering in Cyber
Crime Act of 2025’’; H.R. 1799, the ‘‘Financial Reporting Threshold Modernization Act’’; H.R. 6967,
the ‘‘Public Company Advisory Committee Act of
2026’’; and H.R. 7085, to amend the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to repeal certain disclosure requirements related to conflict minerals, and for other
purposes. H.R. 7128, H. Res. 1007, H.R. 7056,
H.R. 5877, H.R. 1799, H.R. 6967, and H.R. 7085
were ordered reported, as amended.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.PT2

D22JAPT2

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with DIGEST

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

ADVANCING PEACE IN DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO AND RWANDA
THROUGH PRESIDENT TRUMP’S
WASHINGTON ACCORDS
Committee on Foreign Affairs: Africa Subcommittee
held a hearing entitled ‘‘Advancing Peace in DRC
and Rwanda through President Trump’s Washington
Accords’’. Testimony was heard from Sarah Troutman, Deputy Assistant Secretary for African Affairs,
Department of State.
SMARTER BORDERS, SAFER NATION:
EXPANDING THE USE OF NON-INTRUSIVE
INSPECTION TECHNOLOGY
Committee on Homeland Security: Subcommittee on
Border Security and Enforcement held a hearing entitled ‘‘Smarter Borders, Safer Nation: Expanding the
Use of Non-Intrusive Inspection Technology’’. Testimony was heard from Diane J. Sabatino, Acting Executive Assistant Commissioner, Office of Field Operations, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of Homeland Security; and Hilary Benedict, Acting Director, Government Accountability
Office.
OVERSIGHT OF THE GOVERNMENT
PUBLISHING OFFICE IN A DIGITAL-FIRST
ERA
Committee on House Administration: Full Committee
held a hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Government Publishing Office in a Digital-First Era’’. Testimony was heard from Hugh Halpern, Director,
Government Publishing Office.
OVERSIGHT OF THE OFFICE OF SPECIAL
COUNSEL JACK SMITH
Committee on the Judiciary: Full Committee held a
hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Office of Special
Counsel Jack Smith’’. Testimony was heard from a
public witness.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Natural Resources: Full Committee held
a markup on H.R. 4255, the ‘‘Enhancing Safety for
Animals Act of 2025’’; H.R. 2130, the ‘‘Tribal
Trust Land Homeownership Act of 2025’’; H.R.
3073, the ‘‘Shivwits Band of Paiutes Jurisdictional
Clarity Act’’; H.R. 3340, the ‘‘Modernizing Access
to Our Public Oceans Act’’; H.R. 4294, the ‘‘Mitigation Action and Watermen Support Act of 2025’’;
H.R. 5254, the ‘‘Gateway Partnership Act of 2025’’;
H.R. 5729, the ‘‘North Rim Restoration Act of
2025’’; and H.R. 6365, the ‘‘Wintergreen Emergency Egress Act’’. H.R. 2130, H.R. 3073, H.R.
3340 were ordered reported, without amendment.
H.R. 4255, H.R. 4294, H.R. 5254, H.R. 5729, and
H.R. 6365 were ordered reported, as amended.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

11:22 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

D107

DEEP DIVE: EXAMINING THE
REGULATORY AND STATUTORY BARRIERS
TO DEEP SEA MINING
Committee on Natural Resources: Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources held a hearing entitled
‘‘Deep Dive: Examining the Regulatory and Statutory Barriers to Deep Sea Mining’’. Testimony was
heard from public witnesses.
DECLASSIFIED MARTIN LUTHER KING
RECORDS: WHAT THEY REVEAL AND WHY
THEY MATTER
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform: Task
Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets held
a hearing entitled ‘‘Declassified MLK Records: What
They Reveal and Why They Matter’’. Testimony was
heard from public witnesses.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY: SAVING THE
AMERICAN DREAM
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform: Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and
Regulatory Affairs held a hearing entitled ‘‘Housing
Affordability: Saving the American Dream’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026; DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Committee on Rules: Full Committee concluded a hearing on H.R. 7148, the ‘‘Consolidated Appropriations
Act, 2026’’; and H.R. 7147, the ‘‘Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’. The
Committee granted, by a record vote of 9–4, a rule
providing for consideration of H.R. 7148, the ‘‘Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026’’, and H.R.
7148, the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’. The rule provides for consideration of H.R. 7148, the ‘‘Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026’’, under a structured rule. The
rule waives all points of order against consideration
of the bill. The rule provides one hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and
ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees. The rule
provides that the amendment printed in part A of
the Rules Committee report shall be considered as
adopted and the bill, as amended, shall be considered as read. The rule waives all points of order
against provisions in the bill, as amended. The rule
makes in order only the further amendments printed
in part B of the Rules Committee report. Each such
further amendment shall be considered only in the
order printed in the report, may be offered only by
a Member designated in the report, shall be considered as read, shall be debatable for the time specified
in the report equally divided and controlled by the

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.PT2

D22JAPT2

D108

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with DIGEST

proponent and an opponent, shall not be subject to
amendment, and shall not be subject to a demand
for division of the question. The rule waives all
points of order against the amendments printed in
part B of the Rules Committee report. The rule provides one motion to recommit. The rule further provides for consideration of H.R. 7147, the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act,
2026’’, under a closed rule. The rule waives all
points of order against consideration of the bill. The
rule provides that the bill shall be considered as
read. The rule waives all points of order against provisions in the bill. The rule provides one hour of
general debate equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees. The rule provides one motion to recommit.
The rule further provides that the chair of the Committee on Appropriations may insert in the Congressional Record not later than January 23rd, 2026,
such material as he may deem explanatory of H.R.
7148 and H.R. 7147. The rule further provides that
the Clerk shall not transmit to the Senate a message
that the House has passed H.R. 7148 until H.R.
7147 is passed by the House. The rule provides that
in the engrossment of H.R. 7148, the Clerk shall:
add the text of Divisions A, B, and C of H.R. 7006,
as passed by the House, as new matter to follow Division D of H.R. 7148, redesignated as Divisions E,
F, and G, respectively; add the text of titles 1
through 5 of H.R. 7147, as passed by the House,
as new matter designated as Division H, to follow
the text added pursuant to subsection (a); redesignate
Divisions E and F of H.R. 7148 as Divisions I and
J, respectively; assign appropriate designations to
provisions within the engrossment; conform crossreferences and provisions for short titles within the
engrossment; and be authorized to make technical
corrections, to include corrections in spelling, punctuation, page and line numbering, section numbering, and insertion of appropriate headings. Finally, the rule provides that House Resolution 375,
amended by the amendments printed in part C of
the Rules Committee report, is hereby adopted. Testimony was heard from Chairman Cole, and Representatives DeLauro, Tenney, Hoyer, Spartz, Veasey,
Smucker, Gomez, Miller of Ohio, Keating,
Stansbury, Larson of Connecticut, Titus, Johnson of
Texas, Quigley, Horsford, Torres of California, Johnson of Georgia, and Dexter.
NATIONWIDE CONSUMER AND FUEL
RETAILER CHOICE ACT OF 2025
Committee on Rules: Full Committee began a hearing
on H.R. 1346, the ‘‘Nationwide Consumer and Fuel
Retailer Choice Act of 2025’’. Testimony was heard

VerDate Sep 11 2014

11:22 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0627

January 22, 2026

from Representatives Palmer, Landsman, Smith of
Nebraska, Budzinski, Hageman, Feenstra, and Miller-Meeks.
ASSESSING U.S. LEADERSHIP IN QUANTUM
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology: Full Committee held a hearing entitled ‘‘Assessing U.S. Leadership in Quantum Science and Technology’’. Testimony was heard from James Kushmerick, Director,
Physical Measurement Laboratory, National Institute
of Standards and Technology, Department of Commerce; Saul Gonzalez, Deputy Directorate Head, Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
National Science Foundation; Mark Clampin, Deputy
Associate Administrator, Science Mission Directorate,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration; and
Tanner Crowder, Quantum Information Science
Lead, Office of Science, Department of Energy.
LOCAL OWNERSHIP, NATIONAL BRANDS:
HOW FRANCHISING IS A PATHWAY TO
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Committee on Small Business: Full Committee held a
hearing entitled ‘‘Local Ownership, National Brands:
How Franchising is a Pathway to Entrepreneurship’’.
Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
SMARTER SPENDING, STRONGER RESULTS:
REDUCING DUPLICATION AND ENSURING
EFFECTIVENESS THROUGH ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT REFORMS
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure: Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency Management held a hearing entitled ‘‘Smarter Spending, Stronger Results: Reducing Duplication and Ensuring Effectiveness Through
Economic Development Reforms’’. Testimony was
heard from Ben Page, Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Economic Development and Chief Operating Officer,
U.S. Economic Development Administration, Department of Commerce; Gayle Conelly Manchin,
Federal Co-Chair, Appalachian Regional Commission; Corey Wiggins, Federal Co-Chair, Delta Regional Authority; Chris Saunders, Federal Co-Chair,
Northern Border Regional Commission; Jennifer
Clyburn Reed, Federal Co-Chair, Southeast Crescent
Regional Commission; Juan Sanchez, Federal CoChair, Southwest Border Regional Commission; and
Jocelyn Fenton, Director of Programs, Denali Commission.
COMMUNITY CARE NETWORK NEXT
GENERATION: ONE TRILLION OF
OVERSIGHT
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs: Full Committee held a
hearing entitled ‘‘Community Care Network Next

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.PT2

D22JAPT2

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with DIGEST

Generation: One Trillion of Oversight’’. Testimony
was heard from Richard F. Topping, Assistant Secretary for Management and Chief Financial Officer,
Department of Veterans Affairs; and public witnesses.
HEARING WITH HEALTH INSURANCE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
Committee on Ways and Means: Full Committee held
a hearing entitled ‘‘Hearing with Health Insurance
CEOs’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
COVER ENHANCEMENT AUTHORITIES
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence: Subcommittee on Defense Intelligence and Overhead Architecture held a hearing entitled ‘‘Cover Enhancement Authorities’’. Testimony was heard from the
following Department of Defense officials: Lieutenant General Sean M. Farrell, Deputy Commanding
General, U.S. Special Operations Command; Rowena
Ormiston, Director, HUMINT and Sensitive Activities, Office of the Under Secretary of War for Intel-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

11:22 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0627

D109

ligence and Security; Colonel Ted D. Price, Chief,
Defense Support Office, Defense Intelligence Agency;
Colleen Swiderski, Director, Joint Defense Accounting Center, Defense Finance and Accounting Service;
and Theresa Whelan, Director, Defense Intelligence
for Sensitive Activities and Special Programs. This
hearing was closed.

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR FRIDAY,
JANUARY 23, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
No meetings/hearings scheduled.

House
No hearings are scheduled.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.PT2

D22JAPT2

D110

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 22, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

3 p.m., Monday, January 26

10 a.m., Friday, January 23

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Monday: Following a period of morning
business, Senate will vote on the motion to invoke cloture
on the motion to proceed to consideration of S. 3627,
Pregnant Students’ Rights Act, at approximately 5:30
p.m.

Program for Friday: House will meet in Pro Forma session at 10 a.m.

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE

Gonzalez, Vicente, Tex., E67
Kelly, Trent, Miss., E65, E67, E69
Larson, John B., Conn., E67
Liccardo, Sam T., Calif., E66
McClain, Lisa C., Mich., E65, E69
Moylan, James C., Guam, E65, E69

Beyer, Donald S., Jr., Va., E67
Courtney, Joe, Conn., E66
Davids, Sharice, Kans., E68
Davis, Danny K., Ill., E68

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with DIGEST

Norcross, Donald, N.J., E66
Nunn, Zachary, Iowa, E68
Pingree, Chellie, Me., E68
Webster, Daniel, Fla., E66
Westerman, Bruce, Ark., E69
Wilson, Joe, S.C., E69

VerDate Sep 11 2014

11:22 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.PT2

D22JAPT2

