UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 14, 2026

No. 10

House of Representatives
The House met at 10 a.m. and was
called to order by the Speaker pro tempore (Mr. WITTMAN).
f

DESIGNATION OF SPEAKER PRO
TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Speaker:
WASHINGTON, DC,
January 14, 2026.
I hereby appoint the Honorable ROBERT J.
WITTMAN to act as Speaker pro tempore on
this day.
MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
f

MORNING-HOUR DEBATE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of January 6, 2026, the Chair will now recognize
Members from lists submitted by the
majority and minority leaders for
morning-hour debate.
The Chair will alternate recognition
between the parties, with time equally
allocated between the parties and each
Member other than the majority and
minority leaders and the minority
whip limited to 5 minutes, but in no
event shall debate continue beyond
11:50 a.m.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

CELEBRATING 250 YEARS OF
AMERICAN PERSEVERANCE
(Mr. MANN of Kansas was recognized
to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. MANN. Mr. Speaker, 250 years
ago, history was marked by patriots
who proved that freedom belongs to the
people; not the powerful.
This year, our Nation will celebrate
21⁄2 centuries of freedom not granted by
kings or governments but endowed by
God.
America’s story is unmatched. It is a
story of perseverance, faith, sacrifice,
and self-government. From Lexington

and Concord to the present day, generation after generation has answered
the call to preserve this great experiment in liberty.
As we approach America’s 250th
birthday, we have much to celebrate.
We celebrate the principles enshrined
in our founding documents: limited
government, individual liberty, personal responsibility, and the rule of
law. We celebrate a Constitution
strong enough to endure great challenges, and we celebrate people who
have always risen to meet the moment
when freedom was tested. Through it
all, the Nation persevered.
Kansans know the story very well.
Our statehood was forged in the fire of
that very struggle. Kansas entered the
Union as a free State, shaped by men
and women who believed deeply that
liberty was worth fighting for.
Kansas didn’t just inherit freedom;
they helped to defend it. From the
frontier to the heartland, Kansas has
always stood on the side of opportunity, hard work, and moral clarity.
Over the course of our Nation’s history, Kansas farmers and ranchers
helped to feed a growing nation. Kansas innovators helped to fuel our economy. Kansas servicemembers answered
the call in every major conflict to protect this country at home and abroad.
The values that built Kansas—faith,
grit, service, and responsibility—are
the same values that built America.
Those patriotic values were embodied
by Kansans like President Dwight D.
Eisenhower and Senator Bob Dole,
whose leadership helped to guide America through defining moments in our
history and shape the course of the Nation.
As we reflect on 250 years of our Nation’s history, this anniversary is not
only about looking back, but it is
about looking forward and deciding
what comes next. The next chapter of
the American story requires strong
leadership. It requires leaders who be-

lieve in this country, who aren’t afraid
to defend its principles, and who understand that with hard work and prayer,
America’s best days are yet to come.
I am grateful that, as we approach
this historic anniversary, we once
again have strong leadership in the
White House from President Donald
Trump.
President Trump leads with confidence in America’s greatness. He believes in secure borders, strong families, energy dominance, and an economy that rewards work. He understands that, both at home and abroad,
American strength is not something to
apologize for but something to preserve
and protect. American strength makes
the world a better place.
The world is watching as America is
led by a President who puts our country first and is not afraid to stand up
for the values that have defined us for
250 years. He believes in the American
experiment, and his commitment to
celebrating our Nation’s history brings
out patriotism in all of us.
Mr. Speaker, America’s 250th anniversary should not just be a celebration. It should be a recommitment: a
recommitment to the ideals that
launched this Nation; a recommitment
to the Constitution that binds us together through popular sovereignty; a
recommitment to the faith in God that
has steered us through stormy seas
time and time again; and a recommitment to ensuring that the next generation inherits a country that is freer,
stronger, and more prosperous than the
one we inherited.
From the Big First District of Kansas to every corner of this great Nation, Americans are proud of our past
and hopeful for our future.
May we honor those who came before
us, rise to the responsibilities of 250
years of independence, and ensure that
the United States of America remains
the greatest Nation on Earth for centuries to come.

b This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
H721

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.000

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H722

AUTHORITY WITHOUT
ACCOUNTABILITY
(Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois. Mr. Speaker,
it is with a heavy heart that I rise
today with both anger and urgency.
What we are witnessing in this country is not law enforcement. It is violence followed by lies. It is authority
without accountability.
Since Trump returned to power, at
least 36 people have died in ICE custody, and 2 have been shot and killed
by ICE agents. These are not just numbers. They are lives, people with families. We must say their names, tell
their stories, and stop state-sanctioned
violence.
Last week in Minneapolis, a 37-yearold American mother, Renee Good, was
killed by an ICE agent. It was caught
on video for the world to see. Almost
immediately, the lies began.
DHS Secretary Kristi Noem said that
Renee Good posed an imminent threat,
even floating the words ‘‘domestic terrorism.’’ Yet, the facts don’t back this
up. Eyewitnesses don’t back this up.
The video doesn’t back up the lies repeated by DHS immediately after the
killing.
State law enforcement in Minnesota
have been blocked from the vehicle
where Renee was killed because the
FBI sealed it off, blocking transparency and accountability.
Renee Good’s murder is not an isolated incident. In my community, we
know this pattern all too well. In September, Silverio Villegas Gonzalez, a
father of two, was killed by ICE on the
side of a road in my district after dropping off his kids at school. Right on
cue, we got the same script: immediate
vague allegations by DHS, lies instead
of facts, no transparency, no accountability, and no respect for the family
left behind.
There was also Marimar Martinez,
another constituent. An ICE agent shot
her five times and then arrested her.
ICE leveled serious criminal accusations to justify it. Later, quietly, those
charges were dropped. Why? It was because they were lies, but the damage
was done. Her name was dragged
through the mud. Her family was terrorized. Her community is still shaken.
This was how a teacher in our community was victimized, and it didn’t
stop there.
Juan Espinoza Martinez, also from
my district, was accused of serious conspiracy to commit crimes that never
happened. ICE made them up and publicly smeared his name. Those charges
were dropped as well because they were
false. There was no apology, no discipline, and no consequences.
ICE acts first and then lies. The lie
sets the frame. The truth is forced to
play defense.
In 2025, Republicans gave ICE $75 billion, a nearly 300 percent increase in
its annual budget, at the same time
that they stripped millions of Ameri-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

cans of their healthcare. Republicans
now want to give ICE and Border Patrol even more money.
We are asked to fund an agency that
does the following: sends masked
agents into communities like my
neighborhood to use loaded guns and
tear gas against our neighbors. It arrests people without warrants. It engages in obscene racial profiling and
discrimination that communities see
clearly, even when Washington looks
away. It stops Members of Congress
from inspecting detention centers,
which is their duty as a coequal branch
of government.
These facts should outrage every
Member of this House. If you believe in
the rule of law, you should be furious.
If you believe in congressional oversight, you should be furious. If you believe that Federal agencies should not
lie to justify violence, you should be
furious because when an agency lies to
the public, lies to the courts, and lies
to Congress, they are spitting in our
faces.
This is not about being for or against
immigration enforcement. This is
about whether we tolerate violence followed by coverups. This is about
whether or not we accept fabricated
charges as a means of intimidation.
f

HONORING JHONIER DANIEL
MARIN
(Ms. DE LA CRUZ of Texas was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. DE LA CRUZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor a McAllen native, Firefighter Sergeant Jhonier Daniel Marin.
Sergeant Marin’s life is defined by
answering the call to service. At age 18,
he joined the U.S. Army Reserve. By
age 19, he was a certified Texas firefighter. From overseas operations to
the front lines of our own southern border in Eagle Pass, Texas, Sergeant
Marin has selflessly protected our
great country.
His leadership is exceptional. Out of
25,000 troops, Sergeant Marin was 1 of
only 13 selected to be honored by President Trump in the Oval Office this past
December, where he received the new
Mexican Border Defense Medal.
Today, he continues to protect his
community as a firefighter for the city
of Mission.
I congratulate Sergeant Marin on
this recognition and thank him for his
unwavering service to south Texas and
our Nation.
HONORING ESTELA RODRIGUEZ

Ms. DE LA CRUZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor Sergeant Estela Rodriguez of the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s
Office on her retirement after 32 years
of service. For over three decades, Sergeant Rodriguez has not only been a
dedicated member of law enforcement
but also a mentor and a leader.
Through her work to create the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office Women’s
Empowerment Conference, she opened
doors for the next generation of female

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

officers, instilling confidence in the
women who will follow in her footsteps.
Her legacy is not just the badge worn
but the countless officers who stand
taller today because of her.
Sergeant Rodriguez leaves behind a
department and a community that are
better because of her work. We thank
her for 32 years of selfless service, and
we wish her a long and well-deserved
retirement.
HONORING THE UTRGV VAQUEROS FOOTBALL
TEAM

Ms. DE LA CRUZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate the UTRGV
Vaqueros for finishing their inaugural
season with nine wins, including all
seven home games, making the
Vaqueros the winningest first-year program in football championship series
history.
The team proved that the Rio Grande
Valley is a football powerhouse. Every
home game, fans across the valley
showed up to cheer on their team, selling out all seven home games and
ranking top 15 for attendance among
FCS teams across the Nation.
I congratulate the players, coaches,
and the fans on a great season that put
UTRGV football on the map and gave
the valley a legacy that will not be forgotten. We are already looking forward
to the next season.
V’s up.
f

b 1010
ICE SHOOTING OF RENEE NICOLE
GOOD
(Mr. KENNEDY of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. KENNEDY of New York. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today in grief and in
outrage over the killing of an American citizen at the hands of the United
States Government.
Her name was Renee Nicole Good.
She was the mother of three, a devout
Christian, a poet, a partner, a compassionate neighbor. She was a woman
whose love for her community was only
rivaled by the love that she had for her
children. Those children will never
hear their mother’s voice again, feel
her embrace, or have her by their side
as they are growing into adulthood.
That is the human cost of what happened in Minnesota last week. Renee
Good’s life was taken by a Federal
agency emboldened by this administration. Donald Trump and Kristi Noem
have created an Immigration and Customs Enforcement with no oversight,
no chain of command, no standards,
and no restraint. They have created a
lawless culture with no accountability,
and a mother being shot at point-blank
range is the consequence. That is not
law enforcement. It is state violence.
The Department of Homeland Security was created to protect the American people and defend our Nation
against terror. Under Secretary Noem,
it has become a source of terror for the
American people themselves. From

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.003

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

pepper-spraying children to deploying
armed masked agents in the neighborhood raids with zero oversight, ICE has
become a rogue agency operating above
the law.
This did not happen by accident. This
administration made a deliberate
choice. Now, because of it, a U.S. citizen is dead, and she is not the only
one. Rather than investing in our communities, they are turning them into
war zones. This is about failed leadership at the very top.
Kristi Noem took an oath to defend
and support the Constitution of the
United States, an oath she has violated
time and time again. She has obstructed Congress, defied Federal court
orders, violated due process by detaining and deporting American citizens,
and directed unconstitutional ICE operations using militarized agents in
American cities, conduct that culminated in the killing of Renee Nicole
Good.
Renee should be alive today. Her
children should still have their mother.
Her wife should still have her spouse.
The American people deserve to know
exactly what happened, why it happened, and how we ensure it never happens again.
This administration, whose own policies and actions help create these conditions, cannot be trusted to investigate itself impartially. That is why
there must be a full, independent, and
transparent process that results in justice for Renee and accountability for
those in power who allowed this to happen. Anyone who presides over the killing of American citizens and turns a
department meant to protect us into a
force of terror does not deserve to remain in office.
Secretary Kristi Noem must resign
immediately, or she must be impeached. Justice is not optional. Accountability is not negotiable, and silence is complicity.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

PENNSYLVANIA FARM SHOW
RECAP
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to highlight
the Pennsylvania Farm Show which
kicked off this past weekend.
For 110 years, farmers have met each
January at the Farm Show in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. The event is the
largest indoor agricultural exposition
in the country, featuring nearly 5,000
animals, more than 250 commercial exhibits, and welcomes more than 500,000
visitors each year.
The Farm Show is a great event for
all ages and features many educational
booths, helping children learn about
the ag industry. One of the most popular attractions at the Pennsylvania
Farm Show is the food court. Here,
visitors can enjoy various food that
features commodities grown in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H723

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

This year’s Farm Show theme,
‘‘Growing a Nation,’’ is particularly
fitting as we celebrate 250 years since
our Founding Fathers signed the Declaration of Independence.
For generations, American farmers
have not only fed this country, they
have helped to feed the world, and they
have done so by continuously adapting
and embracing new tools, technologies,
and practices.
The success of U.S. agriculture has
been built through the ingenuity, hard
work, and the strategic application of
science and technology.
I was proud to help open the 110th
Farm Show on Saturday. It is always
an honor to meet farmers from across
the Commonwealth and learn about
how they continue to ensure agriculture remains Pennsylvania’s number one industry. It was particularly
encouraging to see many young and aspiring farmers, making it clear that
the next generation is ready to take
charge and lead the industry.
I hosted my annual listening session,
where I was able to take questions directly from producers and consumers.
The crowd also included county commissioners, Farm Bureau leaders, State
senators, representatives from Penn
State, Delaware Valley, as well as lots
of 4–H’ers, dairy princesses, and FFA
members.
As the House Committee on Agriculture prepares to craft the farm bill
2.0, it is crucial to hear directly from
the men and women who feed their
communities and this Nation.
I was glad to be joined by my fellow
Pennsylvania
Congressmen,
RON
BRESNAHAN and DAN MEUSER. I was
also proud to have Russell Redding,
Pennsylvania’s Secretary of Agriculture, and Dr. Troy Ott, dean of Penn
State’s College of Agricultural Science,
on the panel.
This year, we celebrated passage of
my bill, the Whole Milk for Healthy
Kids Act, which will be soon signed
into law and brings back the option of
whole milk and 2 percent milk, including flavored, to our schools’ meal programs. Dairy farmers from across the
Commonwealth championed the Whole
Milk for Healthy Kids Act, and I thank
them for their support for this commonsense bill.
Mr. Speaker, the Pennsylvania Farm
Show has grown exponentially since it
began over 100 years ago, a direct reflection of how our country’s ag industry has grown. It was an honor to attend the Farm Show this year, and I
thank all of those who worked tirelessly to make this incredible event
possible.
f

CELEBRATING JAY SEARS
(Mr. LATIMER of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
celebrate the 20th anniversary of
MyRye.com under the editorship of Jay
Sears, for its service as an online

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

chronicler of the life and the times of
the Rye community.
In addition to an active business career and family obligations, Jay Sears
somehow finds the time and energy to
attend and report on community comings and goings of the people and the
organizations in Rye. The high school
sports scene, boys’ and girls’ sports,
are well documented with photos and
stories of the athletes, as well as scores
of games.
MyRye has regular features, such as
Rye GPT People of Note—the celebrities who live here or have a connection to Rye; a platform to feature the
nonprofits of Rye, the Rye YMCA, The
Rye Arts Center, the Rye Nature Center, the Historical Society, and the Rye
Free Reading Room, amongst so many
others. He also highlights the inevitably sad news when a longtime Rye
neighbor passes away for a final salute.
Mr. Speaker, from the floor of the
House of Representatives, I thank Jay
Sears and MyRye.com.
ARDSLEY ENVIRONMENTALISTS

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, permit
me a shout-out to the many volunteer
environmental activists in the village
of Ardsley who work tirelessly to advance good environmental policy.
Two groups meet monthly to plan
and implement efforts to make Ardsley
greener and cleaner in air, water, and
land resources: The Ardsley Green
Task Force and the Ardsley Pollinator
Pathway Committee.
In attending Zoom meetings, I have
seen the energy and dedication of these
volunteers. With the strong voice of
Dr. Carol Sommerfield, they are making a difference in their community of
4,500 residents.
Mr. Speaker, from the floor of the
House of Representatives, I thank
them for backing up their commitment
to the environment with hard work.
SALUTING TOBA LACROWN

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I want
to salute the work of Dr. Olo-run-toba
Ah-du-yem’-ee LaCrown, who is president of the African American Association of Co-Op City, and the members of
that organization as they prepare to
celebrate The Dream of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., this coming Monday,
January 19, at the Church of New Vision, Einstein Loop North of Co-op City
in the Bronx.
We all know him as ‘‘Toba,’’ and he
and his organization have sponsored
important cultural events that unite
the African-American population in
shared moments of pride.
Aside from honoring the legacy of Dr.
King this weekend, the organization
held a recent December celebration of
Kwanzaa that drew a crowd to the
Bartow meeting hall.
Toba’s leadership has been on display
in many forms: as a United States Air
Force veteran who served in Afghanistan and, later, headed The American
Legion Post in Co-op City; as a former
NYPD police officer and, later, as leader of the 47th Precinct Community
Council; active in Bronx Community

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.005

H14JAPT1

H724

Board 12 and the Wakefield Taxpayers
Alliance.
The legacy of Dr. King is carried
down to this day by Toba and all those
who gather this weekend who, in the
words of Dr. King, are judged and appreciated not merely by the color of
their skin, but by the content of their
character.
Mr. Speaker, from the floor of the
House of Representatives, I salute Toba
LaCrown and the African American Association of Co-op City.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING COLONEL CHARLES
‘‘CHUCK’’ DeBELLEVUE
(Mrs. BICE of Oklahoma was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mrs. BICE. Mr. Speaker, I stand before you, along with my colleague,
Representative KEITH SELF of the
Texas Third Congressional District, to
honor Colonel Chuck DeBellevue,
United States Air Force retired, an
American patriot whose extraordinary
courage, leadership, and lifetime of
service reflect the highest ideals of our
Nation and the United States Air
Force.
On September 9, 1972, then-Captain
DeBellevue and his F–4 Phantom II
crewmate, Captain John Madden, shot
down two north Vietnamese MiG–19s.
These victories marked DeBellevue’s
fifth and sixth aerial kills, making him
the highest scoring American ace of
the Vietnam war.
Over the course of his career, Colonel
DeBellevue flew 220 combat missions,
including 96 over North Vietnam. He is
credited with the destruction of six
North Vietnamese jet fighters in aerial
combat, making him America’s leading
ace of that conflict and the last American ace to serve on Active Duty. His
actions in combat remain among the
most distinguished examples of aerial
valor in the United States military history.
His decorations include the Air Force
Cross, the Service’s second highest
award for valor, along with three Silver Stars, three Legions of Merit, six
Distinguished Flying Crosses, and
eighteen Air Medals.
Colonel DeBellevue earned a bachelor
of science degree in physics from the
University of Southwestern Louisiana
and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the United States Air Force.
Following undergraduate navigator
training and an initial assignment flying the F–4 Phantom II at Seymour
Johnson Air Force Base, North Carolina, he was deployed to Southeast
Asia, joining the 555th Tactical Fighter
Squadron at Udorn Royal Thai Air
Force Base, Thailand.
Following his combat tour, Colonel
DeBellevue attended undergraduate
pilot training and became a full-fledged
F–4 pilot. He subsequently served with
distinction in multiple fighter squadrons, including the 335th Tactical
Fighter Squadron at Seymour Johnson
Air Force Base, the 8th Tactical Fight-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

er Squadron at Holloman Air Force
Base, New Mexico, and the 43rd Tactical Fighter Squadron at Elmendorf
Air Force Base, Alaska. His staff assignments included service at the Pentagon, Alaskan Air Command, and the
Fifth Air Force.
After his promotion to colonel in
1985, he attended the Army War College
and held senior leadership positions
across the Air Force.
In his final Active-Duty assignment,
he was commander of Air Force ROTC
Detachment 440 at the University of
Missouri, Columbia, where he continued to shape and mentor future officers.
Colonel DeBellevue is a command
pilot with more than 3,000 flying hours,
including over 550 hours in combat. In
1972, he and the other Vietnam war
aces were awarded the MacKay Trophy
and the Veterans of Foreign Wars
Armed Forces Award. He retired from
Active Duty February 1 of 1998, after 30
years of honorable service.
Following his retirement from the
Air Force, Colonel DeBellevue continued his commitment to service through
work in the aerospace industry, higher
education, and veteran advocacy. I am
proud to say he currently resides in
Oklahoma’s Fifth Congressional District, which I represent. He serves on
the boards of the Dale K. Graham Veterans Foundation and the Air Warrior
Courage Foundation and is president of
the American Fighter Aces Association. In 2023, he was honored as River
Rat of the Year and named the Air
Warrior Courage Foundation Humanitarian of the Year.
Colonel DeBellevue’s lifetime of service has been recognized with numerous
honors, including selection as Outstanding Alumnus of the University of
Louisiana in 2008, introduction to the
Louisiana Aviation Hall of Fame in
2011, and the Oklahoma Military Hall
of Fame in 2012. In 2014, he was the recipient of the Congressional Gold
Medal as a member of the American
Fighter Aces.
Colonel DeBellevue and his wife,
Sally, have raised a family grounded in
service, integrity, and love of country.
Mr.
Speaker,
Colonel
Charles
‘‘Chuck’’ DeBellevue represents the
very best of the United States Air
Force and of those Americans who have
answered our Nation’s call with uncommon valor and lifelong dedication.
It is fitting that his service and legacy
be entered into the CONGRESSIONAL
RECORD so that future generations may
know and be inspired by his example.
f

b 1030
RISING HOUSING COSTS
(Mrs. SYKES of Ohio was recognized
to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mrs. SYKES. Mr. Speaker, I often
say that while my name may be on the
ballot, we are all going to Congress together. Families in Ohio’s 13th Congressional District and all across the

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

country are telling us that housing
costs are rising faster than wages,
making it hard to keep a roof over
their heads.
Today, I rise to bring an issue that
plagues my community and the entire
country, which is the rising cost of
housing.
In my district alone, over one hundred thousand households rent their
homes. The median renter household
income is just above $40,000 a year, yet
the median rent is more than $1,000 per
month. That means housing costs are
often the largest part of a monthly
budget, and this is even before groceries, childcare, or healthcare.
It is not just renters who are feeling
the squeeze. Homeowners are feeling
the squeeze, too. The median home
value in Ohio’s 13th District is about
$228,000. That may sound modest compared to national prices, especially for
those of you on the coasts, but property taxes, insurance, utilities, and repairs add up fast. With aging homes
and data centers driving up the cost of
utilities, people are feeling the crunch.
For families with a mortgage,
monthly housing costs average nearly
$1,500, and even those who have paid off
their mortgage face rising property
taxes and repair costs that strain
household budgets.
For families trying to buy their first
home, the challenge is steeper, because
mortgage rates may have dipped below
6 percent, but high prices and limited
inventory keep homeownership out of
reach for many in my district. We cannot ignore the inequities baked into
the system.
In Ohio’s 13th District, the homeownership rate overall is nearly 69 percent,
but for Black families, it drops to just
37 percent, dropping by nearly half.
That gap reflects generations of barriers we still have a responsibility to
address, like redlining and restrictive
covenants.
For some families, rising costs lead
to housing instability or homelessness.
That is why, last November, I pressed
the Department of Housing and Urban
Development to protect Federal funding and homelessness prevention programs in Summit and Stark Counties.
These continuum of care dollars support nearly 2,700 beds in my district for
families, veterans, and young people
who need a safe place to sleep. Any cut
could disrupt services that people depend on and, most importantly, keep
them without a roof over their head.
We also have to confront the root
causes of this crisis. Large corporate
investors are buying up single-family
homes, driving up prices and rents, and
locking families out of homeownership.
That is why, last summer, I introduced the HOMES Act, which cracks
down on investors buying 50 or more
single-family homes, shines a light on
corporate ownership and rental practices, and makes sure local families,
not profit-seeking investors, get first

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.006

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

access to homeownership. People simply cannot compete with these for-profit corporations, and every family deserves a place to call home.
Just last week, President Trump acknowledged the same problem and
called on Congress to address it. On
this issue, it seems we may finally all
be reading from the same page.
I encourage my colleagues to support
the HOMES Act and see its swift passage, but we also need to build homes,
too. Supply simply has not met the demand. That is why I secured Federal
funding for the East Akron Neighborhood Development Corporation to help
expand affordable housing, revitalize
neighborhoods, and create jobs. Increasing supply is essential if we want
housing prices to come down.
As chair of the New Democrat Coalition’s Affordable Housing Task Force, I
helped develop a housing action plan
with more than 20 recommendations to
increase housing supply, reform zoning
and permitting, strengthen Federal incentives, grow the construction workforce, and improve transparency.
Mr. Speaker, housing is the foundation of opportunity. Homeownership is
the primary way in which families
build wealth. When housing is affordable and stable, families can plan, save,
and build a future. When it is not, life
becomes harder. Rents are too high.
Mortgages are still out of reach for far
too many families. Property taxes and
repairs are stretching household budgets. Homelessness programs that protect our most vulnerable neighbors
must be preserved.
Mr. Speaker, we have to get serious
about housing and focus our attention
on lowering the cost of housing and
keeping housing accessible to everyone. The American Dream depends on
it.
Every family deserves a safe and affordable place to call home, and this
House has a responsibility to help
make that possible. Until housing costs
come down, Congress has a lot more
work to do. I look forward to working
with this body on behalf of my constituents and across the country to
work to reduce housing costs so everyone can live their American Dream
wherever they choose to call home.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

RECOGNIZING AND THANKING
NATE SOULE
(Mr. LAWLER of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize and thank someone
whose impact on my office and on me
personally cannot be overstated, my
chief of staff, Nate Soule, as he concludes his service to New York’s 17th
Congressional District.
When I first ran for the New York
State Assembly in 2020, before there
was a congressional office or a seat in
this Chamber, Nate took a leap of faith
and helped build a campaign from the
ground up. Together, we delivered a

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H725

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

victory many said was impossible, defeating an incumbent in a district with
a 2–1 Democratic enrollment advantage. That race was the foundation for
everything that has followed.
In Albany, Nate served as my chief of
staff and helped lead one of the most
active offices in the State assembly.
Our team delivered real results for the
Hudson Valley and built a reputation
for being accessible, responsive, and relentless when it came to constituent
services.
When I was elected to Congress, Nate
once again stepped up, first as deputy
chief of staff and communications director and now as my chief of staff.
Through every transition, he has
brought discipline, sound judgment,
and an unwavering commitment to the
people we serve.
Nate understands that public service
is not about titles or headlines. It is
about doing the work, telling the
truth, and delivering for the people
who sent us here. His counsel is steady
and measured, his loyalty unwavering,
and, above all, his friendship cherished.
Through Nate’s vision, his hard work,
and his invaluable leadership, our office has not only been more effective
but has set a standard for what public
service can and should be. I have no
doubt that he will bring the same integrity and dedication as he embarks
on a new chapter. Doina and I wish
Nate and his wife, Lauren, the very
best.
HONORING THE LIFE OF ANTHONY ‘‘TONY’’
DEFECIANI

Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of Anthony
‘‘Tony’’ DeFeciani, who passed away
peacefully on December 23, 2025.
Born and raised in Haverstraw, Tony
was a proud New Yorker, attending
Haverstraw High School and participating in the marching band, where he
was voted the most musical in his senior year.
Following graduation, Tony enlisted
in the United States Navy and proudly
served during the Korean war. He was
awarded the Bronze Star after more
than 30 years of service. Returning
home, Tony worked at Bear Mountain,
Lederle Laboratories, and New York
Telephone/Verizon, retiring after 30
years of professional service.
Tony also gave back to his community as a volunteer firefighter with the
Haverstraw Fire Department Relief
Hose Company No. 3 for 60 years, serving as fire chief.
Tony was an avid gardener and fisherman, built his own boat, and ran
Rainbow Gardens, known locally for its
tomatoes.
A devoted husband, father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, Tony
shared 66 years of wonderful marriage
with his beloved wife, Joan. Together,
they raised six children. He cherished
every moment with his family and
community and will be deeply missed.
HONORING LIFE OF THEODORE SCHULTZ

Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of Theodore

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

‘‘Ted the Great’’ Schultz, who passed
away peacefully on January 10, surrounded by his family.
Born in Nyack, Ted was raised on his
grandfather’s farm in Pomona and attended Spring Valley High School,
where he earned the rank of Eagle
Scout. A talented athlete, he wrestled
and played football, earning the nickname ‘‘Tank,’’ and went on to attend
Illinois Wesleyan University, where he
played football for 4 years and later
earned his MBA from Washington University.
It was at Illinois Wesleyan that Ted
met his wife, Carol. They settled in
Pearl River, New York, where they
raised their children, Traci and Craig,
before later moving to Stony Point.
Ted built a remarkable career at Ted
Schultz Auto Sales, relocating the
dealership to Nanuet and growing it
into a nationally ranked Ford dealership while earning numerous President’s Awards.
Beyond work, Ted enjoyed time with
friends, boating on the Hudson River,
and spending time with his grandchildren. His legacy lives on through
the lessons he passed on to his family,
his friends, and the many lives he
touched. May he rest in peace.
RECOGNIZING S.W. JOHNSON FIRE DEPARTMENT

Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize the S.W. Johnson
Fire Department in Rockland County
on an incredible milestone of 150 years
of dedicated service to our community.
Since its formation in 1876, S.W.
Johnson has been 100 percent volunteer, embodying selflessness, courage,
and a commitment to protecting our
neighbors.
One of the department’s most treasured pieces of history is its steamer, a
Button manufactured in 1896 by the
company that would become American
LaFrance. This remarkable piece of
equipment reflects the rich legacy and
enduring dedication of S.W. Johnson
and the fire service today.
I say thank you on behalf of New
York’s 17th Congressional District to
the many firefighters who have given
their time and bravery to this firehouse over the years. Congratulations
to S.W. Johnson on 150 years of dedicated service. Their commitment,
bravery, and volunteer spirit are an inspiration to us all.
f

HONORING OFFICER WILLIAM
EPPERSON
(Mr. WEBER of Texas was recognized
to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. WEBER of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to honor the courage and
selfless service of Officer William
Epperson of the Oyster Creek Police
Department.
Mr. Speaker, on the night of November 17, 2025, Officer Epperson responded
to a house fire with two residents
trapped inside. Heavy smoke was pouring from the home, and the living area
was only accessible by an exterior
stairwell.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.008

H14JAPT1

H726

When the front door was locked and
conditions were too dangerous to enter,
Officer Epperson did not give up. Hearing calls for help, he broke a smokefilled window and pulled a woman to
safety. He then returned to assist her
husband, who had limited mobility,
helping him also escape the burning
home.
Officer Epperson then ensured no one
else was inside and went door to door,
warning the nearby neighbors, all
while suffering smoke inhalation himself.
Mr.
Speaker,
without
Officer
Epperson’s bravery, lives would have
been lost that night. His actions reflect
the very best of law enforcement and
the very best of Texas. God bless Officer Epperson.
HONORING LIEUTENANT COLONEL IAN
O’SULLIVAN

Mr. WEBER of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
today, we honor a leader whose service
has left a lasting mark on the Texas
coast and on the safety of millions of
Texans. I am speaking about Lieutenant Colonel Ian O’Sullivan, who has
been instrumental in advancing the
Coastal Texas Project, what folks back
home called the Ike Dike. Under his
leadership at the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers’ Galveston District, this
project moved from concept toward
construction.
Just recently, the House included $5
million to advance pre-construction
engineering and design for the Ike
Dike. That funding moves the project
forward, Mr. Speaker, as it heads to
the Senate, and it supports a comprehensive coastal resiliency strategy
that protects lives, restores ecosystems, and strengthens our economy.
Those numbers only happen, Mr.
Speaker, because of leaders like Mr.
O’Sullivan, leaders who understand the
mission, discipline, and follow through
on what they promised.
From combat deployments overseas
to mega projects right here at home, he
has served with honor and excellence.
On behalf of the people of southeast
Texas, I thank Lieutenant Colonel
O’Sullivan for his leadership, his service, and his commitment to protecting
our coast.
May God bless Lieutenant Colonel
O’Sullivan, and may his next chapter
be as impactful as the one he leaves behind.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1045
CATALINA
FOOTHILLS
HIGH
SCHOOL BOYS’ SWIM TEAM WINS
D2 STATE CHAMPIONSHIP
(Mr. CISCOMANI of Arizona was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate the Catalina
Foothills High School boys’ swim team
for winning the D2 State championship.
The Falcons finished with a total
score of 386, with senior Connor
Daggett winning gold.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

The team finished first in three
races: the 200-meter medley, with Nicholas
Dinsmore,
Mathew
Murray,
Ariston Elsesser, and Connor Daggett
finishing with a time of 1:39.891; the 50meter freestyle with Connor Daggett
finishing with a time of 21:42; and the
200-meter freestyle relay, with Nicholas Dinsmore, Aidan Kastner, Ariston
Elsesser, and Connor Daggett finishing
with a time of 1:30.831.
In addition to finishing first in multiple races, the Falcons also placed in
the top five for several others.
To Coach Ed Walter, the whole team,
and everyone who made this win possible: Congratulations. Their hard
work has made their school and our
community extremely proud.
Falcons, enjoy your victory. You
earned it. Congratulations again.
TANQUE VERDE BOYS’ SWIM TEAM WINS D3
STATE CHAMPIONSHIP

Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate the Tanque
Verde High School boys’ swim team for
winning the D3 State championship.
The Hawks finished with a total
score of 257, placing first in the 200meter freestyle relay and in the top
five for multiple other events, including the 200-meter medley relay and 400
freestyle relay.
The team’s time of 1:31.81 on the 200meter freestyle won them first place,
with a team made up of Jackson
Eftekhar, Grayson The, Wade Olsson,
and Zachary Duerkop.
To Coach Porter Olstad, the whole
team, and everyone who made this win
possible: Congratulations. Their hard
work has made their school and our
community extremely proud.
Hawks, enjoy your victory. You have
earned it. Here is to another successful
season and many, many more.
CIENEGA HIGH SCHOOL’S MARCHING BAND WINS
CHAMPIONSHIP TITLE

Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate Cienega High
School’s marching band on winning the
Arizona Marching Band Southern Regional Championship.
The Bobcats broke the program’s
record for the highest score in a regular season show. They also brought
home the highest score in music performance, visual performance, general
effect, and percussion performance.
I also congratulate them on coming
in as State silver medalists at the Arizona Marching Band Association’s
State championship. Through the long
hours of hard work and dedication, the
Bobcats achieved this outstanding accomplishment.
To Director Reed Bailey, each member of the band, and all parents and
staff who made this win possible: Congratulations. They have made their
school and our community very proud.
Bobcats, enjoy this victory. You
earned it. Congratulations on yet another successful season.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

declares the House in recess until noon
today.
Accordingly (at 10 o’clock and 47
minutes a.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1200
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. BOST) at noon.
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret
Grun Kibben, offered the following
prayer:
Holy God, let all who are faithful
offer their prayers to You. Trusting in
Your care, teach us the way we should
go, that we may yield ourselves to
Your instruction and have confidence
that
Your
righteousness
is
our
strength.
When we are overwhelmed or in distress, even the inundation of mighty
waters will not overtake us. For You
are our shelter, a hiding place where
we are protected from discouragement.
Your voice delivers us from despair.
Your eye is upon us. You watch over
our comings and goings. You attend to
our motivations and discipline our inclinations. Your counsel is omniscient
and perceptive, plumbing the depths of
our innermost souls.
Your steadfast love surrounds us.
There is nowhere we can be, no turn or
move we can make that we are not
hemmed in by Your compassionate
care and guided by Your generous
grace.
Sovereign God, may Your immeasurable and abiding presence be our
guardian, guide, and refuge through
this day and always.
In Your infinite mercy, we offer our
prayers, and in Your matchless name,
we pray.
Amen.
f

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair has examined the Journal of the
last day’s proceedings and announces
to the House the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Will the
gentleman from Texas (Mr. LUTTRELL)
come forward and lead the House in the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Mr. LUTTRELL led the Pledge of Allegiance as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair will entertain up to 15 requests

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.010

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

for 1-minute speeches on each side of
the aisle.
f

RECOGNIZING CENTRAL MOUNTAIN
STUDENTS
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize
eight students from the Central Middle
School and High School who performed
in December at the ReliaQuest Bowl in
Tampa Bay, Florida.
The Central Mountain Middle School
and High School twirlers were among
the 481 performers present during the
pregame show and joined other high
school bands during the halftime performance. The students performed in
front of an estimated 35,000 fans in
Raymond James Stadium, the home of
the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
The twirlers were invited to participate in the game day programming
through the National Youth Dance and
Twirling Program. Stephanie Ford, the
Central Mountain High School twirling
coach, provided choreography for the
twirlers. Stephanie has been the high
school and middle school coach for 11
years and was pivotal in making and
helping the students learn the choreography ahead of the performance.
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Central Mountain Middle School and High
School twirlers on this fantastic
achievement. I thank them for representing Pennsylvania’s 15th Congressional District on a national stage.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

NATO
(Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend her remarks.)
Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Speaker, the core of NATO is Article 5:
An attack on one is an attack on all.
Since the end of World War II, the
U.S. and our allies have honored and
operated on this mutual trust. President Truman called it a neighborly act.
There is no article for if a NATO
member attacks another because for 80
years, we have led a peaceful partnership for our shared democratic ideals.
Truman considered the treaty a means
to establish freedom from aggression
and from the use of force in the North
Atlantic community. If one ally invaded another, the center would not
hold.
Now, President Trump seeks to
threaten our historic alliance by his
flippant, poisonous quip that we will
have Greenland one way or another. As
a member of the Committee on Foreign
Affairs, I have met with the Prime
Minister of Denmark and other key allies. They believe in America’s global
leadership. They have fought and died
alongside us in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Now, they fear our words. They plan
for a future in which the United States

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H727

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

is no longer the indispensable nation, a
core global ally.
This cannot be the path we forge. It
is good to have friends, and in order to
have friends, we must be one.
f

TRUMP AND REPUBLICANS
WINNING FOR FAMILIES
(Mr. WILSON of South Carolina
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, led by Republicans and signed
into law by President Donald Trump,
the Working Families Tax Cuts is reversing harmful Biden-era regulations
and putting more money in the pockets
of American families and creating jobs.
The law is delivering bigger paychecks, lower costs, and real results for
hardworking families, including: expanding childcare access, permanently
expanding the child tax credit; supporting American jobs, with tax breaks
for loans on ‘‘Made in America’’ cars;
keeping the border secure, protecting
American families with more Border
Patrol agents; 4-year low gas prices; reversing Biden-era regulations; modernizing air traffic control; no tax on tips,
overtime, and Social Security.
President Trump and House Republicans are producing real results, led by
Speaker MIKE JOHNSON.
In conclusion, God bless our troops as
the global war on terrorism continues.
Trump is reinstituting peace through
strength, revealing war criminal Putin
lies, insulting Trump and mocking
Trump, with Putin defending mass
murderer Khomeini as Donald Trump
courageously encourages the people of
Iran for freedom.
f

ICE RAIDS IN NORTH CAROLINA
(Ms. ROSS asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. ROSS. Mr. Speaker, in November, my home State of North Carolina
watched in horror as Federal immigration agents descended on our State and
terrorized our communities.
During these raids, my constituent
Fatima Velasquez-Antonio, was detained. She has work authorization, no
criminal record, and is allowed to legally remain in this country while her
asylum case is pending.
Yet despite all of this, she was taken
into custody and ripped away from her
family for weeks. Thankfully, after an
outpouring of public anger and criticism, the Trump administration finally
released Fatima a few days before
Christmas.
Fatima is one of countless hardworking immigrants who have been unlawfully or unjustly detained across
the country. People like Fatima with
deep ties to our community are being
targeted instead of a focus on apprehending violent criminals.
We cannot allow the Trump administration to continue violating the rights

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

that all individuals in this country are
guaranteed.
f

RECOGNIZING 2026 MONSTER
ENERGY SUPERCROSS SERIES
(Mr. LUTTRELL asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LUTTRELL. Mr. Speaker, let’s
make today a great day.
I rise in recognition of excellence,
discipline, and American competitiveness.
The 2026 Monster Energy Supercross
Series is absolutely underway, and in
America we like it. If it goes fast, has
got a big motor, and there is a high
probability of somebody getting hurt,
even better.
If you have never seen Monster Energy Supercross, I am about to change
your life, and you are welcome. You
have got 22 riders in a confined space
going from a starting gate to go-to-thebathroom-on-your-pants, fast hitting
20-foot jumps with no seatbelts, airbags, or bumpers; just man on machine.
Last weekend on Saturday, Anaheim
I, the first race of the series went off.
In the 250 class, Max Anstie got first;
Chance Hymas got second; Ryder
DiFrancesco got third; and last year’s
champion,
Haiden
‘‘Danger
Boy’’
Deegan, got fourth place.
In the premier class, Eli Tomac absolutely showed up on his new ride. Ken
Roczen got second; Jorge Prado third;
and seventh place, last year’s champion, was Cooper Webb.
Our thoughts and prayers go out to
Justin Barcia and Malcolm Stewart
after that horrific crash they were involved in. I hope they are healing up
well and every household has their favorite rider. My oldest boy loves Cooper Webb. My baby boy, Lincoln, loves
Eli Tomac and Ken Roczen. My wife
and I absolutely are the biggest fan of
number 7, Aaron Plessinger, the cowboy. Go forward and do great things,
Aaron. Dig in your spurs. This is your
year.
f

b 1210
HONORING BISHOP ROSIE O’NEAL
(Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, Bishop Rosie O’neal, a celebrated pastor, author, and Christian
leader, after 37 years of faithful service, retired as senior pastor on December 14.
Born in Germany and adopted by
Norman and Joann Standifer, she gave
her life to Christ at the age of 16 at
Mount
Olive
Missionary
Baptist
Church, where her grandfather served
as pastor. Bishop O’neal went to East
Carolina University to join the choir
and answer the call to ministry,

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.013

H14JAPT1

H728

preaching her first sermon at 17 years
old.
In 1989, she founded Koinonia Christian Center with just 7 members and
grew it into a ministry of more than
2,500. She is recognized for her ‘‘keep it
real’’ approach, and she is, without a
doubt, one of eastern North Carolina’s
most influential faith leaders.
A cancer survivor, Bishop O’neal is
married to Toiriste O’neal, Sr., and is
known for her deep love of family,
friends, and even riding motorcycles.
Congratulations to the O’neal family.
May she keep on riding.
f

RECOGNIZING BRIAN BUHR
(Mr. FINSTAD asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. FINSTAD. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Brian Buhr, one of
my former professors at the University
of Minnesota, who is stepping down
after 13 years of serving as the dean of
the College of Food, Agricultural and
Natural Resource Sciences and the director of the Minnesota Agriculture
Experiment Station.
As our State’s premier institution for
agricultural education, the U of M has
a longstanding reputation of excellence
in developing and training future ag
leaders.
Thanks to Dean Buhr’s leadership,
CFANS has become a global leader in
ag education, offering a diverse range
of studies for 14 undergraduate majors,
25 minors, and 13 graduate programs.
By working shoulder to shoulder
with farmers, agribusiness, and public
policymakers, Dean Buhr has worked
to cultivate a student experience that
combines classroom learning with cutting-edge research and public engagement, preparing CFANS graduates to
become the world’s ag leaders of tomorrow.
I thank Brian for his years of service
to the College of Food, Agricultural
and Natural Resource Sciences and the
many contributions he has made to the
U of M’s legacy in ag education. I wish
him all the best as he starts this new
chapter.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

RECOGNIZING JEROME POWELL
(Mrs. BEATTY asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Mrs. BEATTY. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Chair Jerome Powell, who has served with honor and integrity on the Federal Reserve’s Board
of Governors for 13 years.
Mr. Speaker, I rise and join Democrats, Republicans, and other leaders
because the Justice Department’s
criminal investigation into Chair Powell is yet another attempt by Trump to
take control of the Fed, endangering
household finances across the country.
Our economy relies on an independent Federal Reserve, and every

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

American should be deeply concerned
and alarmed by this administration’s
dangerous efforts to politicize our central bank.
Interest rate decisions directly impact American households through inflation, the labor market, savings, and
household costs. It is imperative that
these decisions be driven by economic
data and evidence, not partisan pressure.
I ask my colleagues to stand up and
use their voices to defend an independent Fed.
f

HONORING MEHRI NAVAB
(Mr. MCDOWELL asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. MCDOWELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor an extraordinary young
North Carolinian, Mehri Navab, who
has been awarded the National Medal
of Honor Lifesaving Award from the
Girl Scouts, one of their highest recognitions for courage and quick action.
On what should have been a normal
afternoon at swim practice, Mehri saw
her brother, Tristan, at the bottom of
the pool. Something didn’t look right,
and instead of hesitating, she acted.
She swam down, pulled him from a lane
divider, got him to the surface, and
called for help. Lifeguards began CPR,
and she refused to leave her brother’s
side until he began breathing again.
Because of her courage, her quick response, and her presence of mind, Tristan is alive today.
The Girl Scouts teach service, skill,
and leadership. Mehri embodied all of
it in a moment when most people, even
adults, would freeze. She is a hero, and
her community is proud of her.
I thank Mehri for going above and beyond to make a difference in our community. I congratulate her on receiving this well-deserved honor.
f

APPLAUDING STABILIZING CRIME
VICTIMS FUND
(Mr. COSTA asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. COSTA. Mr. Speaker, as the Representative of California’s 21st Congressional District, I am here to share
some good news for the people of not
only the Central Valley but across the
country. The House has just passed the
Crime Victims Fund Stabilization Act,
with strong bipartisan support.
As one of the original founders of the
bipartisan
Congressional
Victims’
Rights Caucus, this is good news. I am
proud to co-lead the bill alongside a bipartisan group of colleagues.
Right now, too many victim service
organizations are forced to operate
with uncertainty, not knowing if funding will be there from year to year.
That uncertainty affects real people
who have been victims of crime, survivors seeking counseling, families

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

needing emergency shelter, and victims looking for legal support in some
of the hardest moments in their lives.
This bill stabilizes the Crime Victims
Fund, which is funded by criminal
fines, not taxpayer dollars, and supports critical services through VOCA
programs across the country.
By bringing stability to the funding,
States and local organizations will
have the ability to plan ahead, keep
staff in place, and continue showing up
for survivors when it matters most.
This bill heads to the Senate, and I
am urging my colleagues there to act
quickly on its passage for victims of
crime and their families.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 7006, FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT AND NATIONAL SECURITY,
DEPARTMENT OF STATE, AND
RELATED
PROGRAMS
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, by direction
of the Committee on Rules, I call up
House Resolution 992 and ask for its
immediate consideration.
The Clerk read the resolution, as follows:
H. RES. 992
Resolved, That at any time after adoption
of this resolution the Speaker may, pursuant
to clause 2(b) of rule XVIII, declare the
House resolved into the Committee of the
Whole House on the state of the Union for
consideration of the bill (H.R. 7006) making
further consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes. The first reading of the bill
shall be dispensed with. All points of order
against consideration of the bill are waived.
General debate shall be confined to the bill
and shall not exceed one hour equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on
Appropriations or their respective designees.
After general debate the bill shall be considered for amendment under the five-minute
rule. The bill shall be considered as read. All
points of order against provisions in the bill
are waived. Clause 2(e) of rule XXI shall not
apply during consideration of the bill. No
amendment to the bill shall be in order except those printed in the report of the Committee on Rules accompanying this resolution. Each such amendment may be offered
only in the order printed in the report, may
be offered only by a Member designated in
the report, shall be considered as read, shall
be debatable for the time specified in the report equally divided and controlled by the
proponent and an opponent, shall not be subject to amendment, and shall not be subject
to a demand for division of the question in
the House or in the Committee of the Whole.
All points of order against such amendments
are waived. At the conclusion of consideration of the bill for amendment the Committee shall rise and report the bill to the
House with such amendments as may have
been adopted. The previous question shall be
considered as ordered on the bill and amendments thereto to final passage without intervening motion except one motion to recommit.
SEC. 2. The chair of the Committee on Appropriations may insert in the Congressional
Record not later than January 16, 2026, such
material as he may deem explanatory of H.R.
7006.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.015

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentlewoman from North Carolina is recognized for 1 hour.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, for the purpose of debate only, I yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Pennsylvania (Ms. SCANLON),
pending which I yield myself such time
as I may consume. During consideration of this resolution, all time yielded is for the purpose of debate only.
GENERAL LEAVE

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from North Carolina?
There was no objection.
b 1220
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the bill and the underlying legislation.
Yesterday, the Rules Committee met
and produced a rule, House Resolution
992, providing for the House’s consideration of a single measure, H.R. 7006,
the Financial Services and General
Government and National Security,
Department of State, and Related Programs Appropriations Act for fiscal
year 2026.
The rule provides for consideration of
H.R. 7006 under a structured rule, with
two amendments made in order. Further, the rule provides 1 hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking member of the Committee on Appropriations, or their respective designees, and
one motion to recommit.
Mr. Speaker, following last week’s
progress in advancing three separate
appropriations bills through the committee and on the floor, we have returned this week to continue our work.
H.R. 7006 was negotiated in good faith
on a bipartisan, bicameral basis.
President Trump’s priorities, alongside the priorities of the American people, are interwoven within this important package.
Let me make this abundantly clear,
Mr. Speaker: Not only does this legislative package contain no poison pills,
but it also cuts foreign aid by 16 percent. That is more than $9 billion.
Further, this package is part of an
agreement that keeps fiscal year 2026
spending below the level that has been
forecasted under the current continuing resolution.
We are enacting targeted funding to
accelerate entrepreneurship and economic prosperity, guard our Nation’s
national security posture and apparatus, and further cement true,
unyielding, American leadership on the
international stage.
At the very same time, we are slashing incompatible mandates and provisions that were cooked up during the
Biden administration that would have
weakened America’s trajectory to
greatness.
With fiscal restraint and an eye toward paving a new and prosperous path

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H729

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

for our Nation, anything—yes, anything—can be possible.
As I said in the committee yesterday
afternoon, gone are the days of inflated
omnibuses that have bogged down and
constrained this legislative body. Indeed, we are moving in a better direction and chucking the Biden budget
into the grave where it belongs. Good
riddance.
The
bipartisan
and
bicameral
underpinnings of this legislative package make a compelling case as to why
the House must pass it immediately.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
the rule.
Let me begin by acknowledging the
hard work of our colleagues on the Appropriations Committee who, despite
deep divisions and really difficult political conditions, have assembled a bipartisan compromise to fund additional portions of the Federal Government for the current fiscal year.
The bill before us containing the Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act and the National Security, Department of State,
and Related Programs Appropriations
Act, includes hard-fought Democratic
priorities, despite our minority position in the House and Senate. These
Democratic priorities will help working families and small businesses safeguard our elections and protect American values and interests abroad.
Democratic appropriators secured
funding for vital government programs
that the White House sought to cut, including the CDFI fund, which promotes
economic development in low-income
communities; the Small Business Administration, which provides invaluable financing that allows people to
start or grow their businesses; and the
Election Assistance Commission, which
supports State and Federal election integrity across the country. The package also provides a long overdue increase in funding for the Federal Defender Services, which gives access to
justice to those who cannot afford it.
Importantly, the bill restores funding, with meaningful safeguards, for
humanitarian and democracy building
programs at the Department of State,
programs that were illegally shut down
earlier this year by the Trump administration.
This bill ensures that the U.S. will
continue to provide economic and humanitarian assistance. Specifically, it
will support women and women’s
health in developing countries and will
combat HIV and AIDS worldwide.
These are victories, and they matter.
They matter for small business owners
struggling to secure a loan. They matter for low-income neighborhoods that
are essentially red-lined by big banks
and that rely upon Community Development Financial Institutions. These
victories matter for women and girls
around the globe seeking safety, education, and healthcare.

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The restoration of State Department
funding matters for all of us who still
believe in the promise of American
leadership in advancing a safe and
prosperous global community.
Ultimately, we cannot afford to let
funding lapse for those agencies, and
given that we are 4 months into the
current fiscal year, I commend our appropriators for crafting these bipartisan bills to address fiscal year 2026 so
that we can immediately start working
on appropriations for next year, fiscal
year 2027.
However, Mr. Speaker, commendable
as this package is and as much as I respect the work of our colleagues on the
Appropriations Committee, I also believe this package reveals the limits of
what we can achieve to meet the needs
of the American people under Republican control.
Let’s be clear: This bill isn’t some
compromise where both sides get a little of what they want. It is the most
Democrats could get from a Republican
Party that continues to knuckle under
to the whims of the Trump administration and turn a blind eye to its worst
abuses. That is why our Republican
colleagues have rejected multiple provisions to rein in the unconstitutional
power grabs by this President and his
administration.
Republicans control the Senate, the
House, and the White House. Under
unified Republican control, we have
seen the Federal Government used not
to help the American people but to
punish the President’s enemies and to
enrich and protect the rich and wellconnected at the expense of the American people.
We have seen it when the Republican
trifecta passed a partisan bill that gave
huge tax cuts to big business and billionaires but refused to extend the ACA
tax credits that helped millions of
Americans afford their health coverage.
In their main legislative accomplishment so far, Trump and congressional
Republicans blew a massive hole in the
deficit with their tax cuts for the rich
and then tried to pay for it with cuts to
Medicaid, SNAP, and public health programs that Americans rely upon.
We are seeing it play out after a
masked Federal agent shot and killed
Renee Good, an American citizen in
Minnesota. In the wake of that killing,
we learned that Department of Justice
leadership blocked the decades-long
practice of initiating an investigation
of an officer-involved shooting by the
Office of Civil Rights. Having blocked
that investigation, they instead opened
a politically motivated criminal investigation of Ms. Good’s widow as it tries
to brand protected speech by Americans as domestic terrorism.
The failure to investigate the lawfulness of the officer’s use of force and the
weaponization of the investigation to
attack the widow are so beyond the
pale that it has sparked a mass resignation by career prosecutors at the
Department of Justice.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.017

H14JAPT1

H730

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

It goes on. Last weekend, the Trump
White House launched a criminal investigation against Federal Reserve
Chair Jerome Powell, not because he
broke the law, but apparently because
he refused to surrender the independence of the Fed and submit to the
President’s demand that he lower interest rates. This is an unprecedented
attack on the independence of the Federal Reserve, an institution that is
critical to the stability of our economy
because it is above partisan politics.
Yet, under Republican rule, the independence of the Fed and other nonpartisan agencies is being destroyed before our eyes because this President
cannot tolerate dissent, and his party
will not restrain him.
Just last week, the administration
blocked $10 billion in social services
funding to States with Democratic
leadership.
Yesterday,
President
Trump went even further, announcing
his intent to withhold Federal funds
from any State that does not embrace
his toxic immigration priorities. This
is extortion, plain and simple, directed
against the American people he was
elected to serve, and the House Republican majority is letting him get away
with it.
Of course, we cannot forget the continued coverup of the Epstein files. The
Department of Justice was mandated
by law to release the Epstein files last
month, last year now, but the vast majority of the files are still being kept
secret, leading us to ask again: Whom
is Trump trying to protect, and why is
it the Republicans refuse to hold him
responsible for this blatant coverup?
What possible justification could there
be for this secrecy, except to protect
the wealthy and powerful men implicated in those documents.
A suggestion of the answers have
come from an unlikely source. According to former Representative Marjorie
Taylor Greene, the President yelled at
her in a phone call that he didn’t want
to release the Epstein files because
‘‘my friends will get hurt.’’
b 1230
The list goes on and on, and the Republican agenda is clear. They abuse
the powers of the Federal Government
to protect the elite and punish the vulnerable.
While I will support the appropriations minibus this week, I call on my
Republican colleagues in the House and
the Senate to take seriously their obligations to this institution under Article I of the Constitution. We cannot sit
by and watch as the executive branch
grabs more and more power at the expense of Congress and at the expense of
the Constitution.
Congress’ power of the purse is not
just a budgetary tool. It is one of the
last real checks we have on a President
who believes that he is above the law
and only constrained by his own morality.
I know my Democratic colleagues
fought for everything they could in

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

this bill under deeply constrained circumstances, so the failures in this bill
are a reflection of the Republican majority, which continues to look the
other way as the President dismantles
our Federal institutions and subverts
our democracy.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, we are here to debate
this appropriations package, not every
other issue under the Sun. I urge my
colleagues not to lose sight of the legislative package at hand: We have a bipartisan,
bicameral
appropriations
package free of poison pill riders that
bring us closer to fulfilling our Article
I responsibilities.
My colleague says Republicans are in
control, but the very bills we have
passed and are passing are bipartisan.
We are working across the aisle, which
we should do. Our friends can’t have it
both ways. They can’t say we are in
control, therefore, everything is our
fault, and say at the same time that
these are good bills built upon bipartisan support.
There will no doubt be time to debate
other matters, but today the matter at
hand is an appropriations package containing the Financial Services and
General Government bill and the National Security, Department of State,
and Related Programs bill.
Might I add that national security is
the number one issue in our Federal
Government. We need to stay focused
and complete the task at hand.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, just to
be clear, I didn’t say these were good
bills. I said they were the best bills we
could get under the circumstances, and
certainly we would craft very different
bills.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman
from
California
(Mr.
KHANNA).
Mr. KHANNA. Mr. Speaker, no one in
America is safe from ICE today. Joe
Rogan said that ICE agents are acting
as ‘‘villains,’’ stripping away freedoms
from Americans. This agency has gone
rogue. It is lawless, and it needs to be
reined in.
The ICE agents who pepper sprayed
an elderly couple in Minnesota need to
be arrested and prosecuted. The ICE
agents who dragged out a disabled
woman from her car who was going to
a doctor’s appointment need to be arrested and prosecuted. The ICE agent
who shot and killed Renee Good needs
to be arrested and prosecuted.
When you have people in the MAGA
base, when you have people like Joe
Rogan talking about the lawlessness of
a private police force—ICE acting as
the President’s private police force—
then we know we have a crisis of freedom in this country. It is time to rein
in this lawless agency.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Again, we should be focused on the
issue at hand. Mr. Speaker, we never
celebrate the loss of life on our side.
We don’t celebrate the loss of life in
the recent shooting, but we cannot absolve people of the actions they are
taking to disrupt ICE’s operations.
We certainly shouldn’t be looking at
ICE agents, condemning ICE agents
who are showing up to do their jobs.
Democrats have been questioning the
authority and jurisdiction of ICE’s actions in Minnesota.
Let’s shed some light on what ICE
has been doing. They arrested a criminal illegal alien from Somalia with a
record of multiple counts of credit card
fraud, drug possession, controlled substance possession, and drug trafficking.
This criminal was issued a final order
of removal in 2022.
ICE also arrested a criminal illegal
alien from Laos with three prior convictions for selling drugs as well as
convictions for assault and contributing to a minor’s delinquency. This
criminal was issued a final order of removal in 2009, Mr. Speaker.
A criminal illegal alien from Mexico
previously arrested for child cruelty
and battery was also picked up by ICE.
This criminal was issued a final order
of removal in 2009.
In addition, there was a criminal illegal alien from Mexico previously arrested for cruelty toward a child, and a
criminal illegal alien from Somalia
previously arrested for dangerous drugs
and possession of narcotics.
We are talking about dangerous people, Mr. Speaker. The list goes on and
on. Let’s be clear, ICE is targeting
criminal rings, and the Trump Administration isn’t ignoring fraud as Governor Walz had done for years. They
are targeting that criminal ring for immigration violations, just as they have
done elsewhere.
Not long ago, ICE agents arrested
more than 150 illegal alien sex offenders during a major enforcement surge
across the State of Florida. ICE is focusing on rings of criminality, and
they will pursue them wherever they
might be, political correctness be
damned. Americans are better off
under this approach.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, nobody is questioning
that the Federal Government has the
duty and authority to arrest and detain
and deport these so-called worst of the
worst, rapists, drug dealers, people who
have been convicted, but that is not
what is happening across the country.
That is not what ICE is doing.
Eighty percent of the people that
they have picked up and that they are
detaining have no criminal record.
What we are seeing in Minnesota, this
door-to-door, stopping people in parking lots, and asking if they are citizens, that is not targeted enforcement.
That is putting masked and armed
agents on the streets and causing
chaos, as we have repeatedly seen.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.019

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

The Rules chairwoman mentioned
one of the people who has been picked
up is absolutely someone who probably
deserves to be picked up. However,
they have had over 2,000 ICE agents in
Minneapolis for about 6 weeks, and
they have arrested about 20 people who
fit that profile.
In addition, of course, they have
killed Renee Good. They have arrested
American citizens. They have tackled
kids outside their high school. They
have tackled teenagers working at Target. They have terrorized an entire
community. That does appear to be
part of the point here is to create propaganda and videos to scare Americans
to project this military power in our
streets, which, for any student of
American history, that is why we left
the U.K.
I think that the objection here is to
the lawfulness of what has been happening in Minnesota, in Chicago, in
L.A., across the country, and the need
to really change how things are being
done there.
If we defeat the previous question, I
will offer an amendment to the rule to
make in order Mr. HOYER’s amendment
to the FSGG appropriations bill, which
restricts obligating any remaining unobligated balances for the new FBI consolidated headquarters facility until
GSA, in consultation with the FBI,
submits the contracted and completed
architectural and engineering plan for
review.
b 1240
Speaker, our colleague, Mr.
HOYER, has served with honor for over
four decades and has ushered countless
pieces of bipartisan legislation through
this House.
Now, in this case, all he is asking for
is a vote, that the Members of this
body vote on an amendment to make
sure that before an extremely consequential and expensive decision is
made with respect to the location of
the FBI headquarters, we receive the
architectural and engineering plan
that the General Services Administration is supposed to complete. That
seems like the least we could do.
Regardless of one’s position on Mr.
HOYER’s amendment, it deserves a vote
on the House floor.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of my amendment into the RECORD, along with any
extraneous
material,
immediately
prior to the vote on the previous question.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania?
There was no objection.
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, to discuss our proposal, I yield 5 minutes to
the gentleman from Maryland (Mr.
HOYER), the sponsor of the amendment.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman for her comments and
for her support of my amendment. I regret that my amendment was rejected
by the Rules Committee, but that is

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Mr.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H731

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

not uncommon. An overwhelming majority of Democratic amendments are
rejected, irrespective of merit.
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that
this amendment comports with the debate that I heard in the Rules Committee yesterday. The substance of
that debate was that we need oversight. We need to make sure that we
know what we are doing. We need to
make sure that what the administration or any administration is asking
for comports with the policies of the
Congress of the United States.
If we defeat the previous question, we
will offer an amendment to the rule
that allows the House to simply consider my amendment concerning the
FBI headquarters.
I will speak more on that matter
later, but I am deeply concerned that
moving the FBI to the Reagan Building, as this administration plans to do,
would greatly undermine the FBI’s security.
This is a picture of the Murrah Building in Oklahoma. In 1995, a guy named
McVeigh drove a step van up to the
street of the Murrah Building and blew
it up, killing 168 people and injuring
over 800 people. That is a major artery
in front of the Murrah Building.
The Reagan Building was designed as
an open and public-private building
with public access, public accommodations, and the public coming into the
building for eating. It has a big cafeteria. It has a big parking lot that the
public uses and is used by city hall,
which is located right in the middle—
or not in the middle, but surrounded by
the Reagan Building.
The amendment that I have simply
says: Let’s not spend any money on
moving the FBI to this building, which
the Murrah Building makes very clear,
and is why the FBI Director came to
me in 2009 to have this facility, the FBI
building, moved to a place where you
can have security.
We have some number of security organizations. They are all located either
in the suburbs or at Boeing Air Force
base. Boeing Air Force base is a secured piece of much acreage, so they
are not subject to that risk.
All of these agencies, including the
CIA at Langley and other agencies,
four of which are in Virginia, are so
that those agencies can be as secure as
we can possibly make them, so that we
will not lose people, FBI agents, CIA
agents, NSA agents, or whoever, and
that we will have those facilities in a
secure place. All this amendment says
is: Show us the plan to keep our people
secure.
The gentlewoman, my friend from
North Carolina, said, and I believe she
is accurate, that we are all concerned
about the lives of people, be they government employees or not. This
amendment says: Present us the information, GSA and FBI, that shows us
that, in fact, you can make the Reagan
Building safe for a security agency.
If the motion is defeated for the previous question, we will offer that sim-

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ple amendment and give everybody in
this Congress the ability to stand up
and say, yes, we want to know information before we make this critical decision.
It is not partisan. It is not ideological. It is simply doing what the Congress is responsible to do, and that is
have oversight and make judgments
based upon the best information they
can receive.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 1 minute to the gentleman from Maryland.
Mr. HOYER. In closing, let me emphasize that this is consistent with
what all of us say and was said in the
committee yesterday. Mrs. HOUCHIN
said it particularly well, and others on
the committee, when saying that they
want the information necessary to
make solid decisions. If we adopt my
amendment, that will accomplish that
objective.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote against the previous question and
for the Hoyer amendment.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to close, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the Rules
Committee, Republicans rejected over
70 amendments submitted by Members
of both parties. This included a handful
of amendments that I have submitted,
which if adopted, I obviously think
would have improved the bill.
I will highlight those amendments in
light of the reporting about the chaos
at the Department of Justice after its
leadership quashed a transparent investigation into the fatal shooting of
Renee Good by an ICE agent and instead insisted on opening a criminal investigation into her widow. DHS Secretary Kristi Noem and other Trump
officials and conservative commentators have tried to brand Renee Good as
a domestic terrorist in gross contradiction to known facts, but that is not the
key issue here.
Putting aside the refusal to investigate the lawfulness of the agent’s use
of deadly force under those circumstances, and the heinous implication that Renee Good somehow deserved to die because she objected to
the presence of armed and masked Federal agents in her neighborhood and
that she was disrespectful, the President’s characterization, this investigation, and these comments from Secretary Noem, are the direct result of an
underreported and underappreciated effort by the Trump administration to
criminalize constitutionally protected
speech.
Earlier this year, President Trump
issued a sweeping memo, directing Federal agencies to target Americans with
criminal and civil investigations on
the explicit basis of constitutionally
protected speech.
The memo literally defines specific
categories of political opinions and beliefs that law enforcement must now

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.021

H14JAPT1

H732

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

treat as instances of domestic terrorism.
Following this directive, the Department of Justice then changed its policies to direct Federal law enforcement
agents to target Americans with criminal investigations for expressing these
sanctioned political views or for participating in protests against the
Trump administration.
This is the kind of political oppression you would expect to see from authoritarian states like Russia or China,
but no, it is here. It is happening at
home.
Our Republican colleagues, who are
often so quick to complain about censorship or the weaponization of the
Federal Government, have remained silent while President Trump has turned
the Department of Justice into a tool
of political suppression.
Last night, I proposed an amendment
to prohibit the use of any Federal taxpayer dollars to investigate or prosecute Americans on the basis of their
lawful and constitutionally protected
speech.
b 1250
Mr. Speaker, every single Republican
on the Rules Committee voted against
my amendment, blocking it from coming to the House floor so our entire
body could vote on it.
The First Amendment protects everyone’s speech. There are no carveouts for those we disagree with. Apparently, as we saw in last night’s vote,
House Republicans do not agree with
that fundamental American value.
While Rules Republicans voted down
my amendment to protect Americans’
right to free speech, they did make in
order a questionable amendment from
our Rules colleague, Representative
ROY, that would defund the D.C. Federal courts and specifically withdraw
the salaries for the staff of two Federal
judges.
These two judges have been targeted
by President Trump and congressional
Republicans because they have done
their job. They have not bent to the
President’s will. They have interpreted
the law as written. Therefore, House
Republicans are taking the extreme position of zeroing out the salaries of
their staff. It is a cruel and un-American attack on the judiciary that completely subverts our constitutional
order.
Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to close,
and I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the
balance of my time.
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, underneath this debate
about the appropriations minibus is
the difficult reality that House Republicans have abdicated their responsibilities to this Chamber, to the Congress,
and to the Constitution. We are not
just debating a budget bill. We are debating whether Congress will continue
to function not just as a coequal
branch of government but as the Arti-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

cle I source of the laws that run our
country.
Under Republican leadership, we
have seen Congress turned into a rubber stamp. Republicans have surrendered to the whims of a President who
sees laws as optional and power as personal.
These two appropriations bills, while
necessary for the continued operation
of essential government functions, are
the limit of how far the Republican
Party is willing to go in defying the
President.
Unfortunately, Republicans are more
interested in protecting power than in
responsibly governing for the benefit of
the American people. Our job isn’t to
protect the President. Our job is to
fund the government responsibly and
to serve as a check on executive overreach.
As masked agents roam our streets,
terrorizing our communities, as Trump
entertains starting another forever
war, and as the Epstein files remain
covered up, now is the time for Congress to stand up for the American people.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘no’’ on the previous question and
rule, and I yield back the balance of
my time.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, this majority continues
to roll up its sleeves and advance the
core priorities of the American people
and President Trump. We are absolutely exercising our Article I responsibilities by passing appropriations
bills.
With our unifying vision and some
elbow grease, we are making significant headway that benefits the American people and our entire Nation. The
legislative package contained under
this rule is yet another commitment
that we are seeing through to completion. Its provisions and intent confirm
this through and through.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘yes’’ on the previous question,
‘‘yes’’ on the rule, and ‘‘yes’’ on the underlying bill.
The material previously referred to
by Ms. SCANLON is as follows:

Act, 2016 (title V of division E of Public Law
114–113), the Financial Services and General
Government Appropriations Act, 2017 (title V
of division E of Public Law 115–31), the Financial Services and General Government
Appropriations Act, 2023 (title V of division
E of Public Law 117–328), or the Financial
Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2024 (title V of division B of Public
Law 118–47) for the new Federal Bureau of Investigation consolidated headquarters facility in the National Capital Region that were
subsequently transferred pursuant to a notification received by the Committees on Appropriations from the Acting Administrator
of the General Services Administrator on
September 19, 2025, may not be further obligated until the General Services Administration, in consultation with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, submits to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate the contracted and completed architectural and engineering plan for the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s new headquarters building for
review. Any classified portion of the architectural and engineering plan shall be submitted through a classified annex.

Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield back
the balance of my time, and I move the
previous question on the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question are postponed.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess subject to
the call of the Chair.
Accordingly (at 12 o’clock and 54
minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1330
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. BOST) at 1 o’clock and 30
minutes p.m.

AN AMENDMENT TO H. RES. 992 OFFERED BY
MS. SCANLON OF PENNSYLVANIA
At the end of the resolution, add the following:
f
SEC. 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this resolution, the amendment specified in section 4 shall be in order as though ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
printed as the last amendment of the report
of the Committee on Rules accompanying
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Prothis resolution if offered by Representative
ceedings will resume on questions preHoyer of Maryland or a designee. That
amendment shall be debatable for 10 minutes viously postponed. Votes will be taken
equally divided and controlled by the pro- in the following order:
Ordering the previous question on
ponent and an opponent.
SEC. 4. The amendment referred to in sec- House Resolution 992; and
tion 3 is as follows:
Adoption of House Resolution 992, if
At the end of division A (before the short ordered.
title), insert the following:
The first electronic vote will be conSEC. ll Any remaining unobligated balances from amounts originally made avail- ducted as a 15-minute vote. Pursuant
able under the heading ‘‘General Services to clause 9 of rule XX, the remaining
Administration’’ in the Financial Services electronic vote will be conducted as a
and General Government Appropriations 5-minute vote.

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.023

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 7006, FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT AND NATIONAL SECURITY,
DEPARTMENT OF STATE, AND
RELATED
PROGRAMS
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on ordering
the previous question on the resolution
(H. Res. 992) providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 7006) making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes, on which
the yeas and nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 213, nays
209, not voting 9, as follows:
[Roll No. 24]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

YEAS—213
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald

Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H733

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube

Jkt 069060

Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)

Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)

Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez

Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—209
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—9
Casar
Castor (FL)
Hunt

Moore (NC)
Murphy
Norman

Pelosi
Swalwell
Van Orden

b 1356
Ms. BROWN and Mr. MIN changed
their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
So the previous question was ordered.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
Stated for:
Mr. MOORE of North Carolina. Mr. Speaker,
had I been present, I would have voted YEA
on Roll Call No. 24.

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the resolution.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This
will be a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 213, nays
210, not voting 8, as follows:
[Roll No. 25]
YEAS—213
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher

Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint

Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop

Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Newhouse
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—210

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.027

H14JAPT1

Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum

H734
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford

Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—8
Casar
Castor (FL)
Hunt

Murphy
Nehls
Norman

Swalwell
Van Orden

b 1402
So the resolution was agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT AND NATIONAL SECURITY, DEPARTMENT
OF STATE, AND RELATED PROGRAMS APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and to include extraneous material on H.R. 7006, and
that I may include tabular material on
the same.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
DESJARLAIS). Is there objection to the
request of the gentleman from Oklahoma?
There was no objection.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 992 and rule
XVIII, the Chair declares the House in
the Committee of the Whole House on
the state of the Union for the consideration of the bill, H.R. 7006.
The Chair appoints the gentleman
from Illinois (Mr. BOST) to preside over
the Committee of the Whole.
b 1407
IN THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

Accordingly, the House resolved
itself into the Committee of the Whole
House on the state of the Union for the
consideration of the bill (H.R. 7006)
making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes,
with Mr. BOST in the chair.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The CHAIR. Pursuant to the rule, the
bill is considered read the first time.
General debate shall be confined to
the bill and shall not exceed 1 hour
equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking minority member of
the Committee on Appropriations, or
their respective designees.
The gentleman from Oklahoma (Mr.
COLE) and the gentlewoman from Connecticut (Ms. DELAURO) each will control 30 minutes.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma (Mr. COLE).
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I yield myself
such time as I may consume.
Mr. Chair, I rise in support of H.R.
7006, the Financial Services-General
Government bill, which institutes fiscal year 2026 funding for the Financial
Services and General Government and
National Security, Department of
State, and Related Programs appropriations measures.
This Congress has a fundamental responsibility to fund the government,
and this two-bill package is our next
step toward completing the full 12 bills.
When done the right way, funding the
government is not a single vote. It is a
process that requires steady, deliberative progress. I am proud to say we are
doing just that.
Today marks the second time this
month that we are bringing bipartisan,
bicameral bills to the floor. We promised the American people a responsible
Member-driven process, and that is precisely what we are delivering.
b 1410
This two-bill package reflects Member input, the America-first agenda,
and the collaboration across political
aisles and Chambers that serves the
Nation.
Advancing full-year appropriations
matters because it gives the country
certainty and direction. It allows vital
agencies to plan, make decisions, and
do their jobs based on today’s realities
and not policies from the past. That is

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

how we move from promises to action
and carry out the America-first agenda
mandated by the people.
Mr. Chair, those priorities are reflected throughout the measure before
us. Through the Financial ServicesGeneral Government portion of the
bill, Financial Services and General
Government Subcommittee Chairman
DAVID JOYCE advanced important provisions that drive economic growth,
uphold consumer freedom, and support
entrepreneurship and small businesses,
reinforcing the foundations of the
American Dream for people and job
creators nationwide.
It also advances needed government
efficiencies by cutting waste, modernizing technology and cybersecurity,
and addressing unused Federal space
and buildings. Crucially, it also protects Americans from a supercharged
IRS by cutting enforcement and redirecting resources to customer service. This is especially important as we
approach tax-filing season and implement the working families tax cut, allowing families to keep more of what
they earn.
Just as this package strengthens economic security and accountability, it
also reinforces America’s security and
leadership at home and abroad. The
National Security-Department of State
measures champion an America-first
policy agenda. We replaced the weakness of prior administrations by restoring President Trump’s Peace Through
Strength agenda. National Security,
Department of State, and Related Programs Subcommittee Chairman MARIO
DIAZ-BALART took decisive action to
reprioritize funding in support of our
Nation’s security. This allowed us to
eliminate $9.3 billion in spending while
reasserting deterrence and leadership.
To protect the safety, freedom, and
prosperity of the American people, we
showed that focused strategy, not endless spending, is what delivers results.
We make critical investments in highimpact initiatives that combat narcotics and human trafficking, confront
the malign influence of the Chinese
Communist Party, and counter terrorism.
We reinforce democracy and human
rights efforts, and we defend religious
liberty. As both a moral duty and vital
American interest, we will not tolerate
religious persecution and attacks on
faith. Upholding those values strengthens American leadership and advances
freedom around the world.
We also eliminate wasteful initiatives, implement the necessary accountability at the United Nations,
and prohibit any funds for things like
UNRWA or the Taliban. The bottom
line: We counter our foes, stand with
our friends, and ensure investments are
focused on security, keeping Americans
safe, and enhancing our global edge.
Taken in its entirety, the package
serves a clear purpose: safety, strength,
and freedom. That is certainly something that we can all support.
I commend the detailed work of our
chairmen, Representatives JOYCE and

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.007

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

DIAZ-BALART. Their leadership and
careful stewardship of this package ensured that the substance of the bill
matched the responsibility of the task.
I thank their accompanying ranking
members, Representative STENY HOYER
and LOIS FRANKEL, for their professionalism and engagement in the process. This work demonstrates what we
can accomplish through collaboration
and respect.
I also particularly thank my good
friend and working partner, the distinguished ranking member of the full
committee, Ms. DELAURO, and I also
thank the superb staff on both sides of
the aisle who worked tirelessly to
present us with the product before us
today.
As I look ahead, Mr. Chairman, to today’s vote, I am grateful for the future
that I see, one where President Trump
keeps his pen ready because full-year
appropriations are advancing and certainty is being restored.
Mr. Chair, I thank my colleagues for
their time. I urge all Members to support this bipartisan package, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chairman, I yield
myself 5 minutes.
Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of
this package today, which includes the
Financial Services-General Government and the National Security-Department of State-Related Programs
appropriations bills.
I begin by offering my gratitude to
everyone who put in the long hours and
late nights to craft this package:
Ranking Member STENY HOYER of Financial Services and LOIS FRANKEL on
National
Security-Department
of
State, who led these negotiations and
secured important provisions which we
could all be proud of.
I thank the Appropriations Committee staff in particular: Matt Smith,
Erin Kolodjeski, Philip Tizzani, Ed
Etzkorn, and Laurie Mignone, who
worked tirelessly to produce this legislation.
I thank our counterparts in the majority, led by my friend, Chairman
COLE, and the subcommittee chairs,
DAVID JOYCE and MARIO DIAZ-BALART.
These two bills are a continuation of
our efforts to reassert Congress’ power
of the purse, reject $163 billion in cuts
proposed by the Trump administration,
constrain the White House’s abuse of
the budget process, and protect Democratic priorities at home and abroad.
This bill supports the small businesses and entrepreneurs that fuel the
American economy by providing more
than $1 billion for the Small Business
Administration and increasing funding
for entrepreneurial development programs by $13 million.
Small businesses employ nearly half
of the American workforce. At a time
when so many families are feeling the
weight of the affordability crisis and
job prospects feel far and few between,
we must do everything in our power to
increase economic opportunities in the
communities that need it most.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H735

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

In support of this goal, this bill also
provides $324 million for community
development financial institutions, rejecting efforts by the Trump administration to fully eliminate large portions of this program.
As we look ahead to an election year,
this bill increases funding for election
security grants by $30 million, providing States and localities with the
resources that they need to shore up
our election infrastructure and defend
our democracy against any form of interference that could deny us the most
basic right.
In addition to our right to vote, this
bill protects our right to counsel codified in the Sixth Amendment by increasing funding for Federal public defenders by $315 million. This helps to
ensure due process is not just a privilege reserved for the wealthy few, but a
protection guaranteed to all of us, regardless of status.
This package not only supports democracy at home but advances it
abroad. It protects funding to fully
meet our treaty obligations, affirming
American leadership at the U.N. and
other international organizations.
It supports women around the globe,
protecting funding for bilateral family
planning and the U.N. Population
Fund, and it facilitates American cooperation with international environmental initiatives by blocking policy
riders that would have prevented our
participation.
In fact, there is not a single poison
pill policy rider in these bills. Both we
and our Republican colleagues agreed
to leave these partisan provisions out
of this package and pursue a reasonable compromise. I am glad that we
could reach this agreement and move
forward with a package that isn’t perfect, but it is one that we can all support.
While there are certainly some
things that I would change about these
measures, they are both vastly superior to yet another continuing resolution or a lapse in funding, either of
which would afford the Trump administration greater leeway to abuse the
budget process, which they have shown
an eagerness to do from the moment
they took office.
Mr. Chairman, I am proud of the
work that was done in a bipartisan
fashion to produce this funding package. I look forward to voting for it, and
I encourage my colleagues to vote for
it.
Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance
of my time.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 5
minutes to the gentleman from Florida
(Mr. DIAZ-BALART), my very good
friend and the vice chair of the full
committee and chair of the National
Security, Department of State, and Related Programs Subcommittee of the
Committee on Appropriations.
Mr. DIAZ-BALART. Mr. Chairman,
as chairman of the National Security,
Department of State, and Related Programs Subcommittee, I rise in strong
support for H.R. 7006.

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

This full-year funding bill really carries out our Nation’s foreign policy in
a historic way in so many different aspects. First and foremost, the bill restores fiscal sanity by reducing spending by 16 percent, which is nearly a $10
billion cut, in recognition of the President’s and the Secretary of State’s effort to make the Department of State,
frankly, more efficient, streamlined,
and responsive to the national security
priorities.
Within these really, I think, dramatic but necessary reductions, the
bill will make sure that the Secretary
has the resources that he needs to
counter our adversaries—adversaries
like China, Iran, cartels in our hemisphere, and the regime of Cuba in our
hemisphere.
This bill takes serious steps toward
confronting, for example, the regime in
Cuba and includes limitations on funding for countries and organizations
that participate in the human trafficking of Cuban medical professionals
while directing the Secretary of State
to revoke visas for officials of countries involved in this grotesque human
trafficking.
b 1420
Mr. Chairman, a smart foreign policy
doesn’t just require opposing our enemies, although that is a big part of it.
It means supporting and standing with
our allies, with our friends, who can be
a force multiplier in our national security interests.
That is why this bill acknowledges
our friends and provides robust assistance for allies, partners like Israel,
Egypt, Jordan, Taiwan, and the Philippines, to name a few.
Mr. Chairman, for too long, we have
ignored our hemisphere, our neighbors
in our own region. This bill changes
that and provides special emphasis to
key partners in the Western Hemisphere who are aligned with our values
and our policies, such as Costa Rica,
Panama, Paraguay, Argentina, and the
Dominican Republic.
This bill increases funding for
counter-fentanyl and synthetic drug
programs to stop these deadly poisons
from crossing our borders and coming
to the United States.
It puts American businesses first,
prioritizing diplomatic engagement to
favorably resolve commercial disputes,
disputes abroad, some of them that
have been going on for years, to promote American business and American
interests overseas.
This bill also makes sure that we are
spending money according to our
American values.
It increases support for religious
freedom and addresses religious persecution.
The bill also maintains longstanding
pro-life provisions and enhances oversight and transparency over those requirements.
It protects free speech and prohibits
censorship or disinformation and misinformation programs that violate the
right of American citizens.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H736

The bill makes double-digit cuts to
U.N. funding and gives the Secretary of
State the tools and the leverage to demand much-needed reforms there.
These are historic changes in our approach that the American people have
been demanding for decades, Mr. Chairman.
The fiscal year 2026 bill removes controversial funding directives from the
CR, like the U.N. climate funds and
others.
Throughout this process, the goal is
to be good stewards of American taxpayer money, to represent our constituents’ priorities within this financial funding and, above all, protect the
national security of the United States.
Now, this bill would not be here without the help of so many others in this
body. I have got to start with the remarkable leadership of Chairman TOM
COLE. We wouldn’t be here discussing
this if it wasn’t for him and his partner
on the other side of the aisle, and I am
so grateful for their leadership and recommendations. Every single member
has made this bill so much better. It
has shaped this bill, and I am grateful
for the contributions. I do need to
thank again my dear friend—and we
have had some tough issues—the ranking member, LOIS FRANKEL, who has
been an amazing partner in putting
this bill together, and, by the way,
Chairman BRIAN MAST, another Floridian, who has been incredibly helpful.
I also thank my staff, the amazing
staff. This bill never would have happened without them; my clerk, Susan
Adams, and the entire majority team,
as well as the minority staff.
We have no greater duty to the
American people than to protect the
security of our country while safeguarding tax dollars.
The CHAIR. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I yield an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Florida.
Mr. DIAZ-BALART. This bill does
that. It protects our national security.
It protects the hard-earned tax dollars
of every American who pays taxes.
This bill plays an integral part in the
noble endeavor.
Mr. Chair, for that reason, I urge my
colleagues to support this measure.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield 5
minutes to the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. HOYER), the distinguished
ranking member of the Committee on
Financial Services.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Chair, I thank the
former chair and ranking member for
yielding. I thank her for her work. I
thank Mr. COLE for his work.
Anybody who knows me knows that I
am opposed to CRs, but I am for keeping the government open, if those are
the only alternatives.
Mr. Chair, this would not be my bill,
but I think probably most of the Members on this floor can say that. It is a
bill that cooperatively has been made
better, I think, as it has passed
through the House and Senate in conference.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

It provides increases for several key
programs for the American people.
That includes a $13 million increase
over the fiscal year 2025 enacted level
for entrepreneurial development programs at the Small Business Administration. The ranking member mentioned that program, but it is critically
important to our communities and to
the small business community.
This bill also increases funding for
election security grants by $30 million.
I created that program, along with Bob
Ney from Ohio, when we passed the
Help America Vote Act. We all want to
make sure our elections are run well.
At that point in time, we distributed to
the States over $3 billion. This is $45
million for 50 States, not a lot of
money, but it is proper for the Federal
Government to help pay for the elections that are run by the locals that include United States Senators and Members of Congress.
The judiciary, Mr. Chairman, receives $584 million or a 6.2 percent increase over the 2025 enacted, which is
what they asked for. The reason we
wanted to do that is to make sure that
the courts can act efficiently, effectively, and justly. We also included $142
million or a 19 percent increase for
court security. Unfortunately, as we
see on our streets today, we are living
in an era in which violence is too often
repaired to.
Crucially, the bill fixes the funding
hole for Federal Public Defender services, which are constitutionally required, providing an increase of $315
million or 22 percent over the 2025 enacted level to meet constitutional responsibilities.
Other programs for the Department
of the Treasury, including the community development financial institutions, so critical for small communities and communities of little means,
were flat funded in the fiscal year 2025
enacted level, instead of being eliminated. While it is not everything we
would want, it is a vast improvement
over what was requested.
Even still, Mr. Chair, some of my colleagues may notice my lack of enthusiasm for this final bill.
This bill’s $1 billion or 9 percent cut
to the Internal Revenue Service below
the fiscal year 2025 enacted is particularly concerning to me. I have made
this point I think every time we have
considered this bill. I might say that
we tried to overcome this deficiency
and have not yet done that.
It includes a $438 million or an 8 percent cut to IRS enforcement. Now,
what does cutting enforcement mean?
It means that we have gone from 9 percent in looking at tax returns over a
million dollars to 0.6 percent. What incentive is that to people who make a
lot of money and who try to avoid taxation? The little guy has to pick up the
tab. Mr. Chair, that cut will cost the
American people dearly by making it
easier for millionaires, billionaires,
and corporations to avoid paying the
taxes they owe under existing law.

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Nevertheless, this bill is better than
it would have otherwise been. IRS data
indicates that every $1 produces $7. A
Harvard study shows that for the top 10
percent, every dollar invested in enforcement brings us $12 in additional
revenue in taxes owed but not paid.
Who will have to pick up the tab? As I
said, hardworking Americans who dutifully pay their taxes.
If you are serious about fiscal responsibility, as I am and as I think many
are——
The CHAIR. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield an
additional 1 minute to the gentleman
from Maryland.
Mr. HOYER. If you are serious, you
have to be serious about collecting revenue that is due and owing. That
means funding the IRS, which has been
understaffed and underresourced far
too long.
Now, I am concerned not only by the
IRS but also the FBI. For two decades,
I have worked to help the FBI move
out of the crumbling, unhealthy J.
Edgar Hoover Building and into a new
consolidated headquarters that meets
its security and operational needs. The
administration has decided to move the
FBI from an inadequate 51-year-old
building to an inadequate 28-year-old
building, the Reagan Building. Its exposed location and its design as an accessible public-private facility would
greatly undermine the FBI security.
b 1430
I will continue to work on that
throughout the year that I have remaining to me.
There was language in the CJS bill
that I wanted the Rules Committee to
include the same exact language, saying simply that we would oversee the
plans of the GSA and the FBI before we
spend money. That was the responsible
thing to do. I am sorry, Mr. Chair, that
we did not do it, but I am going to support this bill.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from Ohio (Mr.
JOYCE), my very good friend and the
distinguished chair of the Financial
Services and General Government Subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. JOYCE of Ohio. Mr. Chair, I
thank Chairman COLE for yielding but
mostly for his leadership together with
the ranking member, the lovely Ms.
DELAURO,
Senate
Appropriations
Chairwoman COLLINS and Vice Chair
MURRAY, and Senate Financial Services and General Government Subcommittee Chairman HAGERTY and
Ranking Member REED. I appreciate all
of their work on this bill.
Separately, I thank my ranking
member, Mr. HOYER. I value his institutional knowledge and his insight on
and off this committee. I am sad to see
him leave at the end of this Congress.
I rise today in strong support of the
fiscal year 2026 Financial Services and
General Government Appropriations

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.034

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

Act. This legislation funds the Department of the Treasury, the Executive
Office of the President, the Federal judiciary, the District of Columbia, and
more than 20 independent commissions,
departments, and agencies.
The breadth of FSGG’s jurisdiction is
daunting, and there are many who
thought we could never get a bill done,
let alone a bipartisan one. I thank all
the members of the FSGG subcommittee for their hard work, and I
certainly thank Kim Betz for her hard
work in keeping this program online
and on track to be here today. I thank
all the members of the subcommittee
because we would not be here without
them.
The bill we are considering today has
a total base discretionary funding level
of $26.3 billion. However, when compared to FY 2025 enacted levels for nonDefense discretionary spending, this
bill is a $140 million cut.
The Treasury Department is cut by 8
percent from FY 2025 enacted levels, including the IRS. In fact, the IRS enforcement account is below $5 billion
for the first time since 2021.
The Executive Office of the President
is funded at just over $870 million.
Funding for the Federal judiciary is
increased by 6 percent to $9.7 billion,
which will support court security and
the Federal public defender’s program.
Approximately $877 million in Federal payments are provided to the District of Columbia, including emergency
security funding for D.C. to support
events in the capital, like America’s
250 celebrations, Memorial Day, and
Labor Day.
Finally, $2.8 billion is provided for
the SEC, FTC, FCC, GSA, SBA, and
more than 20 independent agencies.
This bill will enable the GSA to reduce the number of Federal properties
on the Federal Government’s deferred
maintenance list. It provides critical
funding for national security, including
the Office of Terrorism and Financial
Intelligence and the Committee on
Foreign Investment.
The bill funds bipartisan programs
like CDFIs, which support communities and high-intensity drug trafficking area programs that are critical
to strengthening this administration’s
interdiction and fentanyl tracking efforts.
In conclusion, this bill funds critical
government agencies and programs and
preserves and protects Congress’ responsibility of overseeing how these
funds are being used.
Mr. Chair, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘yes.’’
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield 6
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Florida (Ms. LOIS FRANKEL), the distinguished ranking member of the National Security, Department of State,
and Related Programs Subcommittee.
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida. Mr.
Chair, I thank Ranking Member
DELAURO for yielding.
I rise in support of the fiscal year
2026 National Security, Department of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H737

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

State, and Related Programs funding
bill,
a
bipartisan
package
that
strengthens American leadership and
aims to make our country safer, more
secure, and more prosperous.
Let me start by thanking our chair
of the main committee, Mr. COLE; my
ranking
member,
Representative
DELAURO; the members of our subcommittee; and the hardworking staff
who helped to get the bill done, the
majority team and our Democratic
team of Erin Kolodjeski, Laurie
Mignone, Ed Etzkorn, and Jenn Miller.
A most big thank you to our subcommittee chair, MARIO DIAZ-BALART.
We have known each other for decades,
dating back to our time in the State
legislature. I am grateful for his fine
leadership and friendship.
Mr. Chair, this bill reflects what I believe most Americans want from their
elected leaders: to work together respectfully in a bipartisan way to get
things done. At a time of global uncertainty, it is critical that we face the
world with a unified front.
This bill was not an easy task to
come by. We have, in my opinion, and
the opinion of many on my side of the
aisle, a disappointing reduction in topline funding. The infrastructure needed
to deliver foreign assistance has, in
many ways, including the illegal destruction of USAID, been dismantled.
With that said, I am proud to say
that we worked hard to produce the
bill to affirm U.S. leadership on the
world stage, recognizing the reorganization of the State Department and
reasserting Congress’ constitutional
power of the purse.
This bill funds what should be the
core missions of the State Department:
diplomacy, development, and humanitarian assistance. It supports our diplomats overseas, staffs our embassies,
and protects U.S. missions around the
world. It invests in global health programs, from HIV to maternal and child
health to tuberculosis, stopping infectious and preventable diseases before
they reach our shores. It funds humanitarian efforts to respond to natural disasters, assists those displaced by conflict, and provides lifesaving nutrition
to the hungry. It protects international basic education so children in
poverty and crisis have a chance at opportunity.
The bill empowers women and girls
by safeguarding funding for family
planning, women’s economic empowerment, and Women, Peace, and Security.
It supports access to objective information through outlets like Voice of
America, pushing back against Russian
and Chinese propaganda.
The bill upholds our commitments to
allies like Jordan, Egypt, Taiwan, and
Israel. Importantly, it reasserts congressional oversight over critical independent agencies that were targeted
for dismantling.
This legislation affirms a simple
truth: Foreign assistance is not a charity. It is a strategic investment. At

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

just a small fraction of our Federal
budget, it delivers outsized returns for
our national security, our economy,
and our global influence because we
know that hunger, poverty, ignorance,
repression, and hopelessness create the
conditions where extremism and conflict take root. I can say this as a
mother who watched her son put on the
uniform and deploy to two wars: By investing in global stability, we reduce
the need for costly and deadly military
intervention.
Isolation is not an option. When the
United States pulls back, our adversaries like Iran, China, and Russia double down. They move in to fill the void,
rewrite the rules, expand their influence, and undermine democratic values.
This bill helps ensure that American
leadership, not authoritarian influence,
shapes the future.
I know we know that we are currently operating under a 2024 budget.
Over the past 2 years, the world has
changed, and our institutions have
changed with it.
b 1440
This bill reflects those realities and
adapts how we carry out foreign assistance in a more strategic and accountable way.
This is a serious, bipartisan compromise with a goal of advancing
American leadership around the world.
It is my hope that this bill will give
the administration the tools and funding needed to make our country safer,
more secure, and more prosperous,
with the understanding that they must
be partners with Congress.
Mr. Chair, I proudly urge my colleagues to join me in supporting this
bipartisan bill.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from North
Carolina (Mr. EDWARDS), my very good
friend who is the distinguished vice
chairman of the National Security, Department of State, and Related Programs Subcommittee.
Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Chair, I ask the
chairman of the committee to please
accept my compliments for all he has
done to help make appropriations great
again. I have certainly enjoyed watching the statesmanship, the bipartisanship, and the bringing of the appropriations process back to its relevancy.
Mr. Chairman, turning to the NSRP
bill, I would like to say that this bill
reflects a clear understanding that putting America first also means leading
abroad with strength, accountability,
and purpose. It strengthens our diplomatic and security tools. It reinforces
our alliances, and it counters adversaries who seek to exploit instability
around the world.
It sends an important message that
strong alliances require shared responsibility. Our partners must contribute
to their own defense if they expect continued support from the United States,
protecting American taxpayers while
keeping our alliances credible. It also

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.036

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H738

reinforces accountability in our own
hemisphere by standing up for American companies and the rule of law.
Just as important, this bill cuts off
funding pathways that could benefit
the Taliban and other terrorist organizations, and it continues to shine a
light on Russian atrocities in Ukraine,
including the abduction of Ukrainian
children. This legislation reflects
American leadership, strength, and
moral clarity, and I urge my colleagues
to support it.
Mr. Chairman, while the FSGG bill
contains many important provisions, I
would like to touch base on one key
provision that is important to the folks
back in North Carolina.
This bill is about accountability, and
nowhere is that clearer than in how it
addresses the United States Postal
Service’s failure in western North
Carolina. Nearly 1 year after Hurricane
Helene, five post offices in my district
remain closed, forcing families, seniors, and small businesses to drive 30
minutes or more just to access basic
mail service.
The Acting CHAIR (Mr. SESSIONS).
The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I yield an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from North Carolina.
Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Chair, that is
why I fought to include two provisions
that bring real oversight and real answers. First, the United States Postal
Service is now directed to report to
Congress within 90 days with a concrete plan to reopen and restore service, including in western North Carolina. Second, the Postal Service’s Inspector General must submit a specific
reopening plan for facilities closed due
to Hurricane Helene.
Mr. Chairman, I urge all of my colleagues to support this bill.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chairman, I yield
3 minutes to the gentlewoman from
New York (Ms. MENG), who is the distinguished ranking member of the
Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Subcommittee.
Ms. MENG. Mr. Chairman, I thank
Ranking Member DELAURO for yielding.
Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of the
2026 Financial Services and General
Government and National Security,
Department of State, and Related Programs Appropriations Act.
I thank Chairman MARIO DIAZBALART and Ranking Member LOIS
FRANKEL and their team for their hard
work on this bill.
America is at a fork in the road in
our international affairs. Over the past
year, our soft power has been decimated. Millions of people in need have
been recklessly cut off from vital assistance. Billions of dollars in lifesaving health and food supplies purchased by American taxpayers have
been stranded in supply chains, or
worse, destroyed. Thousands of public
servants, including many of my own
constituents, who dedicated their lives
to protecting our country and projecting our soft power, were fired.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

This bill isn’t the one Democrats
would have written if we were in the
majority, but I want to share why I
support it. First, it continues U.S. support for women around the world.
Women are one-half of the world’s population, but too many still face obstacles to economic opportunity, gender
equality, and their fundamental freedoms.
This funding has been a core pillar of
U.S. assistance since the 1950s, and it is
lifesaving. Estimates suggest that each
year, it prevents 17.1 million unintended pregnancies and saves the lives
of 34,000 women and girls who otherwise would have died from complications of pregnancy and childbirth.
The UNFPA is a critical piece of that
puzzle too. This bill ensures continued
funding for international organizations, including UNFPA.
History has taught us that we cannot
bury our head in the sand and abandon
the international community without
consequences for our own national security, and we certainly can’t afford to
leave women and girls behind. With
this bill, this Congress is doing our
part to make sure we don’t.
Second, this bill protects U.S. leadership and taxpayer investments in global health, including scientific, medical,
and agricultural research in my home
State of New York.
It funds PEPFAR, which fights HIV/
AIDS, well above the President’s anemic request. Since 2003, this program
has saved over 26 million lives. It also
includes funding for programs that support the health of moms and children
and fights other infectious diseases
that know no borders, like tuberculosis.
Third, it takes steps to further protect American taxpayers from waste,
fraud, and abuse perpetrated by this
administration.
It maintains important directives on
education, conservation, water, sanitation, and hygiene programs. It reins in
the Trump administration and reasserts congressional oversight on the
uses of funds by increasing transparency requirements. It includes provisions I championed to make sure lifesaving commodities and supplies purchased with U.S. taxpayer dollars can’t
simply be destroyed.
The Acting CHAIR. The time of the
gentlewoman has expired.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from New York.
Ms. MENG. Mr. Chair, while this bill
won’t right every wrong, it represents
Democrats and Republicans reaching
an agreement that asserts Congress’
authority, pushes back against this administration’s overreach, and stands
up for proven policies that have made
our country and world safer, stronger,
and more prosperous.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from New
York (Mr. LALOTA), who is the distinguished vice chairman of the Financial
Services and General Government Sub-

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

committee of the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. LALOTA. Mr. Chairman, Long Islanders face some of the highest tax
burdens anywhere in the Nation.
At the same time, America, with our
$38 trillion in debt, needs to start to
freeze and cut spending wherever possible. When we deal with these financial issues, lawmakers in this body
would be wise to protect important
government services.
Thankfully, the fiscal year 2026 Financial Services and General Government bill, which is on the floor today,
cuts spending by $140 million and sends
a clear message that Washington is
doing its part to ease, not add to, our
tax and deficit burden, all while protecting important government services.
That is why I rise today in strong
support of this bill.
As vice chair of FSGG, and under the
strong leadership of Chairman COLE
and
Chairman
JOYCE,
our
subcommittee worked to deliver a disciplined funding package that addresses the real pressures facing families
and businesses back home.
This legislation provides $26.5 billion
in discretionary funding to support
economic growth, protect individual
liberties, and ensure the institutions
upon which Americans rely work more
effectively for them.
This bill strengthens our financial
system and economic security. It responsibly funds the Department of the
Treasury, including critical investments in cybersecurity, financial
crimes enforcement, and oversight of
our adversaries’ investments.
It preserves community development
funding to help small businesses and
manufacturers on Long Island grow,
create jobs, and strengthen supply
chains without raising taxes.
This legislation also protects taxpayers
by
modernizing,
not
weaponizing, the IRS. It cuts excessive
enforcement funding by more than $1
billion and prohibits the IRS from targeting Americans for exercising their
First Amendment rights.
The bill also strengthens our defenses
against foreign criminal networks. In
addition to nearly $300 million for the
High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas
program, the bill strengthens the
Treasury’s counterterrorism and financial intelligence efforts, cutting off
funding streams used by cartels, traffickers, and foreign bad actors.
b 1450
The Acting CHAIR. The time of the
gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I yield an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from New York.
Mr. LALOTA. Mr. Chairman, the
FY26 FSGG bill reflects the values
Americans sent us here to uphold. I
urge support of the bill, and I thank
the chairman for his leadership.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chairman, I yield
2 minutes to the gentlewoman from Nevada (Ms. TITUS).

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.038

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

Ms. TITUS. Mr. Chairman, I rise in
strong opposition to a narrow-minded,
shortsighted amendment that is going
to be offered to this bill on the National Endowment for Democracy, prohibiting funding for that important organization.
By eliminating NED’s appropriation,
U.S.-based nonprofit organizations,
local partners, and frontline democracy defenders in dangerous contexts
will be put in immediate jeopardy, undermining efforts to support emerging
democracies and those resisting authoritarian rule like the brave protesters in Iran.
In places like Nicaragua, Venezuela,
Cuba, North Korea, Hong Kong, Tibet,
Burma and, as I mentioned, Iran, NED
provides vital resources for those advocating for freedom. This amendment
would halt efforts to provide citizens
with accurate information, exposing
corruption and brutality of some of
these regimes and kneecapping protesters who are pleading for freedom.
If we withdraw our support and abandon democracy defenders, we cede this
ground to autocratic regimes which
will eagerly step in to replace us and
promote their own interests at our expense. This will devastate U.S. national security and the advancement of
our democratic ideals.
Mr. Chairman, I urge all of my colleagues to reject this terrible amendment when it comes up and show the
rest of the world we have not lost our
minds nor lost our way.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Missouri (Mr. ALFORD), my very good
friend and valued member of the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. ALFORD. Mr. Chairman, today
we are voting on a two-bill appropriations package that funds Financial
Services and our National Security and
State Department. This bill keeps the
government running, protects America,
and respects the taxpayer. This package contains two bills with real cuts,
real security, and real governing, Mr.
Chairman, not bloated omnibuses, not
last-minute
shutdown
threats
or
games, but Members on both sides of
the aisle who are actually doing the
work line by line and in the open.
This package cuts nearly $9 billion
compared to last year. Financial Services is flat-funded. National Security
and State are cut by a whopping 16 percent. It is proof that we can fund priorities without growing our government.
We rein in Washington by cutting
IRS enforcement back to Trump 45-era
levels. Chairman JOYCE blocked Democratic efforts to tie the administration’s hands and help refocus spending
so that taxpayer dollars only go where
they actually make America safer.
delivered
Chairman
DIAZ-BALART
DOGE-era USAID cuts while still funding national security investments. In
fact, I was honored to help Chairman
DIAZ-BALART retain some of these programs under the new banner of national security investment programs at

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H739

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

the State Department under the direction of Secretary Rubio.
The bottom line, sir, is if it is not
having to do with our national security
interests, we are not funding it. We
fully fund CFIUS to stop foreign
threats from buying up America, keep
longstanding pro-life protections in
place, and deliver a bill with no poison
pills. This package keeps spending
below the current continuing resolution and moves us closer to finishing
all 12 appropriations bills. They said it
couldn’t be done. We are going to do it.
The bottom line is, this bill delivers
three critical things: safety, strength,
and freedom. Two bills, real cuts, real
security, real governing, a bill so good
the White House just endorsed it.
The Acting CHAIR. The time of the
gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I yield an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Missouri.
Mr. ALFORD. Mr. Chairman, this bill
is so good, the White House just endorsed this bill, and I want to read the
last paragraph: ‘‘The administration
urges the Congress to support this fiscally responsible bill and looks forward
to working with the Congress on the
remaining appropriations bills to address key priorities and avoid another
disastrous government shutdown.’’
Mr. Chairman, I along with Donald J.
Trump, the White House, and the OMB
Director urge my colleagues to vote for
this funding bill. Let’s get ‘er done.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Arkansas (Mr. HILL), my very good friend,
the distinguished chairman of the Financial Services Committee.
Mr. HILL of Arkansas. Mr. Chairman, I thank Chairman COLE and
Chairman JOYCE for their good work on
our side of the aisle and the committee
at large for producing this constructive, good appropriations bill.
I rise in support of the Financial
Services and General Government and
National Security, Department of
State and Related Programs Appropriations Act.
This bill funds key government agencies that are focused on economic stability, fiscal responsibility, and national security. As chair of the House
Financial Services Committee, I am
proud that key provisions included in
this bill were championed by our committee.
My bill, H.R. 1474, the International
Nuclear Energy Financing Act, expands U.S. financing tools for civilian
nuclear energy projects abroad, helping
U.S. companies compete globally while
promoting safe and reliable energy as
an alternative energy source from opposing nations.
It requires the Treasury to advocate
for nuclear energy assistance at the
World Bank and other international financial institutions, including the establishment of Nuclear Energy Assistance Trust Funds.

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Also included in this funding package
is Congresswoman SALAZAR’s H.R. 6892.
This is a critical piece of the bill that
authorizes a capital increase for the
Inter-American Development Bank,
IDB Invest, an arm of the Bank devoted to private-sector growth in Latin
America. Empowering the IDB Invest
helps expand opportunities for U.S.
businesses and strengthens their economic partnership and footprint in
Latin America and counters growing
influence from our global competitors.
We cannot overlook also, Mr. Chairman, the importance of adequate funding for the Securities and Exchange
Commission, which is included in this
bill. Strong capital markets are essential to American economic leadership,
and ensuring that the SEC has the resources, clear rules, and effective oversight to carry out its mission is essential.
Mr. Chairman, I thank the chairman
for his leadership. I appreciate the
time today, and I urge all my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes.’’
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Ohio
(Mr. TURNER), my very good friend and
classmate.
Mr. TURNER of Ohio. Mr. Chairman,
I rise in support of this appropriations
bill, and I support that this bill invests
in the National Endowment for Democracy.
During my time in Congress, I have
worked very closely with the National
Endowment for Democracy’s executive
director, Damon Wilson, who is a great
leader in democratic efforts throughout the world, and I can attest to the
important work done under his leadership.
The National Endowment for Democracy is a critical tool for ensuring that
prodemocracy movements have the resources
they
need
to
counter
authoritarianism and confront human
rights abuses. Countries such as
Ukraine, Bosnia, and Georgia face constant pressure and interference from
Russia, and the National Endowment
for Democracy is on the front lines of
efforts to ensure democracy and Western values prevail.
Additionally, the National Endowment for Democracy does important
work to counter hostile, authoritarian
regimes like the Chinese Communist
Party and the Iranian regime. It is important for us to support this American
institution and organization, which is
based here in Washington, D.C., that
defends our interests around the world
in some of the most challenging environments.
Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues
to support this American-first legislation.
b 1500
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Chair, I think it is fair to say
that many within this institution and

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.040

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H740

also outside of the institution thought
that we could not get an appropriations process in the U.S. Congress back
on track, that we would be unable to
pass appropriations bills, that we
would face another potential government shutdown, and that we could not
make the process work in the way that
it has historically worked, which is
Democrats and Republicans coming together to hammer out bills that meet
the needs of the American people and
do this every single year, which it has
done historically.
In a negotiation, no one gets everything that they want. You compromise
for a greater good, and you need willing partners to participate in that effort.
I believe that what we have done here
is to show the naysayers that by entrusting appropriations bills to appropriators, we could get the job done.
That is what we are doing with six bills
already passed and signed and two bills
that we will pass today. That is 8 of the
12 appropriations bills, and I believe we
are on track to pass all 12 bills by January 30.
Now, if we do not come to an agreement, there are two options. The first
option is a continuing resolution,
which we can all conclude is no way to
run a government. Quite frankly, for
me personally, I don’t want to turn
over the power of the Appropriations
Committee to any executive, Democratic or Republican. I believe that the
power of the purse resides within the
Congress. The second option is a shutdown, which, as we know, is the worst
of all possible outcomes.
It hurts the American people, and it
really shortchanges the American people. It puts them at risk. It may satisfy
a need or an urge that someone here
has, but it doesn’t reflect well on what
happens to the American people. I
think we have shown the naysayers
that it can be done.
Mr. Chair, I will compliment the
chair of the full committee for understanding the need to reassert the constitutional power of the purse entrusted to the Congress through the
Appropriations Committee and that we
do have to hammer out the bills in a
civil way; not for the purposes of the
process but for what the consequences
are of these 12 bills and the services
that they provide to the American people. Whether it is agriculture in rural
America, whether it is education and
the ability of children to be able to
succeed, or whether it is healthcare or
transportation, which, in this case, is
our role in the world and how we preserve our national security, what we do
with our financial circumstances, what
we do with our community development of financial institutions to help
local communities be able to thrive
economically, that is what is within
the bills.
It is not just a process. It is the content of these efforts which make that
difference and provide what government is here to do: opportunity for peo-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

ple to be able to succeed, to be able to
thrive, and to be able to take care of
themselves and their families.
Mr. Chair, the strategy and the
strength of the Appropriations Committee and its work on behalf of the
American people are the heartbeat of
the U.S. Government. I am proud to
support the bipartisan, bicameral bill
that we have fashioned and, again, give
credit to both our Republican chairs
and our Democratic ranking members
for the great work and their negotiating skills to get it done, and to the
staff, above all. I am sorry to other
staffs, but the Appropriations staff is
second to none. They keep our names
on the door. They make it possible for
these bills to pass.
Mr. Chair, I will just say it is a good
package. It reasserts Congress’ power
of the purse. It does rein in the administration, and it does, for me, protect
key Democratic priorities.
Mr. Chair, I urge my colleagues to
support these bills today and to move
forward as we continue to look at the
next several bills that we have coming
up so that we can, by January 30, pass
all the appropriations bills and make a
difference for the American people.
Mr. Chair, I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I yield myself
the balance of my time.
Mr. Chair, I begin by, number one,
thanking my very good friend, the
ranking member of the full committee.
As I said in my opening statement, this
is a process, and we are a long way into
the process now, thanks, in large part,
to her efforts and certainly the efforts
of the ranking members and chairs of
the two committees whose legislative
work we are considering today.
It is important to recognize that
these bills together reduce funding.
They actually reduce funding. A CR
would actually cost us more. They also
update, refine, and change language in
some cases that is 2 and 3 years old and
is simply out of date with the current
circumstances.
If we were to fail to pass these bills
in these respective areas, then that
language would remain intact. I think
it is important to recognize that we
were able to come to agreements in
this way simply because we have a
common commitment to a set of principles and a process that really isn’t
partisan in nature.
I know my friend, Ms. DELAURO, and
I know her colleagues believe very
much in the Article I power of Congress. We assert that power by passing
appropriations bills. I commend my
friends for working with us to do that.
I know my friends also believe very
deeply in the importance and the power
of the Appropriations Committee. So
do I. The fact is, we know that to get
our job done, at the end of the day, it
is going to have to be bipartisan and
bicameral. A lot of people are going to
have to move or give up some things
that they feel very strongly about for
the greater good of making sure that

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the Government of the United States is
appropriately funded. We do it in a way
that, again, as my good friend Mr.
HOYER said, it is not the bill any of us
would have written individually, but
the point is, it is a collaborative effort
of give and take that has produced
something that the vast majority of us
can and will vote for today.
This is eight bills into this process.
We have a big job in the few days ahead
of us till the end of the month, but I
share my friend the ranking member’s
confidence that we can get that job
done and that we can be back here and
find a way to put all these bills in front
of this Chamber for their consideration
and also pass them and make sure the
Government of the United States is
funded on a bipartisan, bicameral basis
through the balance of this fiscal year.
Mr. Chair, I share my friend’s pride
in the product in front of us. I know if
she got to write it all by herself, it
would look a little bit different. She
knows if I got to write it all by myself,
it would look different. The point is,
this is one we got to write together
with give and take, and I am very
proud that this committee got every
one of its bills out of committee, sat
down and worked with our colleagues
in the other Chamber on both sides of
the aisle, and has produced a product
that we know we have broad consensus
on.
Mr. Chair, I will end by commending
all those involved. My friend, Ms.
DELAURO, always makes a point of how
important the staff is in this process,
and that is absolutely true. While a lot
of people were celebrating the holidays, and appropriately so, that wasn’t
true if you worked on the Appropriations staff, unless you were one of the
lucky three that got their bills done
last year. They had a merry Christmas.
Everybody else was working through
the Christmas holidays to produce
these products. It is enormously complex. There is a lot of work involved,
an extraordinary amount of work for
the staff. I share my friend’s pride in
their efforts and gratitude for their
success.
Mr. Chair, I urge the passage of H.R.
7006. I will also remind everyone that it
is not quite done. We have a lot to do
in the next few days ahead of us, but
this helps set the precedent, helps
move the process along, and gives us a
much better chance of success as we
deal with these final, critical bills. It
will make sure that we both avoid a
shutdown and give the American people assurance that the government will
be functional, operational, and working
in a bipartisan, bicameral process between now and September 30 of this
year.
Mr. Chair, I urge the passage of the
legislation before us, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
b 1510
The Acting CHAIR. All time for general debate has expired.
Pursuant the rule, the bill shall be
considered for amendment under the 5minute rule.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.042

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

The bill shall be considered as read.
The text of the bill is as follows:
H.R. 7006
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Financial
Services and General Government and National Security, Department of State, and
Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
Sec. 3. References.
Sec. 4. Explanatory statement.
Sec. 5. Statement of appropriations.
Sec. 6. Payment to widows and heirs of deceased Members of Congress.
DIVISION A—FINANCIAL SERVICES AND
GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Title I—Department of the Treasury
Title II—Executive Office of the President
and Funds Appropriated to the
President
Title III—The Judiciary
Title IV—District of Columbia
Title V—Independent Agencies
Title VI—General Provisions—This Act
Title VII—General Provisions—Governmentwide
Title VIII—General Provisions—District of
Columbia
DIVISION B—NATIONAL SECURITY, DEPARTMENT OF STATE, AND RELATED
PROGRAMS APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Title I—Department of State and Related
Programs
Title II—Administration of Assistance
Title III—Bilateral Economic Assistance
Title IV—International Security Assistance
Title V—Multilateral Assistance
Title VI—Export and Investment Assistance
Title VII—General Provisions
DIVISION C—OTHER MATTERS
SEC. 3. REFERENCES.

Except as expressly provided otherwise,
any reference to ‘‘this Act’’ contained in any
division of this Act shall be treated as referring only to the provisions of that division.
SEC. 4. EXPLANATORY STATEMENT.

The explanatory statement regarding this
Act, printed in the House section of the Congressional Record on or about January 14,
2026, and submitted by the chair of the Committee on Appropriations of the House, shall
have the same effect with respect to the allocation of funds and implementation of divisions A and B of this Act as if it were a joint
explanatory statement of a committee of
conference.
SEC. 5. STATEMENT OF APPROPRIATIONS.

The following sums in this Act are appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury
not otherwise appropriated, for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC. 6. PAYMENT TO WIDOWS AND HEIRS OF DECEASED MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.

For payment to Jill Marie LaMalfa, widow
of Douglas L. LaMalfa, late a Representative
from the State of California, $174,000.
DIVISION A—FINANCIAL SERVICES AND
GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
TITLE I
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
DEPARTMENTAL OFFICES
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Departmental Offices including operation and
maintenance of the Treasury Building and
Freedman’s Bank Building; hire of passenger

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H741

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

motor vehicles; maintenance, repairs, and
improvements of, and purchase of commercial insurance policies for, real properties
leased or owned overseas, when necessary for
the performance of official business; executive direction program activities; international affairs and economic policy activities; domestic finance and tax policy activities, including technical assistance to State,
local, and territorial entities; and Treasurywide management policies and programs activities, $287,576,000: Provided, That of the
amount appropriated under this heading—
(1) not to exceed $1,350,000 is for official reception and representation expenses of which
$1,000,000 is available until January 30, 2027,
for hosting the G20 Financial Summit;
(2) not to exceed $258,000 is for unforeseen
emergencies of a confidential nature to be
allocated and expended under the direction
of the Secretary of the Treasury and to be
accounted for solely on the Secretary’s certificate; and
(3) not to exceed $42,000,000 shall remain
available until September 30, 2027, for—
(A) the Treasury-wide Financial Statement
Audit and Internal Control Program;
(B) information technology modernization
requirements;
(C) the audit, oversight, and administration of the Gulf Coast Restoration Trust
Fund;
(D) the development and implementation
of programs within the Office of Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructure Protection,
including entering into cooperative agreements;
(E) operations and maintenance of facilities; and
(F) international operations.
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THE
UNITED STATES FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Committee
on Foreign Investment in the United States,
$21,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That the chairperson of the
Committee may transfer such amounts to
any department or agency represented on
the Committee (including the Department of
the Treasury) subject to advance notification to the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate:
Provided further, That the Department shall
submit a report with the notification describing the amount of the transfer, the purpose of the transfer, and the receiving agency: Provided further, That amounts so transferred shall remain available until expended
for expenses of implementing section 721 of
the Defense Production Act of 1950, as
amended (50 U.S.C. 4565), and shall be available in addition to any other funds available
to any department or agency: Provided further, That fees authorized by section 721(p) of
such Act shall be credited to this appropriation as offsetting collections: Provided further, That the total amount appropriated
under this heading from the general fund
shall be reduced as such offsetting collections are received during fiscal year 2026, so
as to result in a total appropriation from the
general fund estimated at not more than $0.
OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND FINANCIAL
INTELLIGENCE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For the necessary expenses of the Office of
Terrorism and Financial Intelligence to safeguard the financial system against illicit use
and to combat rogue nations, terrorist
facilitators, weapons of mass destruction
proliferators, human rights abusers, money
launderers, drug kingpins, and other national security threats, $237,662,000, of which
not less than $3,000,000 shall be available for
addressing human rights violations and cor-

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ruption, including activities authorized by
the Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act (22 U.S.C. 2656 note): Provided, That of the amounts appropriated
under this heading, up to $16,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027.
CYBERSECURITY ENHANCEMENT ACCOUNT

For salaries and expenses for enhanced cybersecurity for systems operated by the Department of the Treasury, $59,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028: Provided, That such funds shall supplement and
not supplant any other amounts made available to the Treasury offices and bureaus for
cybersecurity: Provided further, That of the
total amount made available under this
heading $6,000,000 shall be available for administrative expenses for the Treasury Chief
Information Officer to provide oversight of
the investments made under this heading:
Provided further, That such funds shall supplement and not supplant any other amounts
made available to the Treasury Chief Information Officer.
DEPARTMENT-WIDE SYSTEMS AND CAPITAL
INVESTMENTS PROGRAMS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For development and acquisition of automatic data processing equipment, software,
and services and for repairs and renovations
to buildings owned by the Department of the
Treasury, $11,007,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2028: Provided, That these
funds shall be transferred to accounts and in
amounts as necessary to satisfy the requirements of the Department’s offices, bureaus,
and other organizations: Provided further,
That this transfer authority shall be in addition to any other transfer authority provided
in this Act: Provided further, That none of
the funds appropriated under this heading
shall be used to support or supplement ‘‘Internal Revenue Service—Technology and Operations Support’’ or ‘‘Internal Revenue
Service—Business Systems Modernization’’.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of chapter 4 of title 5, United States
Code, $48,389,000, including hire of passenger
motor vehicles; of which not to exceed
$100,000 shall be available for unforeseen
emergencies of a confidential nature, to be
allocated and expended under the direction
of the Inspector General of the Treasury; of
which up to $2,800,000 to remain available
until September 30, 2027, shall be for audits
and investigations conducted pursuant to
section 1608 of the Resources and Ecosystems
Sustainability, Tourist Opportunities, and
Revived Economies of the Gulf Coast States
Act of 2012 (33 U.S.C. 1321 note); and of which
not to exceed $1,000 shall be available for official reception and representation expenses.
TREASURY INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR TAX
ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration in
carrying out chapter 4 of title 5, United
States Code, including purchase and hire of
passenger motor vehicles (31 U.S.C. 1343(b));
and services authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109, at
such rates as may be determined by the Inspector General for Tax Administration;
$165,000,000, of which $5,000,000 shall remain
available until September 30, 2027; of which
not to exceed $6,000,000 shall be available for
official travel expenses; of which not to exceed $500,000 shall be available for unforeseen
emergencies of a confidential nature, to be
allocated and expended under the direction
of the Inspector General for Tax Administration; and of which not to exceed $1,500 shall

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.044

H14JAPT1

H742

be available for official reception and representation expenses.
FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network, including hire
of passenger motor vehicles; travel and
training expenses of non-Federal and foreign
government personnel to attend meetings
and training concerned with domestic and
foreign financial intelligence activities, law
enforcement, and financial regulation; services authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109; not to exceed $25,000 for official reception and representation expenses; and for assistance to
Federal law enforcement agencies, with or
without reimbursement, $185,193,000, of
which not to exceed $55,000,000 shall remain
available until September 30, 2028.
BUREAU OF THE FISCAL SERVICE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of operations of the
Bureau of the Fiscal Service, $391,109,000; of
which not to exceed $8,000,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2028, is for information systems modernization initiatives; and of which $5,000 shall be available
for official reception and representation expenses.
In addition, $242,000, to be derived from the
Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund to reimburse
administrative and personnel expenses for financial management of the Fund, as authorized by section 1012 of Public Law 101–380.
ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO TAX AND TRADE
BUREAU
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of carrying out section 1111 of the Homeland Security Act of
2002, including hire of passenger motor vehicles, $157,795,000; of which not to exceed $6,000
shall be available for official reception and
representation expenses; and of which not to
exceed $50,000 shall be available for cooperative research and development programs for
laboratory services; and provision of laboratory assistance to State and local agencies
with or without reimbursement: Provided,
That of the amount appropriated under this
heading, $5,000,000 shall be for the costs of
accelerating the processing of formula and
label applications: Provided further, That of
the amount appropriated under this heading,
$5,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028, shall be for the costs associated with enforcement of and education regarding the trade practice provisions of the
Federal Alcohol Administration Act (27
U.S.C. 201 et seq.).
UNITED STATES MINT
UNITED STATES MINT PUBLIC ENTERPRISE FUND

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Pursuant to section 5136 of title 31, United
States Code, the United States Mint is provided funding through the United States
Mint Public Enterprise Fund for costs associated with the production of circulating
coins, numismatic coins, and protective
services, including both operating expenses
and capital investments: Provided, That the
aggregate amount of new liabilities and obligations incurred during fiscal year 2026
under such section 5136 for circulating coinage and protective service capital investments of the United States Mint shall not
exceed $50,000,000.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS FUND
To carry out the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of
1994 (subtitle A of title I of Public Law 103–
325), including services authorized by section
3109 of title 5, United States Code, but at
rates for individuals not to exceed the per
diem rate equivalent to the rate for EX–III,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

$324,000,000. Of the amount appropriated
under this heading—
(1) not less than $188,000,000, notwithstanding section 108(e) of Public Law 103–325
(12 U.S.C. 4707(e)) with regard to Small and/
or Emerging Community Development Financial Institutions Assistance awards, is
available until September 30, 2027, for financial assistance and technical assistance
under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section
108(a)(1), respectively, of Public Law 103–325
(12 U.S.C. 4707(a)(1)(A) and (B)), of which up
to $1,600,000 may be available for training
and outreach under section 109 of Public Law
103–325 (12 U.S.C. 4708), of which up to
$3,153,750 may be used for the cost of direct
loans, of which up to $10,000,000, notwithstanding subsection (d) of section 108 of Public Law 103–325 (12 U.S.C. 4707(d)), may be
available to provide financial assistance,
technical assistance, training, and outreach
to community development financial institutions to expand investments that benefit individuals with disabilities, and of which up
to $2,000,000 shall be for the Economic Mobility Corps to be operated in conjunction with
the Corporation for National and Community Service, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 12571: Provided, That the cost of direct and guaranteed
loans, including the cost of modifying such
loans, shall be as defined in section 502 of the
Congressional Budget Act of 1974: Provided
further, That these funds are available to
subsidize gross obligations for the principal
amount of direct loans not to exceed
$25,000,000: Provided further, That of the funds
provided under this paragraph, excluding
those made to community development financial institutions to expand investments
that benefit individuals with disabilities and
those made to community development financial institutions that serve populations
living in persistent poverty counties, the
CDFI Fund shall prioritize Financial Assistance awards to organizations that invest and
lend in high-poverty areas: Provided further,
That for purposes of this section, the term
‘‘high-poverty area’’ means any census tract
with a poverty rate of at least 20 percent as
measured by the 2016–2020 5-year data series
available from the American Community
Survey of the Bureau of the Census for all
States and Puerto Rico or with a poverty
rate of at least 20 percent as measured by the
2020 Island areas Decennial Census data for
any territory or possession of the United
States;
(2) not less than $28,000,000, notwithstanding section 108(e) of Public Law 103–325
(12 U.S.C. 4707(e)), is available until September 30, 2027, for financial assistance,
technical assistance, training, and outreach
programs designed to benefit Native American, Native Hawaiian, and Alaska Native
communities and provided primarily through
qualified community development lender organizations with experience and expertise in
community development banking and lending in Indian country, Native American organizations, Tribes and Tribal organizations,
and other suitable providers;
(3) not less than $40,000,000 is available
until September 30, 2027, for the Bank Enterprise Award program;
(4) not less than $24,000,000, notwithstanding subsections (d) and (e) of section 108
of Public Law 103–325 (12 U.S.C. 4707(d) and
(e)), is available until September 30, 2027, for
a Healthy Food Financing Initiative to provide financial assistance, technical assistance, training, and outreach to community
development financial institutions for the
purpose of offering affordable financing and
technical assistance to expand the availability of healthy food options in distressed
communities;
(5) not less than $9,000,000 is available until
September 30, 2027, to provide grants for loan

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

loss reserve funds and to provide technical
assistance for small dollar loan programs
under section 122 of Public Law 103–325 (12
U.S.C. 4719): Provided, That sections 108(d)
and 122(b)(2) of such Public Law shall not
apply to the provision of such grants and
technical assistance;
(6) not less than $35,000,000 is available for
administrative expenses, including administration of CDFI Fund programs and the New
Markets Tax Credit Program, of which not
less than $1,000,000 is for the development of
tools to better assess and inform CDFI investment performance and CDFI program
impacts, and up to $300,000 is for administrative expenses to carry out the direct loan
program; and
(7) during fiscal year 2026, none of the
funds available under this heading are available for the cost, as defined in section 502 of
the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, of commitments to guarantee bonds and notes
under section 114A of the Riegle Community
Development and Regulatory Improvement
Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4713a): Provided, That
commitments to guarantee bonds and notes
under such section 114A shall not exceed
$500,000,000: Provided further, That such section 114A shall remain in effect until December 31, 2027: Provided further, That of the
funds awarded under this heading, except
those provided for the Economic Mobility
Corps, not less than 10 percent shall be used
for awards that support investments that
serve populations living in persistent poverty counties: Provided further, That for the
purposes of this paragraph and paragraph (1),
the term ‘‘persistent poverty counties’’
means any county, including county equivalent areas in Puerto Rico, that has had 20
percent or more of its population living in
poverty over the past 30 years, as measured
by the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses and
the 2016–2020 5-year data series available
from the American Community Survey of
the Bureau of the Census or any other territory or possession of the United States that
has had 20 percent or more of its population
living in poverty over the past 30 years, as
measured by the 1990, 2000, 2010 and 2020 Island Areas Decennial Censuses, or equivalent
data, of the Bureau of the Census.
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE
TAXPAYER SERVICES

For necessary expenses of the Internal
Revenue Service to provide taxpayer services, including pre-filing assistance and education, filing and account services, taxpayer
advocacy services, and other services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109, at such rates as
may be determined by the Commissioner,
$3,036,606,000: Provided, That not to exceed
$186,000,000 of the amounts provided under
this heading shall remain available until
September 30, 2027, of which not less than
$12,000,000 shall be for the Tax Counseling for
the Elderly Program; not less than $28,000,000
shall be available for low-income taxpayer
clinic grants, including grants to individual
clinics of up to $200,000; and not less than
$46,000,000 shall be available for the Community Volunteer Income Tax Assistance
Matching Grants Program for tax return
preparation assistance: Provided further,
That not less than $271,200,000 of the
amounts provided under this heading shall
be available for operating expenses of the
Taxpayer Advocate Service, of which not less
than $7,000,000 shall be for identity theft and
refund fraud casework.
ENFORCEMENT

For necessary expenses for tax enforcement activities of the Internal Revenue
Service to determine and collect owed taxes,
to provide legal and litigation support, to
conduct criminal investigations, to enforce

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

criminal statutes related to violations of internal revenue laws and other financial
crimes, to purchase and hire passenger
motor vehicles (31 U.S.C. 1343(b)), and to provide other services as authorized by 5 U.S.C.
3109, at such rates as may be determined by
the Commissioner, $4,999,000,000; of which not
to exceed $250,000,000 shall remain available
until September 30, 2027; of which not less
than $60,257,000 shall be for the Interagency
Crime and Drug Enforcement program; and
of which not to exceed $35,000,000 shall be for
investigative technology for the Criminal Investigation Division: Provided, That the
amount made available for investigative
technology for the Criminal Investigation
Division shall be in addition to amounts
made available for the Criminal Investigation Division under the ‘‘Technology and Operations Support’’ heading.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

TECHNOLOGY AND OPERATIONS SUPPORT

For necessary expenses to operate the Internal Revenue Service to support taxpayer
services and enforcement programs, including rent payments; facilities services; printing; postage; physical security; headquarters
and other IRS-wide administration activities; research and statistics of income; telecommunications; information technology development, enhancement, operations, maintenance and security; the hire of passenger
motor vehicles (31 U.S.C. 1343(b)); the operations of the Internal Revenue Service Oversight Board; and other services as authorized
by 5 U.S.C. 3109, at such rates as may be determined by the Commissioner; $3,159,759,000,
of which not to exceed $275,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027; of
which not to exceed $10,000,000 shall remain
available until expended for acquisition of
equipment and construction, repair and renovation of facilities; of which not to exceed
$1,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2028, for research; and of which
not to exceed $20,000 shall be for official reception and representation expenses: Provided, That not later than 30 days after the
end of each quarter, the Internal Revenue
Service shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate, the Treasury
Inspector General for Tax Administration,
and the Comptroller General of the United
States detailing each major investment in
the Internal Revenue Service’s information
technology portfolio, including projection
management dashboard; short, plain language summaries describing the investment’s planned total expenditures, development start and end dates, schedule of
deliverables between the start and end dates,
scope, and results; the actual deliverables,
expenditures, and results from the prior
quarter; the estimated deliverables, expenditures, and results for the upcoming quarter;
risks and mitigation strategies associated
with ongoing work; reasons for any cost or
schedule variances and any planned cost,
schedule, and scope as a consequence; and
the cumulative and annual costs since the
start date, estimated total and annual operation and maintenance costs, and an explanation of how the investment fulfills the Internal Revenue Service’s information technology objectives and goals: Provided further,
That the Internal Revenue Service shall include, in its budget justification for fiscal
year 2027, a summary of cost and schedule
performance information for its major information technology systems.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—INTERNAL
REVENUE SERVICE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 101. Not to exceed 5 percent of any
funds made available to the Internal Revenue Service in this Act or any other provi-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H743

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

sion of law may be transferred to any other
Internal Revenue Service appropriation upon
the advance approval of the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
SEC. 102. The Internal Revenue Service
shall maintain an employee training program, which shall include the following topics: taxpayers’ rights, dealing courteously
with taxpayers, cross-cultural relations, ethics, and the impartial application of tax law.
SEC. 103. The Internal Revenue Service
shall institute and enforce policies and procedures that will safeguard the confidentiality of taxpayer information and protect
taxpayers against identity theft.
SEC. 104. Funds made available by this or
any other Act to the Internal Revenue Service shall be available for improved facilities
and increased staffing to provide sufficient
and effective 1–800 help line service for taxpayers. The Commissioner shall continue to
make improvements to the Internal Revenue
Service 1–800 help line service a priority and
allocate resources necessary to enhance the
response time to taxpayer communications,
particularly with regard to victims of tax-related crimes.
SEC. 105. The Internal Revenue Service
shall issue a notice of confirmation of any
address change relating to an employer making employment tax payments, and such notice shall be sent to both the employer’s
former and new address and an officer or employee of the Internal Revenue Service shall
give special consideration to an offer-in-compromise from a taxpayer who has been the
victim of fraud by a third party payroll tax
preparer.
SEC. 106. None of the funds made available
under this Act may be used by the Internal
Revenue Service to target citizens of the
United States for exercising any right guaranteed under the First Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States.
SEC. 107. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used by the Internal Revenue Service to target groups for regulatory
scrutiny based on their ideological beliefs.
SEC. 108. None of funds made available by
this Act to the Internal Revenue Service
shall be obligated or expended on conferences that do not adhere to the procedures, verification processes, documentation
requirements, and policies issued by the
Chief Financial Officer, Human Capital Office, and Agency-Wide Shared Services as a
result of the recommendations in the report
published on May 31, 2013, by the Treasury
Inspector General for Tax Administration
entitled ‘‘Review of the August 2010 Small
Business/Self-Employed
Division’s
Conference in Anaheim, California’’ (Reference
Number 2013–10–037).
SEC. 109. None of the funds made available
in this Act to the Internal Revenue Service
may be obligated or expended—
(1) to make a payment to any employee
under a bonus, award, or recognition program; or
(2) under any hiring or personnel selection
process with respect to re-hiring a former
employee;
unless such program or process takes into
account the conduct and Federal tax compliance of such employee or former employee.
SEC. 110. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used in contravention of
section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 (relating to confidentiality and disclosure of returns and return information).
SEC. 111. The Secretary of the Treasury (or
the Secretary’s delegate) may use the funds
made available in this Act, subject to such
policies as the Secretary (or the Secretary’s
delegate) may establish, to utilize direct hire
authority to recruit and appoint qualified
applicants, without regard to any notice or

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

preference requirements, directly to positions in the competitive service to process
backlogged tax returns and return information.
SEC. 112. Notwithstanding section 1344 of
title 31, United States Code, funds appropriated to the Internal Revenue Service in
this Act may be used to provide passenger
carrier transportation and protection between the Commissioner of Internal Revenue’s residence and place of employment.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT
OF THE TREASURY
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 113. Appropriations to the Department
of the Treasury in this Act shall be available
for uniforms or allowances therefor, as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 5901), including
maintenance, repairs, and cleaning; purchase
of insurance for official motor vehicles operated in foreign countries; purchase of motor
vehicles without regard to the general purchase price limitations for vehicles purchased and used overseas for the current fiscal year; entering into contracts with the
Department of State for the furnishing of
health and medical services to employees
and their dependents serving in foreign countries; and services authorized by 5 U.S.C.
3109.
SEC. 114. Not to exceed 2 percent of any appropriations in this title made available
under the headings ‘‘Departmental Offices—
Salaries and Expenses’’, ‘‘Office of Inspector
General’’, ‘‘Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network’’, ‘‘Bureau of the Fiscal Service’’,
and ‘‘Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade
Bureau’’ may be transferred between such
appropriations upon the advance approval of
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate:
Provided, That no transfer under this section
may increase or decrease any such appropriation by more than 2 percent.
SEC. 115. Not to exceed 2 percent of any appropriation made available in this Act to the
Internal Revenue Service may be transferred
to the Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration’s appropriation upon the advance approval of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate: Provided, That no transfer
may increase or decrease any such appropriation by more than 2 percent.
SEC. 116. None of the funds appropriated in
this Act or otherwise available to the Department of the Treasury or the Bureau of
Engraving and Printing may be used to redesign the $1 Federal Reserve note.
SEC. 117. The Secretary of the Treasury
may transfer funds from the ‘‘Bureau of the
Fiscal Service—Salaries and Expenses’’ to
the Debt Collection Fund as necessary to
cover the costs of debt collection: Provided,
That such amounts shall be reimbursed to
such salaries and expenses account from debt
collections received in the Debt Collection
Fund.
SEC. 118. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this or any
other Act may be used by the United States
Mint to construct or operate any museum
without the explicit approval of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate, the House Committee on Financial Services, and the Senate
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs.
SEC. 119. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this or any
other Act or source to the Department of the
Treasury, the Bureau of Engraving and
Printing, and the United States Mint, individually or collectively, may be used to consolidate any or all functions of the Bureau of
Engraving and Printing and the United
States Mint without the explicit approval of

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H744

the House Committee on Financial Services;
the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing,
and Urban Affairs; and the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
SEC. 120. Funds appropriated by this Act,
or made available by the transfer of funds in
this Act, for the Department of the Treasury’s intelligence or intelligence related activities are deemed to be specifically authorized by the Congress for purposes of section
504 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50
U.S.C. 414) during fiscal year 2026 until the
enactment of the Intelligence Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2026.
SEC. 121. Not to exceed $5,000 shall be made
available from the Bureau of Engraving and
Printing’s Industrial Revolving Fund for
necessary official reception and representation expenses.
SEC. 122. The Secretary of the Treasury
shall submit a Capital Investment Plan to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate not
later than 30 days following the submission
of the annual budget submitted by the President: Provided, That such Capital Investment
Plan shall include capital investment spending from all accounts within the Department
of the Treasury, including but not limited to
the Department-wide Systems and Capital
Investment Programs account, Treasury
Franchise Fund account, and the Treasury
Forfeiture Fund account: Provided further,
That such Capital Investment Plan shall include expenditures occurring in previous fiscal years for each capital investment project
that has not been fully completed.
SEC. 123. During fiscal year 2026—
(1) none of the funds made available in this
or any other Act may be used by the Department of the Treasury, including the Internal
Revenue Service, to issue, revise, or finalize
any regulation, revenue ruling, or other
guidance not limited to a particular taxpayer relating to the standard which is used
to determine whether an organization is operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare for purposes of section 501(c)(4)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (including the proposed regulations published at 78
Fed. Reg. 71535 (November 29, 2013)); and
(2) the standard and definitions as in effect
on January 1, 2010, which are used to make
such determinations shall apply after the
date of the enactment of this Act for purposes of determining status under section
501(c)(4) of such Code of organizations created on, before, or after such date.
SEC. 124. Within 45 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the
Treasury shall submit an itemized report to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate on
the amount of total funds charged to each office by the Franchise Fund including the
amount charged for each service provided by
the Franchise Fund to each office, a detailed
description of the services, a detailed explanation of how each charge for each service is
calculated, and a description of the role customers have in governing in the Franchise
Fund.
SEC. 125. (a) Not later than 60 days after
the end of each quarter, the Office of Financial Research shall submit reports on their
activities to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate, the Committee on Financial
Services of the House of Representatives,
and the Senate Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs.
(b) The reports required under subsection
(a) shall include—
(1) the obligations made during the previous quarter by object class, office, and activity;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

(2) the estimated obligations for the remainder of the fiscal year by object class, office, and activity;
(3) the number of full-time equivalents
within each office during the previous quarter;
(4) the estimated number of full-time
equivalents within each office for the remainder of the fiscal year; and
(5) actions taken to achieve the goals, objectives, and performance measures of each
office.
(c) At the request of any such Committees
specified in subsection (a), the Office of Financial Research shall make officials available to testify on the contents of the reports
required under subsection (a).
SEC. 126. Not to exceed 5 percent of any appropriation made available in this Act for
the Department of the Treasury may be
transferred to the Department’s information
technology system modernization and working capital fund (IT WCF), as authorized by
section 1077(b)(1) of title X of division A of
the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115–91), for the
purposes specified in section 1077(b)(3) of
such Act, upon the prior approval of the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate: Provided,
That amounts transferred to the IT WCF
under this section shall remain available for
obligation through September 30, 2029.
SEC. 127. Amounts made available under
section 601(f)(3) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 801(f)(3)) shall be available for any
necessary expenses of the Department of the
Treasury Office of Inspector General with respect to section 601 of that Act, subtitle A of
title V of division N of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, and section 3201 of the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, in addition to amounts otherwise available for such
purposes.
SEC. 128. The Secretary of the Treasury is
directed to issue a report to Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate, the House Committee
on Financial Services, and the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs not later than 90 days after the date of
the enactment of this Act on the authorities
used to establish the Strategic Bitcoin Reserve and U.S. Digital Asset Stockpile, the
impact the reserve and/or stockpile has on
the Treasury Forfeiture Fund (TFF) including specific impacts on funding for law enforcement and compensation for victims of
crime, a description of how Bitcoin and digital assets would appear on the Federal government’s balance sheet including on TFF
monthly reports, and all third party contractors responsible for the custody of the assets.
SEC. 129. Not later than 20 days after the
date of the enactment of this Act, and not
later than 20 days after the end of the month
thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury
shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate a report on the Treasury Forfeiture Fund.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Department
of the Treasury Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE II
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
AND FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE
PRESIDENT
THE WHITE HOUSE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the White
House as authorized by law, including not to
exceed $3,850,000 for services as authorized by
5 U.S.C. 3109 and 3 U.S.C. 105; subsistence expenses as authorized by 3 U.S.C. 105, which
shall be expended and accounted for as provided in that section; hire of passenger

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

motor vehicles, and travel (not to exceed
$100,000 to be expended and accounted for as
provided by 3 U.S.C. 103); and not to exceed
$19,000 for official reception and representation expenses, to be available for allocation
within the Executive Office of the President;
and for necessary expenses of the Office of
Policy Development, including services as
authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109 and 3 U.S.C. 107,
$78,904,000.
EXECUTIVE RESIDENCE AT THE WHITE HOUSE
OPERATING EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Executive
Residence at the White House, $15,453,000, to
be expended and accounted for as provided by
3 U.S.C. 105, 109, 110, and 112–114.
REIMBURSABLE EXPENSES

For the reimbursable expenses of the Executive Residence at the White House, such
sums as may be necessary: Provided, That all
reimbursable operating expenses of the Executive Residence shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of this paragraph: Provided further, That, notwithstanding any
other provision of law, such amount for reimbursable operating expenses shall be the
exclusive authority of the Executive Residence to incur obligations and to receive offsetting collections, for such expenses: Provided further, That the Executive Residence
shall require each person sponsoring a reimbursable political event to pay in advance an
amount equal to the estimated cost of the
event, and all such advance payments shall
be credited to this account and remain available until expended: Provided further, That
the Executive Residence shall require the national committee of the political party of
the President to maintain on deposit $25,000,
to be separately accounted for and available
for expenses relating to reimbursable political events sponsored by such committee
during such fiscal year: Provided further,
That the Executive Residence shall ensure
that a written notice of any amount owed for
a reimbursable operating expense under this
paragraph is submitted to the person owing
such amount within 60 days after such expense is incurred, and that such amount is
collected within 30 days after the submission
of such notice: Provided further, That the Executive Residence shall charge interest and
assess penalties and other charges on any
such amount that is not reimbursed within
such 30 days, in accordance with the interest
and penalty provisions applicable to an outstanding debt on a United States Government claim under 31 U.S.C. 3717: Provided further, That each such amount that is reimbursed, and any accompanying interest and
charges, shall be deposited in the Treasury
as miscellaneous receipts: Provided further,
That the Executive Residence shall prepare
and submit to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate, by not later than 90 days after
the end of the fiscal year covered by this
Act, a report setting forth the reimbursable
operating expenses of the Executive Residence during the preceding fiscal year, including the total amount of such expenses,
the amount of such total that consists of reimbursable official and ceremonial events,
the amount of such total that consists of reimbursable political events, and the portion
of each such amount that has been reimbursed as of the date of the report: Provided
further, That the Executive Residence shall
maintain a system for the tracking of expenses related to reimbursable events within
the Executive Residence that includes a
standard for the classification of any such
expense as political or nonpolitical: Provided
further, That no provision of this paragraph
may be construed to exempt the Executive
Residence from any other applicable requirement of subchapter I or II of chapter 37 of
title 31, United States Code.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

WHITE HOUSE REPAIR AND RESTORATION
For the repair, alteration, and improvement of the Executive Residence at the
White House pursuant to 3 U.S.C. 105(d),
$2,475,000, to remain available until expended, for required maintenance, resolution
of safety and health issues, and continued
preventative maintenance.
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Council of
Economic Advisers in carrying out its functions under the Employment Act of 1946 (15
U.S.C. 1021 et seq.), $4,854,000.
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL AND HOMELAND
SECURITY COUNCIL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the National Security Council and the Homeland Security
Council, including services as authorized by
5 U.S.C. 3109, $19,000,000, of which not to exceed $10,000 shall be available for official reception and representation expenses.
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Office of Administration, including services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109 and 3 U.S.C. 107, and hire
of passenger motor vehicles, $114,308,000, of
which not to exceed $12,800,000 shall remain
available until expended for continued modernization of information resources within
the Executive Office of the President.
In addition, $10,000,000, to remain available
until expended, for security and continuity
of operations improvements for the Executive Office of the President, in addition to
other amounts otherwise available for such
purposes.
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Office of
Management and Budget, including hire of
passenger motor vehicles and services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109, to carry out the
provisions of chapter 35 of title 44, United
States Code, and to prepare and submit the
budget of the United States Government, in
accordance with section 1105(a) of title 31,
United States Code, $129,000,000, of which not
to exceed $3,000 shall be available for official
representation expenses: Provided, That none
of the funds appropriated in this Act for the
Office of Management and Budget may be
used for the purpose of reviewing any agricultural marketing orders or any activities
or regulations under the provisions of the
Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of
1937 (7 U.S.C. 601 et seq.): Provided further,
That none of the funds made available for
the Office of Management and Budget by this
Act may be expended for the altering of the
transcript of actual testimony of witnesses,
except for testimony of officials of the Office
of Management and Budget, before the Committees on Appropriations or their subcommittees: Provided further, That none of
the funds made available for the Office of
Management and Budget by this Act may be
expended for the altering of the annual work
plan developed by the Corps of Engineers for
submission to the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That none of the
funds provided in this or prior Acts shall be
used, directly or indirectly, by the Office of
Management and Budget, for evaluating or
determining if water resource project or
study reports submitted by the Chief of Engineers acting through the Secretary of the
Army are in compliance with all applicable
laws, regulations, and requirements relevant
to the Civil Works water resource planning
process: Provided further, That the Office of
Management and Budget shall have not more

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H745

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

than 60 days in which to perform budgetary
policy reviews of water resource matters on
which the Chief of Engineers has reported:
Provided further, That the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall notify
the appropriate authorizing and appropriating committees when the 60-day review
is initiated: Provided further, That if water
resource reports have not been transmitted
to the appropriate authorizing and appropriating committees within 15 days after the
end of the Office of Management and Budget
review period based on the notification from
the Director, Congress shall assume Office of
Management and Budget concurrence with
the report and act accordingly: Provided further, That no later than 14 days after the
submission of the budget of the United
States Government for fiscal year 2027, the
Director of the Office of Management and
Budget shall make publicly available on a
website a tabular list for each agency that
submits budget justification materials (as
defined in section 3 of the Federal Funding
Accountability and Transparency Act of
2006) that shall include, at minimum, the
name of the agency, the date on which the
budget justification materials of the agency
were submitted to Congress, and a uniform
resource locator where the budget justification materials are published on the website
of the agency.
OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR

pended funds obligated prior to fiscal year
2024 may be used for any other approved activities of that HIDTA, subject to reprogramming requirements: Provided further,
That each HIDTA designated as of September 30, 2025, shall be funded at not less
than the fiscal year 2025 base level, unless
the Director submits to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate justification for
changes to those levels based on clearly articulated priorities and published Office of
National Drug Control Policy performance
measures of effectiveness: Provided further,
That the Director shall notify the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate of the initial allocation of fiscal year 2026 funding among
HIDTAs not later than 45 days after enactment of this Act, and shall notify the Committees of planned uses of discretionary
HIDTA funding, as determined in consultation with the HIDTA Directors, not later
than 90 days after enactment of this Act:
Provided further, That upon a determination
that all or part of the funds so transferred
from this appropriation are not necessary for
the purposes provided herein and upon notification to the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate, such amounts may be transferred back
to this appropriation.

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For other drug control activities authorized by the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 and
the Office of National Drug Control Policy
Reauthorization Act of 1998, as amended,
$136,150,000, to remain available until expended, which shall be available as follows:
$109,000,000 for the Drug-Free Communities
Program, of which not more than $12,780,000
is for administrative expenses, and of which
$2,500,000 shall be made available as directed
by section 4 of Public Law 107–82, as amended
by section 8204 of Public Law 115–271;
$3,000,000 for drug court training and technical assistance; $14,000,000 for anti-doping
activities; up to $3,700,000 for the United
States membership dues to the World AntiDoping Agency; $1,250,000 for the Model Acts
Program; and $5,200,000 for activities authorized by section 103 of Public Law 114–198: Provided, That amounts made available under
this heading may be transferred to other
Federal departments and agencies to carry
out such activities: Provided further, That
the Director of the Office of National Drug
Control Policy shall, not fewer than 30 days
prior to obligating funds under this heading
for United States membership dues to the
World Anti-Doping Agency, submit to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate a spending
plan and explanation of the proposed uses of
these funds: Provided further, That such plan
shall include the results of an audit of the
World Anti-Doping Agency to be conducted
by external anti-doping experts and experienced independent auditors that demonstrate the World Anti-Doping Agency’s
Executive Committee and Foundation are
operating consistent with their duties.
UNANTICIPATED NEEDS
For expenses necessary to enable the President to meet unanticipated needs, in furtherance of the national interest, security, or defense which may arise at home or abroad
during the current fiscal year, as authorized
by 3 U.S.C. 108, $990,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY OVERSIGHT AND
REFORM
For necessary expenses for the furtherance
of integrated, efficient, secure, and effective
uses of information technology in the Federal Government, $8,000,000, to remain available until expended.

For necessary expenses of the Office of the
National Cyber Director, as authorized by
section 1752 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116–283),
$20,000,000, of which not to exceed $5,000 shall
be available for official reception and representation expenses.
OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Office of National Drug Control Policy; for research activities pursuant to the Office of National
Drug Control Policy Reauthorization Act of
1998, as amended; not to exceed $10,000 for official reception and representation expenses;
and for participation in joint projects or in
the provision of services on matters of mutual interest with nonprofit, research, or
public organizations or agencies, with or
without reimbursement, $21,785,000: Provided,
That the Office is authorized to accept, hold,
administer, and utilize gifts, both real and
personal, public and private, without fiscal
year limitation, for the purpose of aiding or
facilitating the work of the Office.
FEDERAL DRUG CONTROL PROGRAMS
HIGH INTENSITY DRUG TRAFFICKING AREAS
PROGRAM
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Office of National Drug Control Policy’s High Intensity
Drug Trafficking Areas Program, $298,579,000,
to remain available until September 30, 2027,
for drug control activities consistent with
the approved strategy for each of the designated High Intensity Drug Trafficking
Areas (‘‘HIDTAs’’), of which not less than 51
percent shall be transferred to State and
local entities for drug control activities and
shall be obligated not later than 120 days
after enactment of this Act: Provided, That
up to 49 percent may be transferred to Federal agencies and departments in amounts
determined by the Director of the Office of
National Drug Control Policy, of which up to
$4,000,000 may be used for auditing services
and associated activities and $3,000,000 shall
be for the Grants Management System for
use by the Office of National Drug Control
Policy: Provided further, That any unex-

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

OTHER FEDERAL DRUG CONTROL PROGRAMS
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H746
SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE PRESIDENT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses to enable the Vice
President to provide assistance to the President in connection with specially assigned
functions; services as authorized by 5 U.S.C.
3109 and 3 U.S.C. 106, including subsistence
expenses as authorized by 3 U.S.C. 106, which
shall be expended and accounted for as provided in that section; and hire of passenger
motor vehicles, $6,015,000.
OFFICIAL RESIDENCE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT
OPERATING EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the care, operation, refurnishing, improvement, and to the extent not otherwise
provided for, heating and lighting, including
electric power and fixtures, of the official
residence of the Vice President; the hire of
passenger motor vehicles; and not to exceed
$90,000 pursuant to 3 U.S.C. 106(b)(2), $318,000:
Provided, That advances, repayments, or
transfers from this appropriation may be
made to any department or agency for expenses of carrying out such activities.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT AND FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

SEC. 201. From funds made available in this
Act under the headings ‘‘The White House’’,
‘‘Executive Residence at the White House’’,
‘‘White House Repair and Restoration’’,
‘‘Council of Economic Advisers’’, ‘‘National
Security Council and Homeland Security
Council’’, ‘‘Office of Administration’’, ‘‘Special Assistance to the President’’, and ‘‘Official Residence of the Vice President’’, the
Director of the Office of Management and
Budget (or such other officer as the President may designate in writing) may, with advance approval of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate, transfer not to exceed 10 percent of any such appropriation to any other
such appropriation, to be merged with and
available for the same time and for the same
purposes as the appropriation to which
transferred: Provided, That the amount of an
appropriation shall not be increased by more
than 50 percent by such transfers: Provided
further, That no amount shall be transferred
from ‘‘Special Assistance to the President’’
or ‘‘Official Residence of the Vice President’’
without the approval of the Vice President.
SEC. 202. (a) During fiscal year 2026, any
Executive order or Presidential memorandum issued or revoked by the President
shall be accompanied by a written statement
from the Director of the Office of Management and Budget on the budgetary impact,
including costs, benefits, and revenues, of
such order or memorandum.
(b) Any such statement shall include—
(1) a narrative summary of the budgetary
impact of such order or memorandum on the
Federal Government;
(2) the impact on mandatory and discretionary obligations and outlays as the result
of such order or memorandum, listed by Federal agency, for each year in the 5-fiscal-year
period beginning in fiscal year 2026; and
(3) the impact on revenues of the Federal
Government as the result of such order or
memorandum over the 5-fiscal-year period
beginning in fiscal year 2026.
(c) If an Executive order or Presidential
memorandum is issued during fiscal year
2026 due to a national emergency, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget
may issue the statement required by subsection (a) not later than 15 days after the
date that such order or memorandum is
issued.
(d) The requirement for cost estimates for
Presidential memoranda shall only apply for

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

Presidential memoranda estimated to have a
regulatory cost in excess of $100,000,000.
SEC. 203. Not later than 30 days after the
date of enactment of this Act, the Director
of the Office of Management and Budget
shall issue a memorandum to all Federal departments, agencies, and corporations directing compliance with the provisions in
title VII of this Act.
SEC. 204. For an additional amount for ‘‘Office of National Drug Control Policy, Salaries and Expenses’’, $7,071,000, which shall be
for initiatives in the amounts and for the
projects specified in the table that appears
under the heading ‘‘Administrative Provisions—Executive Office of the President and
Funds Appropriated to the President’’ in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act): Provided, That none of the
funds made available by this section may be
transferred for any other purpose.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Executive
Office of the President Appropriations Act,
2026’’.
TITLE III
THE JUDICIARY
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the operation of
the Supreme Court, as required by law, excluding care of the building and grounds, including purchase and hire of passenger motor
vehicles as authorized by 31 U.S.C. 1343 and
1344; not to exceed $10,000 for official reception and representation expenses; and for
miscellaneous expenses, to be expended as
the Chief Justice may approve, $135,127,000,
of which $1,500,000 shall remain available
until expended.
In addition, there are appropriated such
sums as may be necessary under current law
for the salaries of the chief justice and associate justices of the court.
CARE OF THE BUILDING AND GROUNDS

For such expenditures as may be necessary
to enable the Architect of the Capitol to
carry out the duties imposed upon the Architect by 40 U.S.C. 6111 and 6112 under the direction of the Chief Justice, $11,437,000, to remain available until expended.
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE
FEDERAL CIRCUIT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For salaries of officers and employees, and
for necessary expenses of the court, as authorized by law, $36,735,000.
In addition, there are appropriated such
sums as may be necessary under current law
for the salaries of the chief judge and judges
of the court.
UNITED STATES COURT OF INTERNATIONAL
TRADE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For salaries of officers and employees of
the court, services, and necessary expenses
of the court, as authorized by law, $22,437,000.
In addition, there are appropriated such
sums as may be necessary under current law
for the salaries of the chief judge and judges
of the court.
COURTS OF APPEALS, DISTRICT COURTS, AND
OTHER JUDICIAL SERVICES
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For the salaries of judges of the United
States Court of Federal Claims, magistrate
judges, and all other officers and employees
of the Federal Judiciary not otherwise specifically provided for, necessary expenses of
the courts, and the purchase, rental, repair,
and cleaning of uniforms for Probation and
Pretrial Services Office staff, as authorized
by law, $6,127,055,000 (including the purchase
of firearms and ammunition); of which not to

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

exceed $27,817,000 shall remain available
until expended for space alteration projects
and for furniture and furnishings related to
new space alteration and construction
projects.
In addition, there are appropriated such
sums as may be necessary under current law
for the salaries of circuit and district judges
(including judges of the territorial courts of
the United States), bankruptcy judges, and
justices and judges retired from office or
from regular active service.
In addition, for reimbursement of expenses
of the United States Court of Federal Claims
associated with processing cases under the
National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of
1986 (Public Law 99–660), $12,109,000, to be appropriated from the Vaccine Injury Compensation Trust Fund to remain available
until expended.
DEFENDER SERVICES

For the operation of Federal Defender organizations; the compensation and reimbursement of expenses of attorneys appointed to represent persons under 18 U.S.C.
3006A and 3599, and for the compensation and
reimbursement of expenses of persons furnishing investigative, expert, and other services for such representations as authorized
by law; the compensation (in accordance
with the maximums under 18 U.S.C. 3006A)
and reimbursement of expenses of attorneys
appointed to assist the court in criminal
cases where the defendant has waived representation by counsel; the compensation
and reimbursement of expenses of attorneys
appointed to represent jurors in civil actions
for the protection of their employment, as
authorized by 28 U.S.C. 1875(d)(1); the compensation and reimbursement of expenses of
attorneys appointed under 18 U.S.C. 983(b)(1)
in connection with certain judicial civil forfeiture proceedings; the compensation and
reimbursement of travel expenses of guardians ad litem appointed under 18 U.S.C.
4100(b); and for necessary training and general administrative expenses, $1,766,010,000,
to remain available until expended.
FEES OF JURORS AND COMMISSIONERS

For fees and expenses of jurors as authorized by 28 U.S.C. 1871 and 1876; compensation
of jury commissioners as authorized by 28
U.S.C. 1863; and compensation of commissioners appointed in condemnation cases
pursuant to rule 71.1(h) of the Federal Rules
of Civil Procedure (28 U.S.C. Appendix Rule
71.1(h)), $19,108,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That the compensation
of land commissioners shall not exceed the
daily equivalent of the highest rate payable
under 5 U.S.C. 5332.
COURT SECURITY
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, incident to the provision of protective guard services for United States courthouses and other facilities housing Federal
court or Administrative Office of the United
States Courts operations, the procurement,
installation, and maintenance of security
systems and equipment for United States
courthouses and other facilities housing Federal court or Administrative Office of the
United States Courts operations, building ingress-egress control, inspection of mail and
packages, directed security patrols, perimeter security, basic security services provided by the Federal Protective Service, and
other similar activities as authorized by section 1010 of the Judicial Improvement and
Access to Justice Act (Public Law 100–702),
$892,032,000, of which not to exceed $20,000,000
shall remain available until expended, to be
expended directly or transferred to the
United States Marshals Service, which shall
be responsible for administering the Judicial

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

Facility Security Program consistent with
standards or guidelines agreed to by the Director of the Administrative Office of the
United States Courts and the Attorney General: Provided, That funds made available
under this heading may be used for managing a Judiciary-wide program to facilitate
security and emergency management services among the Judiciary, United States
Marshals Service, Federal Protective Service, General Services Administration, other
Federal agencies, state and local governments and the public; and for purposes authorized by the Daniel Anderl Judicial Security and Privacy Act of 2022 (Public Law 117–
263, division C, title LIX, subtitle D) and 28
U.S.C. 604(a)(24).
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED
STATES COURTS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts as authorized by law, including travel as authorized by 31 U.S.C. 1345, hire of a passenger
motor vehicle as authorized by 31 U.S.C.
1343(b), advertising and rent in the District
of Columbia and elsewhere, $106,953,000, of
which not to exceed $8,500 is authorized for
official reception and representation expenses.
FEDERAL JUDICIAL CENTER
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Federal Judicial Center, as authorized by Public Law
90–219, $35,121,000; of which $1,800,000 shall remain available through September 30, 2027,
to provide education and training to Federal
court personnel; and of which not to exceed
$1,500 is authorized for official reception and
representation expenses.
UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For the salaries and expenses necessary to
carry out the provisions of chapter 58 of title
28, United States Code, $22,677,000, of which
not to exceed $1,000 is authorized for official
reception and representation expenses.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—THE JUDICIARY

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 301. Appropriations and authorizations made in this title which are available
for salaries and expenses shall be available
for services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109.
SEC. 302. Not to exceed 5 percent of any appropriation made available for the current
fiscal year for the Judiciary in this Act may
be transferred between such appropriations,
but no such appropriation, except ‘‘Courts of
Appeals, District Courts, and Other Judicial
Services, Defender Services’’ and ‘‘Courts of
Appeals, District Courts, and Other Judicial
Services, Fees of Jurors and Commissioners’’, shall be increased by more than 10
percent by any such transfers: Provided, That
any transfer pursuant to this section shall be
treated as a reprogramming of funds under
sections 604 and 608 of this Act and shall not
be available for obligation or expenditure except in compliance with the procedures set
forth in section 608.
SEC. 303. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the salaries and expenses appropriation for ‘‘Courts of Appeals, District
Courts, and Other Judicial Services’’ shall be
available for official reception and representation expenses of the Judicial Conference of
the United States: Provided, That such available funds shall not exceed $11,000 and shall
be administered by the Director of the Administrative Office of the United States
Courts in the capacity as Secretary of the
Judicial Conference.
SEC. 304. Section 3315(a) of title 40, United
States Code, shall be applied by substituting
‘‘Federal’’ for ‘‘executive’’ each place it appears.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H747

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

SEC. 305. In accordance with 28 U.S.C. 561–
569, and notwithstanding any other provision
of law, the United States Marshals Service
shall provide, for such courthouses as its Director may designate in consultation with
the Director of the Administrative Office of
the United States Courts, for purposes of a
pilot program, the security services that 40
U.S.C. 1315 authorizes the Department of
Homeland Security to provide, except for the
services specified in 40 U.S.C. 1315(b)(2)(E).
For building-specific security services at
these courthouses, the Director of the Administrative Office of the United States
Courts shall reimburse the United States
Marshals Service rather than the Department of Homeland Security.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Judiciary
Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE IV
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
FEDERAL FUNDS
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR RESIDENT TUITION
SUPPORT

For a Federal payment to the District of
Columbia, to be deposited into a dedicated
account, for a nationwide program to be administered by the Mayor, for the District of
Columbia resident tuition support program
established and operated under the District
of Columbia College Access Act of 1999 (sec
38–2701 et seq. D.C. Official Code), $40,000,000,
to remain available until expended: Provided,
That the awarding of such funds may be
prioritized on the basis of a resident’s academic merit, the income and need of eligible
students and such other factors as may be
authorized: Provided further, That the District of Columbia government shall maintain
a dedicated account for the Resident Tuition
Support Program that shall consist of the
Federal funds appropriated to the Program
in this Act and any subsequent appropriations, any unobligated balances from prior
fiscal years, and any interest earned in this
or any fiscal year: Provided further, That the
account shall be under the control of the
District of Columbia Chief Financial Officer,
who shall use those funds solely for the purposes of carrying out the Resident Tuition
Support Program: Provided further, That the
Office of the Chief Financial Officer shall
provide a quarterly financial report to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate for these
funds showing, by object class, the expenditures made and the purpose therefor.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR EMERGENCY PLANNING
AND SECURITY COSTS IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

For a Federal payment of necessary expenses, as determined by the Mayor of the
District of Columbia in written consultation
with the elected county or city officials of
surrounding jurisdictions, $90,000,000, to remain available until expended, for the costs
of providing public safety at events related
to the presence of the National Capital in
the District of Columbia, including support
requested by the Director of the United
States Secret Service in carrying out protective duties under the direction of the Secretary of Homeland Security, and for the
costs of providing support to respond to immediate and specific terrorist threats or attacks in the District of Columbia or surrounding jurisdictions: Provided, That not
later than 90 days after the last day of each
quarter, the District of Columbia Chief
Budget Officer shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate a quarterly
budget report that includes total obligations
of the Emergency Planning and Security
Costs for that quarter, broken down by each
Federal and District government agency, ac-

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tivity and purpose charged to the federal
payment account and a quarterly estimates
report that accounts for upcoming federal
activities.
FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA COURTS

For salaries and expenses for the District
of Columbia Courts, including the transfer
and hire of motor vehicles, $292,068,000 to be
allocated as follows: for the District of Columbia Court of Appeals, $15,747,000, of which
not to exceed $2,500 is for official reception
and representation expenses; for the Superior Court of the District of Columbia,
$149,349,000, of which not to exceed $2,500 is
for official reception and representation expenses; for the District of Columbia Court
System, $97,720,000, of which not to exceed
$2,500 is for official reception and representation expenses; and $29,252,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, for capital
improvements for District of Columbia
courthouse facilities: Provided, That funds
made available for capital improvements
shall be expended consistent with the District of Columbia Courts master plan study
and facilities condition assessment: Provided
further, That, in addition to the amounts appropriated herein, fees received by the District of Columbia Courts for administering
bar examinations and processing District of
Columbia bar admissions may be retained
and credited to this appropriation, to remain
available until expended, for salaries and expenses associated with such activities, notwithstanding section 450 of the District of
Columbia Home Rule Act (D.C. Official Code,
sec. 1–204.50): Provided further, That notwithstanding any other provision of law, all
amounts under this heading shall be apportioned quarterly by the Office of Management and Budget and obligated and expended
in the same manner as funds appropriated
for salaries and expenses of other Federal
agencies: Provided further, That 30 days after
providing written notice to the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate, the District of Columbia Courts may reallocate not more than
$9,000,000 of the funds provided under this
heading among the items and entities funded
under this heading: Provided further, That
the Joint Committee on Judicial Administration in the District of Columbia may, by
regulation, establish a program substantially similar to the program set forth in
subchapter II of chapter 35 of title 5, United
States Code, for employees of the District of
Columbia Courts.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR DEFENDER SERVICES IN
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA COURTS

For payments authorized under section 11–
2604 and section 11–2605, D.C. Official Code
(relating to representation provided under
the District of Columbia Criminal Justice
Act), payments for counsel appointed in proceedings in the Family Court of the Superior
Court of the District of Columbia under
chapter 23 of title 16, D.C. Official Code, or
pursuant to contractual agreements to provide guardian ad litem representation, training, technical assistance, and such other
services as are necessary to improve the
quality of guardian ad litem representation,
payments for counsel appointed in adoption
proceedings under chapter 3 of title 16, D.C.
Official Code, and payments authorized
under section 21–2060, D.C. Official Code (relating to services provided under the District
of Columbia Guardianship, Protective Proceedings, and Durable Power of Attorney Act
of 1986), $46,005,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That funds provided
under this heading shall be administered by
the Joint Committee on Judicial Administration in the District of Columbia: Provided

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H748

further, That notwithstanding any other provision of law, this appropriation shall be apportioned quarterly by the Office of Management and Budget and obligated and expended
in the same manner as funds appropriated
for expenses of other Federal agencies.
FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE COURT SERVICES
AND OFFENDER SUPERVISION AGENCY FOR THE
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

For salaries and expenses, including the
transfer and hire of motor vehicles, of the
Court Services and Offender Supervision
Agency for the District of Columbia, as authorized by the National Capital Revitalization and Self-Government Improvement Act
of 1997, $287,017,000, of which not to exceed
$2,000 is for official reception and representation expenses related to Community Supervision and Pretrial Services Agency programs, and of which not to exceed $35,000 is
for dues and assessments relating to the implementation of the Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency Interstate Supervision Act of 2002: Provided, That, of the
funds appropriated under this heading,
$203,542,000 shall be for necessary expenses of
Community Supervision and Sex Offender
Registration, to include expenses relating to
the monitoring of adults subject to protection orders or the provision of services for or
related to such persons: Provided further,
That, of the funds appropriated under this
heading, $83,475,000 shall be available to the
Pretrial Services Agency: Provided further,
That notwithstanding any other provision of
law, all amounts under this heading shall be
apportioned quarterly by the Office of Management and Budget and obligated and expended in the same manner as funds appropriated for salaries and expenses of other
Federal agencies: Provided further, That
amounts under this heading may be used for
programmatic incentives for defendants to
successfully complete their terms of supervision.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA PUBLIC DEFENDER SERVICE

For salaries and expenses, including the
transfer and hire of motor vehicles, of the
District of Columbia Public Defender Service, as authorized by the National Capital
Revitalization and Self-Government Improvement Act of 1997, $53,629,000: Provided,
That notwithstanding any other provision of
law, all amounts under this heading shall be
apportioned quarterly by the Office of Management and Budget and obligated and expended in the same manner as funds appropriated for salaries and expenses of Federal
agencies: Provided further, That the District
of Columbia Public Defender Service may establish for employees of the District of Columbia Public Defender Service a program
substantially similar to the program set
forth in subchapter II of chapter 35 of title 5,
United States Code, except that the maximum amount of the payment made under
the program to any individual may not exceed the amount referred to in section
3523(b)(3)(B) of title 5, United States Code:
Provided further, That for the purposes of engaging with, and receiving services from,
Federal Franchise Fund Programs established in accordance with section 403 of the
Government Management Reform Act of
1994, as amended, the District of Columbia
Public Defender Service shall be considered
an agency of the United States Government:
Provided further, That the District of Columbia Public Defender Service may enter into
contracts for the procurement of severable
services and multiyear contracts for the acquisition of property and services to the
same extent and under the same conditions
as an executive agency under sections 3902
and 3903 of title 41, United States Code.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
COORDINATING COUNCIL

For a Federal payment to the Criminal
Justice Coordinating Council, $3,451,000, to
remain available until expended, to support
initiatives related to the coordination of
Federal and local criminal justice resources
in the District of Columbia.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR JUDICIAL COMMISSIONS

For a Federal payment, to remain available until September 30, 2027, to the Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure,
$330,000, and for the Judicial Nomination
Commission, $300,000.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT

For a Federal payment for a school improvement program in the District of Columbia, $52,500,000, to remain available until expended, for payments authorized under the
Scholarships for Opportunity and Results
Act (division C of Public Law 112–10): Provided, That, to the extent that funds are
available for opportunity scholarships and
following the priorities included in section
3006 of such Act, the Secretary of Education
shall make scholarships available to students eligible under section 3013(3) of such
Act (Public Law 112–10; 125 Stat. 211) including students who were not offered a scholarship during any previous school year: Provided further, That within funds provided for
opportunity scholarships, up to $1,750,000
shall be for the activities specified in sections 3007(b) through 3007(d) of the Act.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA NATIONAL GUARD

For a Federal payment to the District of
Columbia National Guard, $600,000, to remain
available until expended for the Major General David F. Wherley, Jr. District of Columbia National Guard Retention and College
Access Program.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR TESTING AND
TREATMENT OF HIV/AIDS

For a Federal payment to the District of
Columbia for the testing of individuals for,
and the treatment of individuals with,
human immunodeficiency virus and acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome in the District
of Columbia, $4,000,000.
FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY

For a Federal payment to the District of
Columbia Water and Sewer Authority,
$8,000,000, to remain available until expended, to continue implementation of the
Combined Sewer Overflow Long-Term Plan:
Provided, That the District of Columbia
Water and Sewer Authority provides a 100
percent match for this payment.
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FUNDS
Local funds are appropriated for the District of Columbia for the current fiscal year
out of the General Fund of the District of
Columbia (‘‘General Fund’’) for programs
and activities set forth in the Fiscal Year
2026 Local Budget Act of 2025 (D.C. Law 26–51)
and at rates set forth under such Act, as
amended as of the date of enactment of this
Act: Provided, That notwithstanding any
other provision of law, except as provided in
section 450A of the District of Columbia
Home Rule Act (section 1–204.50a, D.C. Official Code), sections 816 and 817 of the Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2009 (secs. 47–369.01 and 47–
369.02, D.C. Official Code), and provisions of
this Act, the total amount appropriated in
this Act for operating expenses for the District of Columbia for fiscal year 2026 under
this heading shall not exceed the estimates
included in the Fiscal Year 2026 Local Budget Act of 2025, as amended as of the date of
enactment of this Act or the sum of the total

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

revenues of the District of Columbia for such
fiscal year: Provided further, That the
amount appropriated may be increased by
proceeds of one-time transactions, which are
expended for emergency or unanticipated operating or capital needs: Provided further,
That such increases shall be approved by enactment of local District law and shall comply with all reserve requirements contained
in the District of Columbia Home Rule Act:
Provided further, That the Chief Financial Officer of the District of Columbia shall take
such steps as are necessary to assure that
the District of Columbia meets these requirements, including the apportioning by
the Chief Financial Officer of the appropriations and funds made available to the District during fiscal year 2026, except that the
Chief Financial Officer may not reprogram
for operating expenses any funds derived
from bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued for capital projects.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘District of
Columbia Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE V
INDEPENDENT AGENCIES
ADMINISTRATIVE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED
STATES
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Administrative Conference of the United States, authorized by 5 U.S.C. 591 et seq., $3,430,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, of
which not to exceed $1,000 is for official reception and representation expenses.
COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of the Commodity Exchange Act
(7 U.S.C. 1 et seq.), including the purchase
and hire of passenger motor vehicles, and the
rental of space (to include multiple year
leases), in the District of Columbia and elsewhere, $365,000,000, including not to exceed
$3,000 for official reception and representation expenses, and not to exceed $25,000 for
the expenses for consultations and meetings
hosted by the Commission with foreign governmental and other regulatory officials, of
which not less than $80,000,000 shall remain
available until September 30, 2028, and of
which not less than $5,773,000 shall be for expenses of the Office of the Inspector General:
Provided, That notwithstanding the limitations in 31 U.S.C. 1553, amounts provided
under this heading are available for the liquidation of obligations equal to current year
payments on leases entered into prior to the
date of enactment of this Act: Provided further, That for the purpose of recording and
liquidating any lease obligations that should
have been recorded and liquidated against
accounts closed pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1552,
and consistent with the preceding proviso,
such amounts shall be transferred to and recorded in a no-year account in the Treasury,
which has been established for the sole purpose of recording adjustments for and liquidating such unpaid obligations.
CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Consumer
Product Safety Commission, including hire
of passenger motor vehicles, services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the per diem rate
equivalent to the maximum rate payable
under 5 U.S.C. 5376, purchase of nominal
awards to recognize non-Federal officials’
contributions to Commission activities, and
not to exceed $4,000 for official reception and
representation expenses, $150,975,000, of
which no less than $1,622,000 shall be for salaries and expenses of the Office of the Inspector General, of which $2,500,000 shall remain

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

available until expended, to carry out the
program, including administrative costs, authorized by section 1405 of the Virginia
Graeme Baker Pool and Spa Safety Act
(Public Law 110–140, as amended), and of
which $2,000,000 shall remain available until
expended, to carry out the program, including administrative costs, authorized by section 204 of the Nicholas and Zachary Burt
Memorial Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Prevention Act of 2022 (title II of division Q of
Public Law 117–103).
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—CONSUMER
PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION

SEC. 501. During fiscal year 2026, none of
the amounts made available by this Act may
be used to finalize or implement the Safety
Standard for Recreational Off-Highway Vehicles published by the Consumer Product
Safety Commission in the Federal Register
on November 19, 2014 (79 Fed. Reg. 68964)
until after—
(1) the National Academy of Sciences, in
consultation with the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration and the Department of Defense, completes a study to
determine—
(A) the technical validity of the lateral
stability and vehicle handling requirements
proposed by such standard for purposes of reducing the risk of Recreational Off-Highway
Vehicle (referred to in this section as
‘‘ROV’’) rollovers in the off-road environment, including the repeatability and reproducibility of testing for compliance with
such requirements;
(B) the number of ROV rollovers that
would be prevented if the proposed requirements were adopted;
(C) whether there is a technical basis for
the proposal to provide information on a
point-of-sale hangtag about a ROV’s rollover
resistance on a progressive scale; and
(D) the effect on the utility of ROVs used
by the United States military if the proposed
requirements were adopted; and
(2) a report containing the results of the
study completed under paragraph (1) is delivered to—
(A) the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation of the Senate;
(B) the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives;
(C) the Committee on Appropriations of
the Senate; and
(D) the Committee on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives.
SEC. 502. None of the funds provided may be
used to promulgate, implement, administer,
or enforce any regulation issued by the U.S.
Consumer Product Safety Commission to
ban gas stoves as a class of products.
COUNCIL OF THE INSPECTORS GENERAL ON
INTEGRITY AND EFFICIENCY

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Council of
the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency, as established pursuant to section
11(c)(3)(B) of chapter 4 of title 5, United
States Code, to utilize and further develop
the data analytics capabilities of the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee
to enhance transparency, to prevent, detect,
and remediate waste, fraud and abuse in Federal spending, and for expenses related to enhancements to www.oversight.gov, $5,450,000,
to remain available until expended, of which
$850,000 is for enhancements to oversight.gov: Provided, That the amounts appropriated under this heading shall be in addition to any other amounts available to the
Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency under section 424 of title
5, United States Code.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H749

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses to carry out the
Help America Vote Act of 2002 (Public Law
107–252), $23,860,000, of which $1,500,000 shall
be made available to the National Institute
of Standards and Technology for election reform activities authorized under the Help
America Vote Act of 2002; and of which
$1,354,169 shall be for necessary expenses of
the Office of the Inspector General and of
which $8,000 shall be for official reception
and representation expenses: Provided, That
of the amounts appropriated under this heading, up to $2,500,000 shall remain available
until September 30, 2027.
ELECTION SECURITY GRANTS

Notwithstanding section 104(c)(2)(B) of the
Help America Vote Act of 2002 (52 U.S.C.
20904(c)(2)(B)), $45,000,000 is provided to the
Election Assistance Commission for necessary expenses to make payments to States
for activities to improve the administration
of elections for Federal office, including to
enhance election technology and make election security improvements, as authorized
by sections 101, 103, and 104 of such Act: Provided, That for purposes of applying such sections, the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands shall be deemed to be a
State and, for purposes of sections 101(d)(2)
and 103(a) shall be treated in the same manner as the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
Guam, American Samoa, and the United
States Virgin Islands: Provided further, That
each reference to the ‘‘Administrator of General Services’’ or the ‘‘Administrator’’ in
sections 101 and 103 shall be deemed to refer
to the ‘‘Election Assistance Commission’’:
Provided further, That each reference to
‘‘$5,000,000’’ in section 103 shall be deemed to
refer to ‘‘$819,000’’ and each reference to
‘‘$1,000,000’’ in section 103 shall be deemed to
refer to ‘‘$162,000’’: Provided further, That not
later than two years after receiving a payment under this heading, a State shall make
available funds for such activities in an
amount equal to 20 percent of the total
amount of the payment made to the State
under this heading: Provided further, That
not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Election Assistance
Commission shall make the payments to
States under this heading: Provided further,
That States shall submit quarterly financial
reports and annual progress reports: Provided
further, That of the amounts provided under
this heading, $10,000,000 shall be paid from
the unobligated balances, as of the date of
enactment of this Act, in the fund established by section 9006(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 9006(a)).
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Federal
Communications Commission, as authorized
by law, including uniforms and allowances
therefor, as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 5901–5902;
not to exceed $4,000 for official reception and
representation expenses; purchase and hire
of motor vehicles; special counsel fees; and
services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109,
$416,112,000 to remain available until September 30, 2029: Provided, That $416,112,000 of
offsetting collections shall be assessed and
collected pursuant to section 9 of title I of
the Communications Act of 1934, shall be retained and used for necessary expenses and
shall remain available until September 30,
2029: Provided further, That the sum herein
appropriated shall be reduced as such offsetting collections are received during fiscal
year 2026 so as to result in a final fiscal year
2026 appropriation estimated at $0: Provided
further, That, notwithstanding 47 U.S.C.
309(j)(8)(B), proceeds from the use of a com-

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

petitive bidding system that may be retained
and made available for obligation shall not
exceed $132,681,000 for fiscal year 2026: Provided further, That, of the amount appropriated under this heading, not less than
$13,500,000 shall be for the salaries and expenses of the Office of Inspector General.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

SEC. 510. Section 302 of Public Law 108–494
shall be applied as if ‘‘and ending on December 31, 2024’’ were struck.
SEC. 511. None of the funds appropriated by
this Act may be used by the Federal Communications Commission to modify, amend, or
change its rules or regulations for universal
service support payments to implement the
February 27, 2004, recommendations of the
Federal-State Joint Board on Universal
Service regarding single connection or primary line restrictions on universal service
support payments.
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of chapter 4 of title 5, United States
Code, $48,500,000, of which $1,500,000 shall remain available until expended, to be derived
from the Deposit Insurance Fund or, only
when appropriate, the FSLIC Resolution
Fund.
FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of the Federal Election Campaign
Act of 1971, $80,857,000, of which not to exceed
$5,000 shall be available for reception and
representation expenses.
FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses to carry out functions of the Federal Labor Relations Authority, pursuant to Reorganization Plan Numbered 2 of 1978, and the Civil Service Reform
Act of 1978, including services authorized by
5 U.S.C. 3109, and including hire of experts
and consultants, hire of passenger motor vehicles, and including official reception and
representation expenses (not to exceed $1,500)
and rental of conference rooms in the District of Columbia and elsewhere, $29,500,000,
of which $1,271,000 shall be made available to
support the Office of the Inspector General:
Provided, That public members of the Federal Service Impasses Panel may be paid
travel expenses and per diem in lieu of subsistence as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 5703)
for persons employed intermittently in the
Government service, and compensation as
authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109: Provided further,
That, notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302, funds
received from fees charged to non-Federal
participants at labor-management relations
conferences shall be credited to and merged
with this account, to be available without
further appropriation for the costs of carrying out these conferences.
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Federal
Trade Commission, including uniforms or allowances therefor, as authorized by 5 U.S.C.
5901–5902; services as authorized by 5 U.S.C.
3109; hire of passenger motor vehicles; and
not to exceed $2,000 for official reception and
representation expenses, $383,600,000, to remain available until expended: Provided,
That not less than $2,700,000 shall be for necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector
General: Provided further, That not to exceed
$300,000 shall be available for use to contract
with a person or persons for collection services in accordance with the terms of 31

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H750

U.S.C. 3718: Provided further, That not less
than $10,000,000 shall be available for the programs and activities authorized by the
TAKE IT DOWN Act (Public Law 119–12):
Provided further, That, notwithstanding any
other provision of law, not to exceed
$310,000,000 of offsetting collections derived
from fees collected for premerger notification filings under the Hart-Scott-Rodino
Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 (15
U.S.C. 18a), regardless of the year of collection, shall be retained and used for necessary
expenses in this appropriation: Provided further, That, notwithstanding any other provision of law, not to exceed $15,000,000 in offsetting collections derived from fees to implement and enforce the Telemarketing Sales
Rule, promulgated under the Telemarketing
and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention
Act (15 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.), shall be credited
to this account, and be retained and used for
necessary expenses in this appropriation:
Provided further, That the sum herein appropriated from the general fund shall be reduced as such offsetting collections are received during fiscal year 2026 so as to result
in a final fiscal year 2026 appropriation from
the general fund estimated at no more than
$58,600,000: Provided further, That none of the
funds made available to the Federal Trade
Commission may be used to implement subsection (e)(2)(B) of section 43 of the Federal
Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1831t).
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
REAL PROPERTY ACTIVITIES
FEDERAL BUILDINGS FUND
LIMITATIONS ON AVAILABILITY OF REVENUE
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Amounts in the Fund, including revenues
and collections deposited into the Fund,
shall be available for necessary expenses of
real property management and related activities not otherwise provided for, including
operation, maintenance, and protection of
federally owned and leased buildings; rental
of buildings in the District of Columbia; restoration of leased premises; moving governmental agencies (including space adjustments and telecommunications relocation
expenses) in connection with the assignment,
allocation, and transfer of space; contractual
services incident to cleaning or servicing
buildings, and moving; repair and alteration
of federally owned buildings, including
grounds, approaches, and appurtenances;
care and safeguarding of sites; maintenance,
preservation, demolition, and equipment; acquisition of buildings and sites by purchase,
condemnation, or as otherwise authorized by
law; acquisition of options to purchase buildings and sites; conversion and extension of
federally owned buildings; preliminary planning and design of projects by contract or
otherwise; construction of new buildings (including equipment for such buildings); and
payment of principal, interest, and any other
obligations for public buildings acquired by
installment purchase and purchase contract;
in the aggregate amount of $9,686,761,000, of
which—
(1) $165,661,000 shall remain available until
expended for construction and acquisition
(including funds for sites and expenses, and
associated design and construction services),
in addition to amounts otherwise provided
for such purposes, as follows:
Connecticut:
Hartford, U.S. Courthouse, $10,000,000;
Puerto Rico:
San Juan, Clemente Ruiz-Nazario U.S.
Courthouse and Federico Degetau Federal
Building, $20,000,000;
Tennessee:
Chattanooga, U.S. Courthouse, $43,500,000;
Memphis, Odell Horton Federal Building,
$1,500,000;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

Washington:
Seattle, National Archives Replacement
Facility, $30,000,000; and
Environmental Remediation, $60,661,000:
Provided, That each of the foregoing limits of
costs on construction and acquisition
projects may be exceeded to the extent that
savings are effected in other such projects,
but not to exceed 20 percent of the amounts
included in a transmitted prospectus, if required, unless advance approval is obtained
from the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
of a greater amount;
(2) $933,553,000 shall remain available until
expended for repairs and alterations, including associated design and construction services, in addition to amounts otherwise provided for such purposes, of which—
(A) $239,000,000 is for Major Repairs and Alterations;
(B) $479,000,000 is for Basic Repairs and Alterations; and
(C) $215,553,000 is for Special Emphasis Programs:
Provided, That funds made available in this
or any previous Act in the Federal Buildings
Fund for Repairs and Alterations shall, for
prospectus projects, be limited to the
amount identified for each project, except
each project in this or any previous Act may
be increased by an amount not to exceed 20
percent unless advance approval is obtained
from the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
of a greater amount: Provided further, That
additional projects for which prospectuses
have been fully approved may be funded
under this category only if advance approval
is obtained from the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate: Provided further, That the
amounts provided in this or any prior Act for
‘‘Repairs and Alterations’’ may be used to
fund costs associated with implementing security improvements to buildings necessary
to meet the minimum standards for security
in accordance with current law and in compliance with the reprogramming guidelines
of the appropriate Committees of the House
and Senate: Provided further, That the difference between the funds appropriated and
expended on any projects in this or any prior
Act, under the heading ‘‘Repairs and Alterations’’, may be transferred to ‘‘Basic Repairs and Alterations’’ or used to fund authorized increases in prospectus projects:
Provided further, That the amount provided
in this or any prior Act for ‘‘Basic Repairs
and Alterations’’ may be used to pay claims
against the Government arising from any
projects under the heading ‘‘Repairs and Alterations’’ or used to fund authorized increases in prospectus projects;
(3) $5,574,593,000 for rental of space to remain available until expended; and
(4) $3,012,954,000 for building operations to
remain available until expended: Provided,
That the total amount of funds made available from this Fund to the General Services
Administration shall not be available for expenses of any construction, repair, alteration
and acquisition project for which a prospectus, if required by 40 U.S.C. 3307(a), has
not been approved, except that necessary
funds may be expended for each project for
required expenses for the development of a
proposed prospectus: Provided further, That
funds available in the Federal Buildings
Fund may be expended for emergency repairs
when advance approval is obtained from the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate: Provided
further, That amounts necessary to provide
reimbursable special services to other agencies under 40 U.S.C. 592(b)(2) and amounts to
provide such reimbursable fencing, lighting,
guard booths, and other facilities on private

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

or other property not in Government ownership or control as may be appropriate to enable the United States Secret Service to perform its protective functions pursuant to 18
U.S.C. 3056, shall be available from such revenues and collections: Provided further, That
revenues and collections and any other sums
accruing to this Fund during fiscal year 2026,
excluding reimbursements under 40 U.S.C.
592(b)(2), in excess of the aggregate new
obligational authority authorized for Real
Property Activities of the Federal Buildings
Fund in this Act shall remain in the Fund
and shall not be available for expenditure except as authorized in appropriations Acts.
GENERAL ACTIVITIES
GOVERNMENT-WIDE POLICY

For expenses authorized by law, not otherwise provided for, for Government-wide policy associated with the management of real
and personal property assets and certain administrative services; Government-wide policy support responsibilities relating to acquisition, travel, motor vehicles, information technology management, and related
technology activities; and services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109; and evaluation activities as authorized by statute; $64,000,000,
of which $4,000,000 shall remain available
until September 30, 2027.
OPERATING EXPENSES

For expenses authorized by law, not otherwise provided for, for Government-wide activities associated with utilization and donation of surplus personal property; disposal of
real property; agency-wide policy direction
and management; and services as authorized
by 5 U.S.C. 3109; $48,000,000, of which not to
exceed $7,500 is for official reception and representation expenses.
CIVILIAN BOARD OF CONTRACT APPEALS

For expenses authorized by law, not otherwise provided for, for the activities associated with the Civilian Board of Contract Appeals, $10,248,000, of which $2,000,000 shall remain available until expended.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General and services authorized by 5
U.S.C. 3109, $73,837,000: Provided, That not to
exceed $50,000 shall be available for payment
for information and detection of fraud
against the Government, including payment
for recovery of stolen Government property:
Provided further, That not to exceed $2,500
shall be available for awards to employees of
other Federal agencies and private citizens
in recognition of efforts and initiatives resulting in enhanced Office of Inspector General effectiveness.
ALLOWANCES AND OFFICE STAFF FOR FORMER
PRESIDENTS

For carrying out the provisions of the Act
of August 25, 1958 (3 U.S.C. 102 note), and
Public Law 95–138, $5,353,000.
FEDERAL CITIZEN SERVICES FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses authorized by 40
U.S.C. 323 and 44 U.S.C. 3604; and for necessary expenses authorized by law in support
of interagency projects that enable the Federal Government to enhance its ability to
conduct activities electronically through the
development and implementation of innovative
uses
of
information
technology;
$70,000,000, to be deposited into the Federal
Citizen Services Fund: Provided, That the
previous amount may be transferred to Federal agencies to carry out the purpose of the
Federal Citizen Services Fund: Provided further, That the appropriations, revenues, reimbursements, and collections deposited into
the Fund shall be available until expended
for necessary expenses authorized by 40

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

U.S.C. 323 and 44 U.S.C. 3604 and for necessary expenses in support of interagency
projects that enable the Federal Government
to enhance its ability to conduct activities
electronically through the development and
implementation of innovative uses of information technology in the aggregate amount
not to exceed $150,000,000: Provided further,
That appropriations, revenues, reimbursements, and collections accruing to this Fund
during fiscal year 2026 in excess of such
amount shall remain in the Fund and shall
not be available for expenditure except as
authorized in appropriations Acts: Provided
further, That, of the total amount appropriated, up to $5,000,000 shall be available for
support functions and full-time hires to support activities related to the Administration’s requirements under title II of the
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–435): Provided further, That the transfer authorities
provided herein shall be in addition to any
other transfer authority provided in this
Act.
TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION FUND

For carrying out the purposes of the Technology Modernization Fund, as authorized by
section 1078 of subtitle G of the title X of the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115–91; 40 U.S.C.
11301 note), $5,000,000, to remain available
until expended.
ASSET PROCEEDS AND SPACE MANAGEMENT
FUND

For carrying out section 16(b) of the Federal Asset Sales and Transfer Act of 2016 (40
U.S.C. 1303 note), $143,328,000, to remain
available until expended.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—GENERAL
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 520. Funds available to the General
Services Administration shall be available
for the hire of passenger motor vehicles.
SEC. 521. Funds in the Federal Buildings
Fund made available for fiscal year 2026 for
Federal Buildings Fund activities may be
transferred between such activities only to
the extent necessary to meet program requirements: Provided, That any proposed
transfers shall be approved in advance by the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate.
SEC. 522. Except as otherwise provided in
this title, funds made available by this Act
shall be used to transmit a fiscal year 2027
request for United States Courthouse construction only if the request: (1) meets the
design guide standards for construction as
established and approved by the General
Services Administration, the Judicial Conference of the United States, and the Office
of Management and Budget; (2) reflects the
priorities of the Judicial Conference of the
United States as set out in its approved
Courthouse Project Priorities plan; and (3)
includes a standardized courtroom utilization study of each facility to be constructed,
replaced, or expanded.
SEC. 523. None of the funds provided in this
Act may be used to increase the amount of
occupiable square feet, provide cleaning
services, security enhancements, or any
other service usually provided through the
Federal Buildings Fund, to any agency that
does not pay the rate per square foot assessment for space and services as determined by
the General Services Administration in consideration of the Public Buildings Amendments Act of 1972 (Public Law 92–313).
SEC. 524. From funds made available under
the heading ‘‘Federal Buildings Fund, Limitations on Availability of Revenue’’, claims
against the Government of less than $250,000
arising from direct construction projects and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H751

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

acquisition of buildings may be liquidated
from savings effected in other construction
projects with prior notification to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate.
SEC. 525. In any case in which the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
of the House of Representatives and the
Committee on Environment and Public
Works of the Senate adopt a resolution
granting lease authority pursuant to a prospectus transmitted to Congress by the Administrator of the General Services Administration under 40 U.S.C. 3307, the Administrator shall ensure that the delineated area
of procurement is identical to the delineated
area included in the prospectus for all lease
agreements, except that, if the Administrator determines that the delineated area of
the procurement should not be identical to
the delineated area included in the prospectus, the Administrator shall provide an
explanatory statement to each of such committees and the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate prior to exercising any lease authority provided in the resolution.
SEC. 526. With respect to projects funded
under the heading ‘‘Federal Citizen Services
Fund’’, the Administrator of General Services shall submit a spending plan and explanation for each project to be undertaken to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 527. For an additional amount to be
deposited in the ‘‘Federal Buildings Fund’’,
$23,612,000, to remain available until expended, which shall be for initiatives related
to Repairs and Alterations, in the amounts
and for the projects specified in the table
that appears under the heading ‘‘Administrative Provisions—General Services Administration’’ in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act): Provided, That if any of the projects specified in
this section experience a funding deficiency
due to unforeseen cost over runs for that
project that will create a risk to project
completion, the Administrator of the General Services Administration shall immediately notify the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate of the amount of and the reason
for such deficiency: Provided further, That if
any of the projects specified in this section
do not need all of the amounts provided for
project completion, the Administrator of the
General Services Administration shall immediately notify the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate of the amount of and the reason that such funding that is not needed for
project completion: Provided further, That
none of the funds made available by this section may be transferred for any other purpose.
HARRY S TRUMAN SCHOLARSHIP FOUNDATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For payment to the Harry S Truman
Scholarship Foundation Trust Fund, established by section 10 of Public Law 93–642,
$2,970,000, to remain available until expended.
MERIT SYSTEMS PROTECTION BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses to carry out functions of the Merit Systems Protection Board
pursuant to Reorganization Plan Numbered 2
of 1978, the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978,
and the Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989
(5 U.S.C. 5509 note), including services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109, rental of conference

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

rooms in the District of Columbia and elsewhere, hire of passenger motor vehicles, direct procurement of survey printing, and not
to exceed $2,000 for official reception and representation expenses, $49,135,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, and in addition not to exceed $2,345,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, for administrative expenses to adjudicate retirement
appeals to be transferred from the Civil
Service Retirement and Disability Fund in
amounts determined by the Merit Systems
Protection Board.
MORRIS K. UDALL AND STEWART L. UDALL
FOUNDATION
MORRIS K. UDALL AND STEWART L. UDALL
TRUST FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For payment to the Morris K. Udall and
Stewart L. Udall Foundation, pursuant to
the Morris K. Udall and Stewart L. Udall
Foundation Act (20 U.S.C. 5601 et seq.),
$1,582,000, to remain available for direct expenditure until September 30, 2029, of which,
notwithstanding sections 8 and 9 of such Act,
up to $1,000,000 shall be available to carry out
the activities authorized by section 6(7) of
Public Law 102–259 and section 817(a) of Public Law 106–568 (20 U.S.C. 5604(7)): Provided,
That all current and previous amounts
transferred to the Office of Inspector General
of the Department of the Interior will remain available until expended for audits and
investigations of the Morris K. Udall and
Stewart L. Udall Foundation, consistent
with chapter 4 of title 5, United States Code,
and for annual independent financial audits
of the Morris K. Udall and Stewart L. Udall
Foundation pursuant to the Accountability
of Tax Dollars Act of 2002 (Public Law 107–
289): Provided further, That previous amounts
transferred to the Office of Inspector General
of the Department of the Interior may be
transferred to the Morris K. Udall and Stewart L. Udall Foundation for annual independent financial audits pursuant to the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002 (Public Law 107–289): Provided further, That any
interest earned during fiscal year 2026 from
investments made from discretionary appropriations to the Morris K. Udall and Stewart
L. Udall Trust Fund after the date specified
in 20 U.S.C. 5606(b)(1) shall be available until
expended.
ENVIRONMENTAL DISPUTE RESOLUTION FUND

For payment to the Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund to carry out activities
authorized in the Environmental Policy and
Conflict Resolution Act of 1998, $3,862,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2029.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS
ADMINISTRATION
OPERATING EXPENSES

For necessary expenses in connection with
the administration of the National Archives
and Records Administration and archived
Federal records and related activities, as
provided by law, and for expenses necessary
for the review and declassification of documents, the activities of the Public Interest
Declassification Board, the operations and
maintenance of the electronic records archives, the hire of passenger motor vehicles,
and for uniforms or allowances therefor, as
authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 5901), including
maintenance,
repairs,
and
cleaning,
$421,000,000, of which up to $30,000,000 shall
remain available until expended for expenses
necessary to enhance the Federal Government’s ability to electronically preserve,
manage, and store Government records.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of the Inspector General Reform Act of

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H752

2008, Public Law 110–409, 122 Stat. 4302–16
(2008), and chapter 4 of title 5, United States
Code, and for the hire of passenger motor vehicles, $5,920,000, of which $897,000 is available until September 30, 2027.
REPAIRS AND RESTORATION

For the repair, alteration, and improvement of archives facilities and to provide
adequate storage for holdings, $8,000,000, to
remain available until expended.
NATIONAL HISTORICAL PUBLICATIONS AND
RECORDS COMMISSION
GRANTS PROGRAM

For necessary expenses for allocations and
grants for historical publications and records
as authorized by 44 U.S.C. 2504, $5,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2029.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISION—NATIONAL
ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION

SEC. 530. For an additional amount for
‘‘National
Historical
Publications
and
Records Commission Grants Program’’,
$14,344,000 shall be available until one year
after the date of enactment of this Act,
which shall be for initiatives in the amounts
and for the projects specified in the table
that appears under the heading ‘‘Administrative
Provision—National
Archives
and
Records Administration’’ in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided, That none of the funds made
available by this section may be transferred
for any other purpose.
NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT REVOLVING LOAN
FUND

For the Community Development Revolving Loan Fund program as authorized by 42
U.S.C. 9812, 9822, and 9910, $3,465,000 shall be
available until September 30, 2027, for technical assistance to low-income designated
credit unions.
OFFICE OF GOVERNMENT ETHICS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses to carry out functions of the Office of Government Ethics pursuant to chapter 131 of title 5, United States
Code, the Ethics Reform Act of 1989, and the
Representative Louise McIntosh Slaughter
Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge
Act of 2012, including services as authorized
by 5 U.S.C. 3109, rental of conference rooms
in the District of Columbia and elsewhere,
hire of passenger motor vehicles, and not to
exceed $1,500 for official reception and representation expenses, $23,037,000.
OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF TRUST FUNDS)

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

For necessary expenses to carry out functions of the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) pursuant to Reorganization Plan
Numbered 2 of 1978 and the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, including services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109; medical examinations performed for veterans by private physicians on a fee basis; rental of conference
rooms in the District of Columbia and elsewhere; hire of passenger motor vehicles; not
to exceed $2,500 for official reception and representation expenses; and payment of per
diem and/or subsistence allowances to employees where Voting Rights Act activities
require an employee to remain overnight at
his or her post of duty, $167,535,000: Provided,
That of the total amount made available
under this heading, $10,898,000 may remain
available until expended, for information
technology modernization, and shall be in
addition to funds otherwise made available
for
such
purposes;
and
in
addition
$214,605,000, for administrative expenses, to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

be transferred from the appropriate trust
funds of OPM without regard to other statutes, including direct procurement of printed
materials, for the retirement and insurance
programs: Provided further, That the provisions of this appropriation shall not affect
the authority to use applicable trust funds
as
provided
by
sections
8348(a)(1)(B),
8958(f)(2)(A), 8988(f)(2)(A), and 9004(f)(2)(A) of
title 5, United States Code: Provided further,
That no part of this appropriation shall be
available for salaries and expenses of the
Legal Examining Unit of OPM established
pursuant to Executive Order No. 9358 of July
1, 1943, or any successor unit of like purpose:
Provided further, That the President’s Commission on White House Fellows, established
by Executive Order No. 11183 of October 3,
1964, may, during fiscal year 2026, accept donations of money, property, and personal
services: Provided further, That such donations, including those from prior years, may
be used for the development of publicity materials to provide information about the
White House Fellows, except that no such
donations shall be accepted for travel or reimbursement of travel expenses, or for the
salaries of employees of such Commission:
Provided further, That not to exceed 5 percent
of amounts made available under this heading may be transferred to an information
technology working capital fund established
for purposes authorized by subtitle G of title
X of division A of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (Public
Law 115–91; 40 U.S.C. 11301 note): Provided further, That the OPM Director shall notify,
and receive approval from, the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate at least 15 days in advance of any transfer under the preceding
proviso: Provided further, That amounts
transferred to such a fund under such transfer authority from any organizational category of OPM shall not exceed 5 percent of
each such organizational category’s budget
as identified in the report required by section 608 of this Act: Provided further, That
amounts transferred to such a fund shall remain available for obligation through September 30, 2029.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF TRUST FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of chapter 4 of title 5, United States
Code, including services as authorized by 5
U.S.C. 3109, hire of passenger motor vehicles,
$6,839,000, and in addition, not to exceed
$29,192,000 for administrative expenses to
audit, investigate, and provide other oversight of the Office of Personnel Management’s retirement and insurance programs,
to be transferred from the appropriate trust
funds of the Office of Personnel Management, as determined by the Inspector General: Provided, That the Inspector General is
authorized to rent conference rooms in the
District of Columbia and elsewhere.
OFFICE OF SPECIAL COUNSEL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses to carry out functions of the Office of Special Counsel, including services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109,
payment of fees and expenses for witnesses,
rental of conference rooms in the District of
Columbia and elsewhere, and hire of passenger motor vehicles, $31,585,000.
PRIVACY AND CIVIL LIBERTIES OVERSIGHT
BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Privacy and
Civil Liberties Oversight Board, as authorized by section 1061 of the Intelligence Re-

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

form and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004
(42 U.S.C. 2000ee), $13,700,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS REFORM BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For salaries and expenses of the Public
Buildings Reform Board in carrying out the
Federal Assets Sale and Transfer Act of 2016
(Public Law 114–287), $3,605,000, to remain
available until expended.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the Securities
and Exchange Commission, including services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109, the rental
of space (to include multiple year leases) in
the District of Columbia and elsewhere, and
not to exceed $3,500 for official reception and
representation expenses, $2,149,000,000, to remain available until expended; of which not
less than $20,050,000 shall be for the Office of
Inspector General; of which not to exceed
$275,000 shall be available for a permanent
secretariat for the International Organization of Securities Commissions; and of which
not to exceed $100,000 shall be available for
expenses for consultations and meetings
hosted by the Commission with foreign governmental and other regulatory officials,
members of their delegations and staffs to
exchange views concerning securities matters, such expenses to include necessary logistic and administrative expenses and the
expenses of Commission staff and foreign
invitees in attendance including: (1) incidental expenses such as meals; (2) travel and
transportation; and (3) related lodging or
subsistence: Provided, That any unobligated
balances from funds made available under
this heading in prior Acts for replacement
leases for the Commission’s headquarters
and other regional office facilities may be
used for such purposes at any Commission
office facility, notwithstanding provisos in
such Acts limiting use to particular office
facilities, and notwithstanding provisos in
such Acts requiring that de-obligated
amounts derived from the general fund be returned to the general fund or that de-obligated amounts derived from fees or assessments be paid to national securities exchanges and national securities associations
in proportion to any fees or assessments paid
by such national securities exchange or national securities association.
For purposes of calculating the fee rate
under section 31(j) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78ee(j)) for fiscal
year 2026, all amounts appropriated under
this heading shall be deemed to be the regular appropriation to the Commission for fiscal year 2026: Provided, That fees and charges
authorized by section 31 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78ee) shall be
credited to this account as offsetting collections: Provided further, That not to exceed
$2,149,000,000 of such offsetting collections
shall be available until expended for necessary expenses of this account: Provided further, That the total amount appropriated
under this heading from the general fund for
fiscal year 2026 shall be reduced as such offsetting fees are received so as to result in a
final total fiscal year 2026 appropriation
from the general fund estimated at not more
than $0.
SELECTIVE SERVICE SYSTEM
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Selective
Service System, including expenses of attendance at meetings and of training for uniformed personnel assigned to the Selective
Service System, as authorized by 5 U.S.C.
4101–4118 for civilian employees; hire of passenger motor vehicles; services as authorized

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

by 5 U.S.C. 3109; and not to exceed $1,000 for
official reception and representation expenses; $31,300,000: Provided, That during the
current fiscal year, the President may exempt this appropriation from the provisions
of 31 U.S.C. 1341, whenever the President
deems such action to be necessary in the interest of national defense: Provided further,
That none of the funds appropriated by this
Act may be expended for or in connection
with the induction of any person into the
Armed Forces of the United States.
SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, of the Small Business Administration, including hire of passenger motor vehicles as authorized by sections 1343 and 1344 of
title 31, United States Code, and not to exceed $3,500 for official reception and representation expenses, $323,118,000, of which
not less than $12,000,000 shall be available for
examinations, reviews, and other lender
oversight activities, of which no more than
$30,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027, for information technology
systems and activities, and shall be in addition to amounts otherwise available for such
purposes: Provided, That the Administrator
is authorized to charge fees to cover the cost
of publications developed by the Small Business Administration, and certain loan program activities, including fees authorized by
section 5(b) of the Small Business Act: Provided further, That, notwithstanding 31
U.S.C. 3302, revenues received from all such
activities shall be credited to this account,
to remain available until expended, for carrying out these purposes without further appropriations: Provided further, That the
Small Business Administration may accept
gifts in an amount not to exceed $4,000,000
and may co-sponsor activities, each in accordance with section 132(a) of division K of
Public Law 108–447, during fiscal year 2026:
Provided further, That $15,500,000 shall be
available for costs associated with the certification of small business concerns owned
and controlled by veterans or service-disabled veterans under sections 36A and 36 of
the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 657f–1;
657f), respectively, and section 862 of Public
Law 116–283, to be available until September
30, 2027: Provided further, That not later than
180 days after the enactment of this Act, the
Small Business Administration shall submit
a report to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate detailing the number FTE, funding obligated, and city and state for each district and regional office during the previous
fiscal year and the number of FTE, funding
level, and city and state for the current fiscal year for each district and regional office:
Provided further, That district offices shall
collect data on the number of constituents
served each fiscal year.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

For necessary expenses of programs supporting entrepreneurial and small business
development, $330,000,000, of which $82,000,000
shall remain available until September 30,
2027: Provided, That amounts made available
under this heading may not be transferred
pursuant to section 540 of this Act: Provided
further, That of the amount appropriated
under this heading—
(1) $150,000,000 shall be available to fund
grants for performance as authorized by section 21 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C.
648), of which $30,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027;
(2) $41,000,000 shall be available for marketing, management, and technical assistance under section 7(m)(4) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 636(m)(4)) by inter-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H753

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

mediaries that make microloans under the
microloan program, of which $8,200,000 shall
remain available until September 30, 2027;
(3) $20,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2027, shall be available for
grants to States to carry out export programs that assist small business concerns
authorized under section 22(l) of the Small
Business Act (15 U.S.C. 649(l));
(4) $27,000,000 shall be available for the
Women’s Business Center program described
in section 29 of the Small Business Act (15
U.S.C. 656), of which $5,400,000 shall remain
available until September 30, 2027;
(5) $21,400,000 shall be available for conducting outreach to veterans, including
through the Boots to Business Program established under section 32(h) of the Small
Business Act (15 U.S.C. 657b(h)) and Veteran
Business
Outreach
Centers,
of
which
$4,280,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027;
(6) $17,000,000 shall be available for the
Service Corps of Retired Executives established under section 8(b)(1)(B) of the Small
Business Act (15 U.S.C. 637(b)(1)(B)), of which
$3,400,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027;
(7) $9,000,000 shall be available for grants
and cooperative agreements under the Federal and State Technology Partnership Program under section 34 of the Small Business
Act (15 U.S.C. 657d), of which $1,800,000 shall
remain available until September 30, 2027;
(8) $9,000,000 shall be available for the Regional Innovation Cluster Initiative, of
which $1,800,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2027;
(9) $7,000,000 shall be available for providing technical assistance under the Program for Investors in Microentrepreneurs, of
which $1,400,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2027;
(10) $9,000,000 shall be available for grants
to growth accelerators to assist entrepreneurs to start and scale their businesses,
of which $1,800,000 shall remain available
until September 30, 2027;
(11) $5,300,000 shall be available for the Office of Native American Affairs to carry out
the outreach activities for Native Americanowned small businesses, of which $1,060,000
shall remain available until September 30,
2027;
(12) $3,800,000 shall be available for financial assistance for the program established
under section 7(j) of the Small Business Act
(15 U.S.C. 636(j)), of which $760,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027;
(13) $4,000,000 shall be available for technical and certification assistance for the
HUBZone program established under section
31 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 657a),
of which $800,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2027;
(14) $2,000,000 shall be available to provide
entrepreneurship education, of which $400,000
shall remain available until September 30,
2027;
(15) $3,000,000 shall be available to make
grants under the Cybersecurity for Small
Businesses Pilot Program, of which $600,000
shall remain available until September 30,
2027; and
(16) $1,500,000 shall be available for the National Women’s Business Council established
under section 405 of the Women’s Business
Ownership Act of 1988 (15 U.S.C. 7105), of
which $300,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2027.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of chapter 4 of title 5, United States
Code, $37,020,000.

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

OFFICE OF ADVOCACY

For necessary expenses of the Office of Advocacy in carrying out the provisions of title
II of Public Law 94–305 (15 U.S.C. 634a et seq.)
and the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (5
U.S.C. 601 et seq.), $10,109,000, to remain
available until expended.
BUSINESS LOANS PROGRAM ACCOUNT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the cost of direct loans, $3,000,000, to
remain available until expended: Provided,
That such costs, including the cost of modifying such loans, shall be as defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of
1974: Provided further, That subject to section
502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974,
during fiscal year 2026 commitments to guarantee loans under section 503 of the Small
Business Investment Act of 1958 and commitments for loans authorized under subparagraph (C) of section 502(7) of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 (15 U.S.C. 696(7))
shall
not
exceed,
in
the
aggregate,
$16,500,000,000: Provided further, That during
fiscal year 2026 commitments for general
business loans authorized under paragraphs
(1) through (35) of section 7(a) of the Small
Business Act shall not exceed $35,500,000,000
for a combination of amortizing term loans
and the aggregated maximum line of credit
provided by revolving loans: Provided further,
That during fiscal year 2026 commitments to
guarantee loans for debentures under section
303(b) of the Small Business Investment Act
of 1958 shall not exceed $6,000,000,000: Provided further, That during fiscal year 2026,
guarantees of trust certificates authorized
by section 5(g) of the Small Business Act
shall not exceed a principal amount of
$15,000,000,000. In addition, for administrative
expenses to carry out the direct and guaranteed loan programs, $158,000,000, which may
be transferred to and merged with the appropriations for Salaries and Expenses.
DISASTER LOANS PROGRAM ACCOUNT
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

To carry out the direct loan program authorized by section 7(b) of the Small Business Act, $282,000,000, to be available until
expended, of which $1,600,000 is for the Office
of Inspector General of the Small Business
Administration for audits and reviews of disaster loans and the disaster loan programs
and shall be transferred to and merged with
the appropriations for the Office of Inspector
General; of which $197,000,000 is for direct administrative expenses of loan making and
servicing to carry out the direct loan program, which may be transferred to and
merged with the appropriations for Salaries
and Expenses; of which $8,400,000 is for indirect administrative expenses for the direct
loan program, which may be transferred to
and merged with the appropriations for Salaries and Expenses; and of which $75,000,000 is
for the cost of direct loans and that such
costs, including the cost of modifying such
loans, shall be as defined in section 502 of the
Congressional Budget Act of 1974: Provided,
That, of the funds provided under this heading, $250,000,000 shall be for major disasters
declared pursuant to the Robert T. Stafford
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance
Act (42 U.S.C. 5122(2)): Provided further, That
the amount for major disasters under this
heading is designated by the Congress as
being for disaster relief pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the budget.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—SMALL BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 540. Not to exceed 5 percent of any appropriation made available for the current
fiscal year for the Small Business Administration in this Act may be transferred between such appropriations, but no such appropriation shall be increased by more than

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H754

10 percent by any such transfers: Provided,
That any transfer pursuant to this paragraph
shall be treated as a reprogramming of funds
under section 608 of this Act and shall not be
available for obligation or expenditure except in compliance with the procedures set
forth in that section.
SEC. 541. Not to exceed 3 percent of any appropriation made available in this Act for
the Small Business Administration under
the headings ‘‘Salaries and Expenses’’ and
‘‘Business Loans Program Account’’ may be
transferred to the Administration’s information technology system modernization and
working capital fund (IT WCF), as authorized
by section 1077(b)(1) of title X of division A of
the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2018, for the purposes specified in
section 1077(b)(3) of such Act, upon the advance approval of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate: Provided, That amounts
transferred to the IT WCF under this section
shall remain available for obligation through
September 30, 2029.
SEC. 542. For an additional amount for
‘‘Small Business Administration—Salaries
and Expenses’’, $106,862,000, which shall be
for initiatives related to small business development and entrepreneurship, including
programmatic, construction, and acquisition
activities, in the amounts and for the
projects specified in the table that appears
under the heading ‘‘Administrative Provisions—Small Business Administration’’ in
the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act): Provided, That, notwithstanding sections 2701.92 and 2701.93 of
title 2, Code of Federal Regulations, the Administrator of the Small Business Administration may permit awards to subrecipients
for initiatives funded under this section: Provided further, That none of the funds made
available by this section may be transferred
for any other purpose.
UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE
PAYMENT TO THE POSTAL SERVICE FUND

For payment to the Postal Service Fund
for revenue forgone on free and reduced rate
mail, pursuant to subsections (c) and (d) of
section 2401 of title 39, United States Code,
$38,360,000: Provided, That mail for overseas
voting and mail for the blind shall continue
to be free: Provided further, That none of the
funds made available to the Postal Service
by this Act shall be used to implement any
rule, regulation, or policy of charging any officer or employee of any State or local child
support enforcement agency, or any individual participating in a State or local program of child support enforcement, a fee for
information requested or provided concerning an address of a postal customer: Provided further, That none of the funds provided
in this Act shall be used to consolidate or
close small rural and other small post offices: Provided further, That the Postal Service may not destroy, and shall continue to
offer for sale, any copies of the Multinational
Species
Conservation
Funds
Semipostal Stamp, as authorized under the
Multinational Species Conservation Funds
Semipostal Stamp Act of 2010 (Public Law
111–241).
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of chapter 4 of title 5, United States
Code, $274,000,000, to be derived by transfer
from the Postal Service Fund and expended
as authorized by section 603(b)(3) of the Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act
(Public Law 109–435).

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

UNITED STATES TAX COURT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses, including contract
reporting and other services as authorized by
5 U.S.C. 3109, and not to exceed $3,000 for official reception and representation expenses,
$55,000,000, of which $1,000,000 shall remain
available until expended: Provided, That
travel expenses of the judges shall be paid
upon the written certificate of the judge.
TITLE VI
GENERAL PROVISIONS—THIS ACT
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 601. None of the funds in this Act shall
be used for the planning or execution of any
program to pay the expenses of, or otherwise
compensate, non-Federal parties intervening
in regulatory or adjudicatory proceedings
funded in this Act.
SEC. 602. None of the funds appropriated in
this Act shall remain available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year, nor may
any be transferred to other appropriations,
except for transfers made pursuant to the
authority in section 3173(d) of title 40, United
States Code, unless expressly so provided
herein.
SEC. 603. The expenditure of any appropriation under this Act for any consulting service through procurement contract pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 3109, shall be limited to those
contracts where such expenditures are a
matter of public record and available for
public inspection, except where otherwise
provided under existing law, or under existing Executive order issued pursuant to existing law.
SEC. 604. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be transferred to any department, agency, or instrumentality of the
United States Government, except pursuant
to a transfer made by, or transfer authority
provided in, this Act or any other appropriations Act.
SEC. 605. None of the funds made available
by this Act shall be available for any activity or for paying the salary of any Government employee where funding an activity or
paying a salary to a Government employee
would result in a decision, determination,
rule, regulation, or policy that would prohibit the enforcement of section 307 of the
Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1307).
SEC. 606. No funds appropriated pursuant to
this Act may be expended by an entity unless the entity agrees that in expending the
assistance the entity will comply with chapter 83 of title 41, United States Code.
SEC. 607. No funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this Act shall be
made available to any person or entity that
has been convicted of violating chapter 83 of
title 41, United States Code.
SEC. 608. Except as otherwise provided in
this Act, none of the funds provided in this
Act, provided by previous appropriations
Acts to the agencies or entities funded in
this Act that remain available for obligation
or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, or provided
from any accounts in the Treasury derived
by the collection of fees and available to the
agencies funded by this Act, shall be available for obligation or expenditure through a
reprogramming of funds that: (1) creates a
new program; (2) eliminates a program,
project, or activity; (3) increases funds or
personnel for any program, project, or activity for which funds have been denied or restricted by the Congress; (4) proposes to use
funds directed for a specific activity by the
Committee on Appropriations of either the
House of Representatives or the Senate for a
different purpose; (5) augments existing programs, projects, or activities in excess of
$5,000,000 or 10 percent, whichever is less; (6)
reduces existing programs, projects, or ac-

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tivities by $5,000,000 or 10 percent, whichever
is less; or (7) creates or reorganizes offices,
programs, or activities unless prior approval
is received from the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate: Provided, That prior to any
significant reorganization, restructuring, relocation, or closing of offices, programs, or
activities, each agency or entity funded in
this Act shall consult with the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate: Provided further, That
not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, each agency funded by
this Act shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate to establish
the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for the current
fiscal year: Provided further, That at a minimum the report shall include: (1) a table for
each appropriation, detailing both full-time
employee equivalents and budget authority,
with separate columns to display the prior
year enacted level, the President’s budget request, adjustments made by Congress, adjustments due to enacted rescissions, if appropriate, and the fiscal year enacted level;
(2) a delineation in the table for each appropriation and its respective prior year enacted
level by object class and program, project,
and activity as detailed in this Act, in the
accompanying report, or in the budget appendix for the respective appropriation,
whichever is more detailed, and which shall
apply to all items for which a dollar amount
is specified and to all programs for which
new budget authority is provided, as well as
to discretionary grants and discretionary
grant allocations; and (3) an identification of
items of special congressional interest: Provided further, That the amount appropriated
or limited for salaries and expenses for an
agency shall be reduced by $100,000 per day
for each day after the required date that the
report has not been submitted to the Congress.
SEC. 609. Except as otherwise specifically
provided by law, not to exceed 50 percent of
unobligated balances remaining available at
the end of fiscal year 2026 from appropriations made available for salaries and expenses for fiscal year 2026 in this Act, shall
remain available through September 30, 2027,
for each such account for the purposes authorized: Provided, That a request shall be
submitted to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate for approval prior to the expenditure of such funds: Provided further, That
these requests shall be made in compliance
with reprogramming guidelines.
SEC. 610. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used by the Executive Office of the President to request—
(1) any official background investigation
report on any individual from the Federal
Bureau of Investigation; or
(2) a determination with respect to the
treatment of an organization as described in
section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code from the Department
of the Treasury or the Internal Revenue
Service.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply—
(1) in the case of an official background investigation report, if such individual has
given express written consent for such request not more than 6 months prior to the
date of such request and during the same
presidential administration; or
(2) if such request is required due to extraordinary circumstances involving national security.
SEC. 611. The cost accounting standards
promulgated under chapter 15 of title 41,

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

United States Code shall not apply with respect to a contract under the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program established
under chapter 89 of title 5, United States
Code.
SEC. 612. For the purpose of resolving litigation and implementing any settlement
agreements regarding the nonforeign area
cost-of-living allowance program, the Office
of Personnel Management may accept and
utilize (without regard to any restriction on
unanticipated travel expenses imposed in an
appropriations Act) funds made available to
the Office of Personnel Management pursuant to court approval.
SEC. 613. No funds appropriated by this Act
shall be available to pay for an abortion, or
the administrative expenses in connection
with any health plan under the Federal employees health benefits program which provides any benefits or coverage for abortions.
SEC. 614. The provision of section 613 shall
not apply where the life of the mother would
be endangered if the fetus were carried to
term, or the pregnancy is the result of an act
of rape or incest.
SEC. 615. In order to promote Government
access to commercial information technology, the restriction on purchasing nondomestic articles, materials, and supplies set
forth in chapter 83 of title 41, United States
Code (popularly known as the Buy American
Act), shall not apply to the acquisition by
the Federal Government of information
technology (as defined in section 11101 of
title 40, United States Code), that is a commercial item (as defined in section 103 of
title 41, United States Code).
SEC. 616. Notwithstanding section 1353 of
title 31, United States Code, no officer or employee of any regulatory agency or commission funded by this Act may accept on behalf
of that agency, nor may such agency or commission accept, payment or reimbursement
from a non-Federal entity for travel, subsistence, or related expenses for the purpose of
enabling an officer or employee to attend
and participate in any meeting or similar
function relating to the official duties of the
officer or employee when the entity offering
payment or reimbursement is a person or entity subject to regulation by such agency or
commission, or represents a person or entity
subject to regulation by such agency or commission, unless the person or entity is an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such
Code.
SEC. 617. (a)(1) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, an Executive agency covered by this Act otherwise authorized to
enter into contracts for either leases or the
construction or alteration of real property
for office, meeting, storage, or other space
must consult with the General Services Administration before issuing a solicitation for
offers of new leases or construction contracts, and in the case of succeeding leases,
before entering into negotiations with the
current lessor.
(2) Any such agency with authority to
enter into an emergency lease may do so
during any period declared by the President
to require emergency leasing authority with
respect to such agency.
(b) For purposes of this section, the term
‘‘Executive agency covered by this Act’’
means any Executive agency provided funds
by this Act, but does not include the General
Services Administration or the United
States Postal Service.
SEC. 618. (a) There are appropriated for the
following activities the amounts required
under current law:
(1) Compensation of the President (3 U.S.C.
102).
(2) Payments to—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H755

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(A) the Judicial Officers’ Retirement Fund
(28 U.S.C. 377(o));
(B) the Judicial Survivors’ Annuities Fund
(28 U.S.C. 376(c)); and
(C) the United States Court of Federal
Claims Judges’ Retirement Fund (28 U.S.C.
178(l)).
(3) Payment of Government contributions—
(A) with respect to the health benefits of
retired employees, as authorized by chapter
89 of title 5, United States Code, and the Retired Federal Employees Health Benefits Act
(74 Stat. 849); and
(B) with respect to the life insurance benefits for employees retiring after December
31, 1989 (5 U.S.C. ch. 87).
(4) Payment to finance the unfunded liability of new and increased annuity benefits
under the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund (5 U.S.C. 8348).
(5) Payment of annuities authorized to be
paid from the Civil Service Retirement and
Disability Fund by statutory provisions
other than subchapter III of chapter 83 or
chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code.
(b) Nothing in this section may be construed to exempt any amount appropriated
by this section from any otherwise applicable limitation on the use of funds contained
in this Act.
SEC. 619. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used by the Federal Trade
Commission to complete the draft report entitled ‘‘Interagency Working Group on Food
Marketed to Children: Preliminary Proposed
Nutrition Principles to Guide Industry Self-Regulatory Efforts’’ unless the Interagency Working Group on Food Marketed to Children
complies with Executive Order No. 13563.
SEC. 620. (a) The head of each executive
branch agency funded by this Act shall ensure that the Chief Information Officer of
the agency has the authority to participate
in decisions regarding the budget planning
process related to information technology.
(b) Amounts appropriated for any executive branch agency funded by this Act that
are available for information technology
shall be allocated within the agency, consistent with the provisions of appropriations
Acts and budget guidelines and recommendations from the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in such manner as
specified by, or approved by, the Chief Information Officer of the agency in consultation
with the Chief Financial Officer of the agency and budget officials.
SEC. 621. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used in contravention of
chapter 29, 31, or 33 of title 44, United States
Code.
SEC. 622. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used by a governmental
entity to require the disclosure by a provider
of electronic communication service to the
public or remote computing service of the
contents of a wire or electronic communication that is in electronic storage with the
provider (as such terms are defined in sections 2510 and 2711 of title 18, United States
Code) in a manner that violates the Fourth
Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
SEC. 623. No funds provided in this Act
shall be used to deny an Inspector General
funded under this Act timely access to any
records, documents, or other materials available to the department or agency over which
that Inspector General has responsibilities
under chapter 4 of title 5, United States
Code, or to prevent or impede that Inspector
General’s access to such records, documents,
or other materials, under any provision of
law, except a provision of law that expressly
refers to the Inspector General and expressly
limits the Inspector General’s right of access. A department or agency covered by this

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

section shall provide its Inspector General
with access to all such records, documents,
and other materials in a timely manner.
Each Inspector General shall ensure compliance with statutory limitations on disclosure relevant to the information provided by
the establishment over which that Inspector
General has responsibilities under chapter 4
of title 5, United States Code. Each Inspector
General covered by this section shall report
to the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate
within 5 calendar days any failures to comply with this requirement.
SEC. 624. None of the funds appropriated by
this Act may be used by the Federal Communications Commission to modify, amend, or
change the rules or regulations of the Commission for universal service high-cost support for competitive eligible telecommunications carriers in a way that is inconsistent
with paragraph (e)(5) or (e)(6) of section
54.307 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on July 15, 2015: Provided,
That this section shall not prohibit the Commission from considering, developing, or
adopting other support mechanisms as an alternative to Mobility Fund Phase II: Provided further, That any such alternative
mechanism shall maintain existing high-cost
support
to
competitive
eligible
telecommunications carriers until support under
such mechanism commences.
SEC. 625. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to maintain or
establish a computer network unless such
network blocks the viewing, downloading,
and exchanging of pornography.
(b) Nothing in subsection (a) shall limit
the use of funds necessary for any Federal,
State, Tribal, or local law enforcement agency or any other entity carrying out criminal
investigations, prosecution, adjudication activities, or other law enforcement- or victim
assistance-related activity.
SEC. 626. None of the funds appropriated or
other-wise made available by this Act may
be used to pay award or incentive fees for
contractors whose performance has been
judged to be below satisfactory, behind
schedule, over budget, or has failed to meet
the basic requirements of a contract, unless
the Agency determines that any such deviations are due to unforeseeable events, government-driven scope changes, or are not
significant within the overall scope of the
project and/or program and unless such
awards or incentive fees are consistent with
section 16.401(e)(2) of the Federal Acquisition
Regulation.
SEC. 627. (a) None of the funds made available under this Act may be used to pay for
travel and conference activities that result
in a total cost to an Executive branch department, agency, board or commission
funded by this Act of more than $500,000 at
any single conference unless the agency or
entity determines that such attendance is in
the national interest and advance notice is
transmitted to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate that includes the basis of
that determination.
(b) None of the funds made available under
this Act may be used to pay for the travel to
or attendance of more than 50 employees,
who are stationed in the United States, at
any single conference occurring outside the
United States unless the agency or entity determines that such attendance is in the national interest and advance notice is transmitted to the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate that includes the basis of that determination.
SEC. 628. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used for first-class or
business-class travel by the employees of executive branch agencies funded by this Act

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H756

in contravention of sections 301–10.122
through 301–10.125 of title 41, Code of Federal
Regulations.
SEC. 629. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be obligated on contracts in
excess of $5,000 for public relations, as that
term is defined in Office and Management
and Budget Circular A–87 (revised May 10,
2004), unless advance notice of such an obligation is transmitted to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
SEC. 630. Federal agencies funded under
this Act shall clearly state within the text,
audio, or video used for advertising or educational purposes, including emails or Internet postings, that the communication is
printed, published, or produced and disseminated at U.S. taxpayer expense. The funds
used by a Federal agency to carry out this
requirement shall be derived from amounts
made available to the agency for advertising
or other communications regarding the programs and activities of the agency.
SEC. 631. When issuing statements, press
releases, requests for proposals, bid solicitations and other documents describing
projects or programs funded in whole or in
part with Federal money, all grantees receiving Federal funds included in this Act,
shall clearly state—
(1) the percentage of the total costs of the
program or project which will be financed
with Federal money;
(2) the dollar amount of Federal funds for
the project or program; and
(3) percentage and dollar amount of the
total costs of the project or program that
will be financed by non-governmental
sources.
SEC. 632. None of the funds made available
by this Act shall be used by the Securities
and Exchange Commission to finalize, issue,
or implement any rule, regulation, or order
regarding the disclosure of political contributions, contributions to tax exempt organizations, or dues paid to trade associations.
SEC. 633. Not later than 45 days after the
last day of each quarter, each agency funded
in this Act shall submit to the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate a quarterly budget report that includes total obligations of the
Agency for that quarter for each appropriation, by the source year of the appropriation.
SEC. 634. Of the unobligated balances available in the Department of the Treasury,
Treasury Forfeiture Fund, established by
section 9703 of title 31, United States Code,
$300,000,000 shall be permanently rescinded
not later than September 30, 2026.
SEC. 635. The unobligated balances from
prior years appropriations provided for the
Special Inspector General for Pandemic Recovery are permanently rescinded.
TITLE VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS—GOVERNMENTWIDE
DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES, AND CORPORATIONS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 701. No department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States receiving appropriated funds under this or any other Act
for fiscal year 2026 shall obligate or expend
any such funds, unless such department,
agency, or instrumentality has in place, and
will continue to administer in good faith, a
written policy designed to ensure that all of
its workplaces are free from the illegal use,
possession, or distribution of controlled substances (as defined in the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802)) by the officers
and employees of such department, agency,
or instrumentality.
SEC. 702. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the maximum amount allowable dur-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

ing the current fiscal year in accordance
with section 1343(c) of title 31, United States
Code, for the purchase of any passenger
motor vehicle (exclusive of buses, ambulances, vans, law enforcement vehicles, protective vehicles, undercover surveillance vehicles, and police-type vehicles), is hereby
fixed at $40,000 except station wagons for
which the maximum shall be $41,140: Provided, That these limits may be exceeded by
not to exceed $7,775 for police-type vehicles:
Provided further, That the limits set forth in
this section may not be exceeded by more
than 5 percent for electric or hybrid vehicles
purchased for demonstration under the provisions of the Electric and Hybrid Vehicle
Research, Development, and Demonstration
Act of 1976: Provided further, That the limits
set forth in this section may be exceeded by
the incremental cost of clean alternative
fuels vehicles acquired pursuant to Public
Law 101–549 over the cost of comparable conventionally fueled vehicles: Provided further,
That the limits set forth in this section shall
not apply to any vehicle that is a commercial item and which operates on alternative
fuel, including but not limited to electric,
plug-in hybrid electric, and hydrogen fuel
cell vehicles.
SEC. 703. Appropriations of the executive
departments and independent establishments
for the current fiscal year available for expenses of travel, or for the expenses of the
activity concerned, are hereby made available for quarters allowances and cost-of-living allowances, in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
5922–5924.
SEC. 704. Unless otherwise specified in law
during the current fiscal year, no part of any
appropriation contained in this or any other
Act shall be used to pay the compensation of
any officer or employee of the Government
of the United States (including any agency
the majority of the stock of which is owned
by the Government of the United States)
whose post of duty is in the continental
United States unless such person: (1) is a citizen of the United States; (2) is a person who
is lawfully admitted for permanent residence
and is seeking citizenship as outlined in 8
U.S.C. 1324b(a)(3)(B); (3) is a person who is
admitted as a refugee under 8 U.S.C. 1157 or
is granted asylum under 8 U.S.C. 1158 and has
filed a declaration of intention to become a
lawful permanent resident and then a citizen
when eligible; or (4) is a person who owes allegiance to the United States: Provided, That
for purposes of this section, affidavits signed
by any such person shall be considered prima
facie evidence that the requirements of this
section with respect to his or her status are
being complied with: Provided further, That
for purposes of paragraphs (2) and (3) such affidavits shall be submitted prior to employment and updated thereafter as necessary:
Provided further, That any person making a
false affidavit shall be guilty of a felony, and
upon conviction, shall be fined no more than
$4,000 or imprisoned for not more than 1
year, or both: Provided further, That the
above penal clause shall be in addition to,
and not in substitution for, any other provisions of existing law: Provided further, That
any payment made to any officer or employee contrary to the provisions of this section shall be recoverable in action by the
Federal Government: Provided further, That
this section shall not apply to any person
who is an officer or employee of the Government of the United States on the date of enactment of this Act, or to international
broadcasters employed by the Broadcasting
Board of Governors, or to temporary employment of translators, or to temporary employment in the field service (not to exceed
60 days) as a result of emergencies: Provided
further, That this section does not apply to
the employment as Wildland firefighters for

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

not more than 120 days of nonresident aliens
employed by the Department of the Interior
or the USDA Forest Service pursuant to an
agreement with another country.
SEC. 705. Appropriations available to any
department or agency during the current fiscal year for necessary expenses, including
maintenance or operating expenses, shall
also be available for payment to the General
Services Administration for charges for
space and services and those expenses of renovation and alteration of buildings and facilities which constitute public improvements performed in accordance with the
Public Buildings Act of 1959 (73 Stat. 479),
the Public Buildings Amendments of 1972 (86
Stat. 216), or other applicable law.
SEC. 706. In addition to funds provided in
this or any other Act, all Federal agencies
are authorized to receive and use funds resulting from the sale of materials, including
Federal records disposed of pursuant to a
records schedule recovered through recycling
or waste prevention programs. Such funds
shall be available until expended for the following purposes:
(1) Acquisition, waste reduction and prevention, and recycling programs as described
in Executive Order No. 14057 (December 8,
2021), including any such programs adopted
prior to the effective date of the Executive
order.
(2) Other Federal agency environmental
management programs, including, but not
limited to, the development and implementation of hazardous waste management and
pollution prevention programs.
(3) Other employee programs as authorized
by law or as deemed appropriate by the head
of the Federal agency.
SEC. 707. Funds made available by this or
any other Act for administrative expenses in
the current fiscal year of the corporations
and agencies subject to chapter 91 of title 31,
United States Code, shall be available, in addition to objects for which such funds are
otherwise available, for rent in the District
of Columbia; services in accordance with 5
U.S.C. 3109; and the objects specified under
this head, all the provisions of which shall be
applicable to the expenditure of such funds
unless otherwise specified in the Act by
which they are made available: Provided,
That in the event any functions budgeted as
administrative expenses are subsequently
transferred to or paid from other funds, the
limitations on administrative expenses shall
be correspondingly reduced.
SEC. 708. No part of any appropriation contained in this or any other Act shall be
available for interagency financing of boards
(except Federal Executive Boards), commissions, councils, committees, or similar
groups (whether or not they are interagency
entities) which do not have a prior and specific statutory approval to receive financial
support from more than one agency or instrumentality.
SEC. 709. None of the funds made available
pursuant to the provisions of this or any
other Act shall be used to implement, administer, or enforce any regulation which has
been disapproved pursuant to a joint resolution duly adopted in accordance with the applicable law of the United States.
SEC. 710. During the period in which the
head of any department or agency, or any
other officer or civilian employee of the Federal Government appointed by the President
of the United States, holds office, no funds
may be obligated or expended in excess of
$5,000 to furnish or redecorate the office of
such department head, agency head, officer,
or employee, or to purchase furniture or
make improvements for any such office, unless advance notice of such furnishing or redecoration is transmitted to the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate. For the purposes of

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

this section, the term ‘‘office’’ shall include
the entire suite of offices assigned to the individual, as well as any other space used primarily by the individual or the use of which
is directly controlled by the individual.
SEC. 711. Notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 1346, or
section 708 of this Act, funds made available
for the current fiscal year by this or any
other Act shall be available for the interagency funding of national security and
emergency preparedness telecommunications
initiatives which benefit multiple Federal
departments, agencies, or entities, as provided by Executive Order No. 13618 (July 6,
2012).
SEC. 712. (a) None of the funds made available by this or any other Act may be obligated or expended by any department, agency, or other instrumentality of the Federal
Government to pay the salaries or expenses
of any individual appointed to a position of
a confidential or policy-determining character that is excepted from the competitive
service under section 3302 of title 5, United
States Code, (pursuant to schedule C of subpart C of part 213 of title 5 of the Code of
Federal Regulations) unless the head of the
applicable department, agency, or other instrumentality employing such schedule C individual certifies to the Director of the Office of Personnel Management that the
schedule C position occupied by the individual was not created solely or primarily in
order to detail the individual to the White
House.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not
apply to Federal employees or members of
the armed forces detailed to or from an element of the intelligence community (as that
term is defined under section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C.
3003(4))).
SEC. 713. No part of any appropriation contained in this or any other Act shall be
available for the payment of the salary of
any officer or employee of the Federal Government, who—
(1) prohibits or prevents, or attempts or
threatens to prohibit or prevent, any other
officer or employee of the Federal Government from having any direct oral or written
communication or contact with any Member,
committee, or subcommittee of the Congress
in connection with any matter pertaining to
the employment of such other officer or employee or pertaining to the department or
agency of such other officer or employee in
any way, irrespective of whether such communication or contact is at the initiative of
such other officer or employee or in response
to the request or inquiry of such Member,
committee, or subcommittee; or
(2) removes, suspends from duty without
pay, demotes, reduces in rank, seniority, status, pay, or performance or efficiency rating,
denies promotion to, relocates, reassigns,
transfers, disciplines, or discriminates in regard to any employment right, entitlement,
or benefit, or any term or condition of employment of, any other officer or employee
of the Federal Government, or attempts or
threatens to commit any of the foregoing actions with respect to such other officer or
employee, by reason of any communication
or contact of such other officer or employee
with any Member, committee, or subcommittee of the Congress as described in
paragraph (1).
SEC. 714. (a) None of the funds made available in this or any other Act may be obligated or expended for any employee training
that—
(1) does not meet identified needs for
knowledge, skills, and abilities bearing directly upon the performance of official duties;
(2) contains elements likely to induce high
levels of emotional response or psychological
stress in some participants;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H757

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(3) does not require prior employee notification of the content and methods to be used
in the training and written end of course
evaluation;
(4) contains any methods or content associated with religious or quasi-religious belief
systems or ‘‘new age’’ belief systems as defined in Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission Notice N–915.022, dated September 2, 1988; or
(5) is offensive to, or designed to change,
participants’ personal values or lifestyle outside the workplace.
(b) Nothing in this section shall prohibit,
restrict, or otherwise preclude an agency
from conducting training bearing directly
upon the performance of official duties.
SEC. 715. No part of any funds appropriated
in this or any other Act shall be used by an
agency of the executive branch, other than
for normal and recognized executive-legislative relationships, for publicity or propaganda purposes, and for the preparation, distribution or use of any kit, pamphlet, booklet, publication, radio, television, or film
presentation designed to support or defeat
legislation pending before the Congress, except in presentation to the Congress itself.
SEC. 716. None of the funds appropriated by
this or any other Act may be used by an
agency to provide a Federal employee’s
home address to any labor organization except when the employee has authorized such
disclosure or when such disclosure has been
ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
SEC. 717. None of the funds made available
in this or any other Act may be used to provide any non-public information such as
mailing, telephone, or electronic mailing
lists to any person or any organization outside of the Federal Government without the
approval of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate.
SEC. 718. No part of any appropriation contained in this or any other Act shall be used
directly or indirectly, including by private
contractor, for publicity or propaganda purposes within the United States not heretofore authorized by Congress.
SEC. 719. (a) In this section, the term
‘‘agency’’—
(1) means an Executive agency, as defined
under 5 U.S.C. 105; and
(2) includes a military department, as defined under section 102 of such title and the
United States Postal Service.
(b) Unless authorized in accordance with
law or regulations to use such time for other
purposes, an employee of an agency shall use
official time in an honest effort to perform
official duties. An employee not under a
leave system, including a Presidential appointee exempted under 5 U.S.C. 6301(2), has
an obligation to expend an honest effort and
a reasonable proportion of such employee’s
time in the performance of official duties.
SEC. 720. Notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 1346
and section 708 of this Act, funds made available for the current fiscal year by this or any
other Act to any department or agency,
which is a member of the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB),
shall be available to finance an appropriate
share of FASAB administrative costs.
SEC. 721. Notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 1346
and section 708 of this Act, the head of each
Executive department and agency is hereby
authorized to transfer to or reimburse ‘‘General Services Administration, Governmentwide Policy’’ with the approval of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget,
funds made available for the current fiscal
year by this or any other Act, including rebates from charge card and other contracts:
Provided, That these funds shall be administered by the Administrator of General Services to support Government-wide and other

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

multi-agency financial, information technology, procurement, and other management
innovations, initiatives, and activities, including improving coordination and reducing
duplication, as approved by the Director of
the Office of Management and Budget, in
consultation with the appropriate interagency and multi-agency groups designated
by the Director (including the President’s
Management Council for overall management improvement initiatives, the Chief Financial Officers Council for financial management initiatives, the Chief Information
Officers Council for information technology
initiatives, the Chief Human Capital Officers
Council for human capital initiatives, the
Chief Acquisition Officers Council for procurement initiatives, and the Performance
Improvement Council for performance improvement initiatives): Provided further,
That the total funds transferred or reimbursed shall not exceed $15,000,000 to improve
coordination, reduce duplication, and for
other activities related to Federal Government Priority Goals established by 31 U.S.C.
1120, and not to exceed $17,000,000 for Government-wide innovations, initiatives, and activities: Provided further, That the funds
transferred to or for reimbursement of ‘‘General Services Administration, GovernmentWide Policy’’ during fiscal year 2026 shall remain available for obligation through September 30, 2027: Provided further, That not
later than 90 days after enactment of this
Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation with the
Administrator of General Services, shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate,
the Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs of the Senate, and the
Committee on Oversight and Accountability
of the House of Representatives a detailed
spend plan for the funds to be transferred or
reimbursed: Provided further, That the spend
plan shall, at a minimum, include: (i) the
amounts currently in the funds authorized
under this section and the estimate of
amounts to be transferred or reimbursed in
fiscal year 2026; (ii) a detailed breakdown of
the purposes for all funds estimated to be
transferred or reimbursed pursuant to this
section (including total number of personnel
and costs for all staff whose salaries are provided for by this section); (iii) where applicable, a description of the funds intended for
use by or for the benefit of each executive
council; and (iv) where applicable, a description of the funds intended for use by or for
the implementation of specific laws passed
by Congress: Provided further, That no transfers or reimbursements may be made pursuant to this section until 15 days following
notification of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate by the Director of the Office
of Management and Budget.
SEC. 722. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a woman may breastfeed her
child at any location in a Federal building or
on Federal property, if the woman and her
child are otherwise authorized to be present
at the location.
SEC. 723. Notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 1346, or
section 708 of this Act, funds made available
for the current fiscal year by this or any
other Act shall be available for the interagency funding of specific projects, workshops, studies, and similar efforts to carry
out the purposes of the National Science and
Technology Council (authorized by Executive Order No. 12881), which benefit multiple
Federal departments, agencies, or entities:
Provided, That the Office of Management and
Budget shall provide a report describing the
budget of and resources connected with the
National Science and Technology Council to
the Committees on Appropriations of the

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H758

House of Representatives and the Senate, the
House Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, and the Senate Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation 90
days after enactment of this Act.
SEC. 724. Any request for proposals, solicitation, grant application, form, notification,
press release, or other publications involving
the distribution of Federal funds shall comply with any relevant requirements in part
200 of title 2, Code of Federal Regulations:
Provided, That this section shall apply to direct payments, formula funds, and grants received by a State receiving Federal funds.
SEC. 725. (a) PROHIBITION OF FEDERAL AGENCY MONITORING OF INDIVIDUALS’ INTERNET
USE.—None of the funds made available in
this or any other Act may be used by any
Federal agency—
(1) to collect, review, or create any aggregation of data, derived from any means, that
includes any personally identifiable information relating to an individual’s access to or
use of any Federal Government Internet site
of the agency; or
(2) to enter into any agreement with a
third party (including another government
agency) to collect, review, or obtain any aggregation of data, derived from any means,
that includes any personally identifiable information relating to an individual’s access
to or use of any nongovernmental Internet
site.
(b) EXCEPTIONS.—The limitations established in subsection (a) shall not apply to—
(1) any record of aggregate data that does
not identify particular persons;
(2) any voluntary submission of personally
identifiable information;
(3) any action taken for law enforcement,
regulatory, or supervisory purposes, in accordance with applicable law; or
(4) any action described in subsection (a)(1)
that is a system security action taken by the
operator of an Internet site and is necessarily incident to providing the Internet
site services or to protecting the rights or
property of the provider of the Internet site.
(c) DEFINITIONS.—For the purposes of this
section:
(1) The term ‘‘regulatory’’ means agency
actions to implement, interpret or enforce
authorities provided in law.
(2) The term ‘‘supervisory’’ means examinations of the agency’s supervised institutions, including assessing safety and soundness, overall financial condition, management practices and policies and compliance
with applicable standards as provided in law.
SEC. 726. (a) None of the funds appropriated
by this Act may be used to enter into or
renew a contract which includes a provision
providing prescription drug coverage, except
where the contract also includes a provision
for contraceptive coverage.
(b) Nothing in this section shall apply to a
contract with—
(1) any of the following religious plans:
(A) Personal Care’s HMO; and
(B) OSF HealthPlans, Inc.; and
(2) any existing or future plan, if the carrier for the plan objects to such coverage on
the basis of religious beliefs.
(c) In implementing this section, any plan
that enters into or renews a contract under
this section may not subject any individual
to discrimination on the basis that the individual refuses to prescribe or otherwise provide for contraceptives because such activities would be contrary to the individual’s religious beliefs or moral convictions.
(d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require coverage of abortion or
abortion-related services.
SEC. 727. The United States is committed
to ensuring the health of its Olympic, Pan
American, and Paralympic athletes, and supports the strict adherence to anti-doping in

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

sport through testing, adjudication, education, and research as performed by nationally recognized oversight authorities.
SEC. 728. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, funds appropriated for official
travel to Federal departments and agencies
may be used by such departments and agencies, if consistent with Office of Management
and Budget Circular A–126 regarding official
travel for Government personnel, to participate in the fractional aircraft ownership
pilot program.
SEC. 729. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, none of the funds appropriated or
made available under this or any other appropriations Act may be used to implement
or enforce restrictions or limitations on the
Coast Guard Congressional Fellowship Program, or to implement the proposed regulations of the Office of Personnel Management
to add sections 300.311 through 300.316 to part
300 of title 5 of the Code of Federal Regulations, published in the Federal Register, volume 68, number 174, on September 9, 2003 (relating to the detail of executive branch employees to the legislative branch).
SEC. 730. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no executive branch agency shall
purchase, construct, or lease any additional
facilities, except within or contiguous to existing locations, to be used for the purpose of
conducting Federal law enforcement training without the advance approval of the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate, except
that the Federal Law Enforcement Training
Centers is authorized to obtain the temporary use of additional facilities by lease,
contract, or other agreement for training
which cannot be accommodated in existing
Centers facilities.
SEC. 731. Unless otherwise authorized by
existing law, none of the funds provided in
this or any other Act may be used by an executive branch agency to produce any prepackaged news story intended for broadcast
or distribution in the United States, unless
the story includes a clear notification within
the text or audio of the prepackaged news
story that the prepackaged news story was
prepared or funded by that executive branch
agency.
SEC. 732. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used in contravention of
section 552a of title 5, United States Code
(popularly known as the Privacy Act), and
regulations implementing that section.
SEC. 733. (a) IN GENERAL.—None of the
funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this or any other Act may be used for
any Federal Government contract with any
foreign incorporated entity which is treated
as an inverted domestic corporation under
section 835(b) of the Homeland Security Act
of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 395(b)) or any subsidiary of
such an entity.
(b) WAIVERS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Any Secretary shall waive
subsection (a) with respect to any Federal
Government contract under the authority of
such Secretary if the Secretary determines
that the waiver is required in the interest of
national security.
(2) REPORT TO CONGRESS.—Any Secretary
issuing a waiver under paragraph (1) shall report such issuance to Congress.
(c) EXCEPTION.—This section shall not
apply to any Federal Government contract
entered into before the date of the enactment of this Act, or to any task order issued
pursuant to such contract.
SEC. 734. During fiscal year 2026, for each
employee who—
(1) retires under section 8336(d)(2) or
8414(b)(1)(B) of title 5, United States Code; or
(2) retires under any other provision of
subchapter III of chapter 83 or chapter 84 of
such title 5 and receives a payment as an in-

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

centive to separate, the separating agency
shall remit to the Civil Service Retirement
and Disability Fund an amount equal to the
Office of Personnel Management’s average
unit cost of processing a retirement claim
for the preceding fiscal year. Such amounts
shall be available until expended to the Office of Personnel Management and shall be
deemed to be an administrative expense
under section 8348(a)(1)(B) of title 5, United
States Code.
SEC. 735. (a) None of the funds made available in this or any other Act may be used to
recommend or require any entity submitting
an offer for a Federal contract to disclose
any of the following information as a condition of submitting the offer:
(1) Any payment consisting of a contribution, expenditure, independent expenditure,
or disbursement for an electioneering communication that is made by the entity, its
officers or directors, or any of its affiliates
or subsidiaries to a candidate for election for
Federal office or to a political committee, or
that is otherwise made with respect to any
election for Federal office.
(2) Any disbursement of funds (other than
a payment described in paragraph (1)) made
by the entity, its officers or directors, or any
of its affiliates or subsidiaries to any person
with the intent or the reasonable expectation that the person will use the funds to
make a payment described in paragraph (1).
(b) In this section, each of the terms ‘‘contribution’’, ‘‘expenditure’’, ‘‘independent expenditure’’,
‘‘electioneering
communication’’, ‘‘candidate’’, ‘‘election’’, and ‘‘Federal
office’’ has the meaning given such term in
the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971
(52 U.S.C. 30101 et seq.).
SEC. 736. None of the funds made available
in this or any other Act may be used to pay
for the painting of a portrait of an officer or
employee of the Federal Government, including the President, the Vice President, a
Member of Congress (including a Delegate or
a Resident Commissioner to Congress), the
head of an executive branch agency (as defined in section 133 of title 41, United States
Code), or the head of an office of the legislative branch.
SEC. 737. (a)(1) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, and except as otherwise
provided in this section, no part of any of the
funds appropriated for fiscal year 2026, by
this or any other Act, may be used to pay
any prevailing rate employee described in
section 5342(a)(2)(A) of title 5, United States
Code—
(A) during the period from the date of expiration of the limitation imposed by the comparable section for the previous fiscal years
until the normal effective date of the applicable wage survey adjustment that is to take
effect in fiscal year 2026, in an amount that
exceeds the rate payable for the applicable
grade and step of the applicable wage schedule in accordance with such section; and
(B) during the period consisting of the remainder of fiscal year 2026, in an amount
that exceeds, as a result of a wage survey adjustment, the rate payable under subparagraph (A) by more than the sum of—
(i) the percentage adjustment taking effect
in fiscal year 2026 under section 5303 of title
5, United States Code, in the rates of pay
under the General Schedule; and
(ii) the difference between the overall average percentage of the locality-based comparability payments taking effect in fiscal
year 2026 under section 5304 of such title
(whether by adjustment or otherwise), and
the overall average percentage of such payments which was effective in the previous
fiscal year under such section.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, no prevailing rate employee described in
subparagraph (B) or (C) of section 5342(a)(2)

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

of title 5, United States Code, and no employee covered by section 5348 of such title,
may be paid during the periods for which
paragraph (1) is in effect at a rate that exceeds the rates that would be payable under
paragraph (1) were paragraph (1) applicable
to such employee.
(3) For the purposes of this subsection, the
rates payable to an employee who is covered
by this subsection and who is paid from a
schedule not in existence on September 30,
2025, shall be determined under regulations
prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, rates of premium pay for employees subject to this subsection may not be changed
from the rates in effect on September 30,
2025, except to the extent determined by the
Office of Personnel Management to be consistent with the purpose of this subsection.
(5) This subsection shall apply with respect
to pay for service performed after September
30, 2025.
(6) For the purpose of administering any
provision of law (including any rule or regulation that provides premium pay, retirement, life insurance, or any other employee
benefit) that requires any deduction or contribution, or that imposes any requirement
or limitation on the basis of a rate of salary
or basic pay, the rate of salary or basic pay
payable after the application of this subsection shall be treated as the rate of salary
or basic pay.
(7) Nothing in this subsection shall be considered to permit or require the payment to
any employee covered by this subsection at a
rate in excess of the rate that would be payable were this subsection not in effect.
(8) The Office of Personnel Management
may provide for exceptions to the limitations imposed by this subsection if the Office
determines that such exceptions are necessary to ensure the recruitment or retention of qualified employees.
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), the adjustment in rates of basic pay for the statutory pay systems that take place in fiscal
year 2026 under sections 5344 and 5348 of title
5, United States Code, shall be—
(1) not less than the percentage received by
employees in the same location whose rates
of basic pay are adjusted pursuant to the
statutory pay systems under sections 5303
and 5304 of title 5, United States Code: Provided, That prevailing rate employees at locations where there are no employees whose
pay is increased pursuant to sections 5303
and 5304 of title 5, United States Code, and
prevailing rate employees described in section 5343(a)(5) of title 5, United States Code,
shall be considered to be located in the pay
locality designated as ‘‘Rest of United
States’’ pursuant to section 5304 of title 5,
United States Code, for purposes of this subsection; and
(2) effective as of the first day of the first
applicable pay period beginning after September 30, 2025.
SEC. 738. (a) The head of any Executive
branch department, agency, board, commission, or office funded by this or any other appropriations Act shall submit annual reports
to the Inspector General or senior ethics official for any entity without an Inspector General, regarding the costs and contracting
procedures related to each conference held
by any such department, agency, board, commission, or office during fiscal year 2026 for
which the cost to the United States Government was more than $100,000.
(b) Each report submitted shall include, for
each conference described in subsection (a)
held during the applicable period—
(1) a description of its purpose;
(2) the number of participants attending;
(3) a detailed statement of the costs to the
United States Government, including—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H759

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(A) the cost of any food or beverages;
(B) the cost of any audio-visual services;
(C) the cost of employee or contractor
travel to and from the conference; and
(D) a discussion of the methodology used
to determine which costs relate to the conference; and
(4) a description of the contracting procedures used including—
(A) whether contracts were awarded on a
competitive basis; and
(B) a discussion of any cost comparison
conducted by the departmental component
or office in evaluating potential contractors
for the conference.
(c) Within 15 days after the end of a quarter, the head of any such department, agency, board, commission, or office shall notify
the Inspector General or senior ethics official for any entity without an Inspector General, of the date, location, and number of employees attending a conference held by any
Executive branch department, agency, board,
commission, or office funded by this or any
other appropriations Act during fiscal year
2026 for which the cost to the United States
Government was more than $20,000.
(d) A grant or contract funded by amounts
appropriated by this or any other appropriations Act may not be used for the purpose of
defraying the costs of a conference described
in subsection (c) that is not directly and programmatically related to the purpose for
which the grant or contract was awarded,
such as a conference held in connection with
planning, training, assessment, review, or
other routine purposes related to a project
funded by the grant or contract.
(e) None of the funds made available in this
or any other appropriations Act may be used
for travel and conference activities that are
not in compliance with Office of Management and Budget Memorandum M–12–12
dated May 11, 2012 or any subsequent revisions to that memorandum.
SEC. 739. None of the funds made available
in this or any other appropriations Act may
be used to increase, eliminate, or reduce
funding for a program, project, or activity as
proposed in the President’s budget request
for a fiscal year until such proposed change
is subsequently enacted in an appropriation
Act, or unless such change is made pursuant
to the reprogramming or transfer provisions
of this or any other appropriations Act.
SEC. 740. None of the funds made available
by this or any other Act may be used to implement, administer, enforce, or apply the
rule entitled ‘‘Competitive Area’’ published
by the Office of Personnel Management in
the Federal Register on April 15, 2008 (73 Fed.
Reg. 20180 et seq.).
SEC. 741. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this or any
other Act may be used to begin or announce
a study or public-private competition regarding the conversion to contractor performance of any function performed by Federal employees pursuant to Office of Management and Budget Circular A–76 or any other
administrative regulation, directive, or policy.
SEC. 742. (a) None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this or any
other Act may be available for a contract,
grant, or cooperative agreement with an entity that requires employees or contractors
of such entity seeking to report fraud, waste,
or abuse to sign internal confidentiality
agreements or statements prohibiting or
otherwise restricting such employees or contractors from lawfully reporting such waste,
fraud, or abuse to a designated investigative
or law enforcement representative of a Federal department or agency authorized to receive such information.
(b) The limitation in subsection (a) shall
not contravene requirements applicable to

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Standard Form 312, Form 4414, or any other
form issued by a Federal department or
agency governing the nondisclosure of classified information.
SEC. 743. (a) No funds appropriated in this
or any other Act may be used to implement
or enforce the agreements in Standard
Forms 312 and 4414 of the Government or any
other nondisclosure policy, form, or agreement if such policy, form, or agreement does
not contain the following provisions: ‘‘These
provisions are consistent with and do not supersede, conflict with, or otherwise alter the
employee obligations, rights, or liabilities
created by existing statute or Executive
order relating to (1) classified information,
(2) communications to Congress, (3) the reporting to an Inspector General or the Office
of Special Counsel of a violation of any law,
rule, or regulation, or mismanagement, a
gross waste of funds, an abuse of authority,
or a substantial and specific danger to public
health or safety, or (4) any other whistleblower protection. The definitions, requirements, obligations, rights, sanctions, and liabilities created by controlling Executive orders and statutory provisions are incorporated into this agreement and are controlling.’’: Provided, That notwithstanding the
preceding provision of this section, a nondisclosure policy form or agreement that is
to be executed by a person connected with
the conduct of an intelligence or intelligence-related activity, other than an employee or officer of the United States Government, may contain provisions appropriate
to the particular activity for which such document is to be used. Such form or agreement
shall, at a minimum, require that the person
will not disclose any classified information
received in the course of such activity unless
specifically authorized to do so by the
United States Government. Such nondisclosure forms shall also make it clear that they
do not bar disclosures to Congress, or to an
authorized official of an executive agency or
the Department of Justice, that are essential
to reporting a substantial violation of law.
(b) A nondisclosure agreement may continue to be implemented and enforced notwithstanding subsection (a) if it complies
with the requirements for such agreement
that were in effect when the agreement was
entered into.
(c) No funds appropriated in this or any
other Act may be used to implement or enforce any agreement entered into during fiscal year 2014 which does not contain substantially similar language to that required in
subsection (a).
SEC. 744. None of the funds made available
by this or any other Act may be used to
enter into a contract, memorandum of understanding, or cooperative agreement with,
make a grant to, or provide a loan or loan
guarantee to, any corporation that has any
unpaid Federal tax liability that has been assessed, for which all judicial and administrative remedies have been exhausted or have
lapsed, and that is not being paid in a timely
manner pursuant to an agreement with the
authority responsible for collecting the tax
liability, where the awarding agency is
aware of the unpaid tax liability, unless a
Federal agency has considered suspension or
debarment of the corporation and has made
a determination that this further action is
not necessary to protect the interests of the
Government.
SEC. 745. None of the funds made available
by this or any other Act may be used to
enter into a contract, memorandum of understanding, or cooperative agreement with,
make a grant to, or provide a loan or loan
guarantee to, any corporation that was convicted of a felony criminal violation under
any Federal law within the preceding 24
months, where the awarding agency is aware

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H760

of the conviction, unless a Federal agency
has considered suspension or debarment of
the corporation and has made a determination that this further action is not necessary
to protect the interests of the Government.
SEC. 746. (a) During fiscal year 2026, on the
date on which a request is made for a transfer of funds in accordance with section 1017
of Public Law 111–203, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection shall notify the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate, the Committee on Financial Services of the House of
Representatives, and the Committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the
Senate of such request.
(b) Any notification required by this section shall be made available on the Bureau’s
public website.
SEC. 747. (a) Notwithstanding any official
rate adjusted under section 104 of title 3,
United States Code, the rate payable to the
Vice President during calendar year 2026
shall be the rate payable to the Vice President on December 31, 2025, by operation of
section 747 of division B of Public Law 118–47,
as continued in effect and modified by section 1605 of title VI of division A of Public
Law 119–4 (as continued in effect and modified by division A of Public Law 119–37).
(b) Notwithstanding any official rate adjusted under section 5318 of title 5, United
States Code, or any other provision of law,
the payable rate during calendar year 2026
for an employee serving in an Executive
Schedule position, or in a position for which
the rate of pay is fixed by statute at an Executive Schedule rate, shall be the rate payable for the applicable Executive Schedule
level on December 31, 2025, by operation of
section 747 of division B of Public Law 118–47,
as continued in effect and modified by section 1605 of title VI of division A of Public
Law 119–4 (as continued in effect and modified by division A of Public Law 119–37).
(c) Notwithstanding section 401 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (Public Law 96–465)
or any other provision of law, a chief of mission or ambassador at large is subject to subsection (b) in the same manner as other employees who are paid at an Executive Schedule rate.
(d)(1) This subsection applies to—
(A) a noncareer appointee in the Senior Executive Service paid a rate of basic pay at or
above the official rate for level IV of the Executive Schedule; or
(B) a limited term appointee or limited
emergency appointee in the Senior Executive Service serving under a political appointment and paid a rate of basic pay at or
above the official rate for level IV of the Executive Schedule.
(2) Notwithstanding sections 5382 and 5383
of title 5, United States Code, an employee
described in paragraph (1) may not receive a
pay rate increase during calendar year 2026,
except as provided in subsection (i).
(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, any employee paid a rate of basic pay
(including any locality based payments
under section 5304 of title 5, United States
Code, or similar authority) at or above the
official rate for level IV of the Executive
Schedule who serves under a political appointment may not receive a pay rate increase during calendar year 2026, except as
provided in subsection (i). This subsection
does not apply to employees in the General
Schedule pay system or the Foreign Service
pay system, to employees appointed under
section 3161 of title 5, United States Code, or
to employees in another pay system whose
position would be classified at GS–15 or
below if chapter 51 of title 5, United States
Code, applied to them.
(f) Nothing in subsections (b) through (e)
shall prevent employees who do not serve

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

under a political appointment from receiving
pay increases as otherwise provided under
applicable law.
(g) This section does not apply to an individual who makes an election to retain Senior Executive Service basic pay under section 3392(c) of title 5, United States Code, for
such time as that election is in effect.
(h) This section does not apply to an individual who makes an election to retain Senior Foreign Service pay entitlements under
section 302(b) of the Foreign Service Act of
1980 (Public Law 96–465) for such time as that
election is in effect.
(i)
Notwithstanding
subsections
(b)
through (e), an employee in a covered position may receive a pay rate increase upon an
authorized movement to a different covered
position only if that new position has higherlevel duties and a pre-established level or
range of pay higher than the level or range
for the position held immediately before the
movement. Any such increase must be based
on the rates of pay and applicable limitations on payable rates of pay in effect on December 31, 2025, by operation of section 747 of
division B of Public Law 118–47, as continued
in effect and modified by section 1605 of title
VI of division A of Public Law 119–4 (as continued in effect and modified by division A of
Public Law 119–37).
(j) Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, for an individual who is newly appointed
to a covered position during the period of
time subject to this section, the initial pay
rate shall be based on the rates of pay and
applicable limitations on payable rates of
pay in effect on December 31, 2025, by operation of section 747 of division B of Public
Law 118–47, as continued in effect and modified by section 1605 of title VI of division A
of Public Law 119–4 (as continued in effect
and modified by division A of Public Law
119–37).
(k) If an employee affected by this section
is subject to a biweekly pay period that begins in calendar year 2026 but ends in calendar year 2027, the bar on the employee’s
receipt of pay rate increases shall apply
through the end of that pay period.
(l) For the purpose of this section, the
term ‘‘covered position’’ means a position
occupied by an employee whose pay is restricted under this section.
(m) This section takes effect on the first
day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2026.
SEC. 748. In the event of a violation of the
Impoundment Control Act of 1974, the President or the head of the relevant department
or agency, as the case may be, shall report
immediately to the Congress all relevant
facts and a statement of actions taken: Provided, That a copy of each report shall also
be transmitted to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate and the Comptroller General
on the same date the report is transmitted
to the Congress.
SEC. 749. (a) Each department or agency of
the executive branch of the United States
Government shall notify the Committees on
Appropriations and the Budget of the House
of Representatives and the Senate and any
other appropriate congressional committees
if—
(1) an apportionment is not made in the required time period provided in section 1513(b)
of title 31, United States Code;
(2) an approved apportionment received by
the department or agency conditions the
availability of an appropriation on further
action; or
(3) an approved apportionment received by
the department or agency may hinder the
prudent obligation of such appropriation or
the execution of a program, project, or activity by such department or agency.

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(b) Any notification submitted to a congressional committee pursuant to this section shall contain information identifying
the bureau, account name, appropriation
name, and Treasury Appropriation Fund
Symbol or fund account.
SEC. 750. (a) Any non-Federal entity receiving funds provided in this or any other appropriations Act for fiscal year 2026 that are
specified in the disclosure table submitted in
compliance with clause 9 of rule XXI of the
Rules of the House of Representatives or
Rule XLIV of the Standing Rules of the Senate that is included in the report or explanatory statement accompanying any such Act
shall be deemed to be a recipient of a Federal
award with respect to such funds for purposes of the requirements of 2 CFR 200.334,
regarding records retention, and 2 CFR
200.337, regarding access by the Comptroller
General of the United States.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit, amend, supersede, or restrict
in any manner any requirements otherwise
applicable to non-Federal entities described
in paragraph (1) or any existing authority of
the Comptroller General.
SEC. 751. Notwithstanding section 1346 of
title 31, United States Code, or section 708 of
this Act, funds made available by this or any
other Act to any Federal agency may be used
by that Federal agency for interagency funding for coordination with, participation in,
or recommendations involving, activities of
the U.S. Army Medical Research and Development Command, the Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs and the
National Institutes of Health research programs.
SEC. 752. Notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 1346
and section 708 of this Act, the head of each
Executive department and agency is hereby
authorized to transfer to or reimburse ‘‘General Services Administration, Federal Citizen Services Fund’’ with the approval of the
Director of the Office of Management and
Budget, funds made available for the current
fiscal year by this or any other Act, including rebates from charge card and other contracts: Provided, That these funds, in addition to amounts otherwise available, shall be
administered by the Administrator of General Services to carry out the purposes of the
Federal Citizen Services Fund and to support
Government-wide and other multi-agency financial, information technology, procurement, and other activities, including services authorized by 44 U.S.C. 3604 and enabling
Federal agencies to take advantage of information technology in sharing information:
Provided further, That the total funds transferred or reimbursed shall not exceed
$29,000,000 for such purposes: Provided further,
That the funds transferred to or for reimbursement of ‘‘General Services Administration, Federal Citizen Services Fund’’ during
fiscal year 2026 shall remain available for obligation through September 30, 2027: Provided
further, That not later than 90 days after enactment of this Act, the Administrator of
General Services, in consultation with the
Director of the Office of Management and
Budget, shall submit to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate a detailed spend plan
for the funds to be transferred or reimbursed:
Provided further, That the spend plan shall,
at a minimum, include: (i) the amounts currently in the funds authorized under this section and the estimate of amounts to be
transferred or reimbursed in fiscal year 2026;
(ii) a detailed breakdown of the purposes for
all funds estimated to be transferred or reimbursed pursuant to this section (including
total number of personnel and costs for all
staff whose salaries are provided for by this
section); and (iii) where applicable, a description of the funds intended for use by or for

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

the implementation of specific laws passed
by Congress: Provided further, That no transfers or reimbursements may be made pursuant to this section until 15 days following
notification of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate by the Director of the Office
of Management and Budget.
SEC. 753. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the unobligated balances of
funds made available in division J of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58) to any department or agency
funded by this or any other Act may be
transferred to the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service and the National Marine
Fisheries Service for the costs of carrying
out their responsibilities under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et
seq.) to consult and conference, as required
by section 7 of such Act, in connection with
activities and projects funded by Public Law
117–58: Provided, That such transfers shall
support activities and projects executed by
the department or agency making such
transfer: Provided further, That such transfers shall be approved by the head of such department or agency making such transfer:
Provided further, That each department or
agency shall provide notification to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate no less
than 30 days prior to such transfer: Provided
further, That any such transfers from the Department of Transportation, including from
agencies within the Department of Transportation, shall be from funding provided for
personnel, contracting, and other costs to
administer and oversee grants: Provided further, That amounts transferred pursuant to
this section shall be in addition to amounts
otherwise available for such purposes: Provided further, That the transfer authority
provided in this section shall be in addition
to any other transfer authority provided by
law: Provided further, That amounts transferred pursuant to this section shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in
section 103(b) of division A of Public Law
118–5.
SEC. 754. Except as expressly provided otherwise, any reference to ‘‘this Act’’ contained in any title other than title IV or VIII
shall not apply to such title IV or VIII.
TITLE VIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS—DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 801. There are appropriated from the
applicable funds of the District of Columbia
such sums as may be necessary for making
refunds and for the payment of legal settlements or judgments that have been entered
against the District of Columbia government.
SEC. 802. None of the Federal funds provided in this Act shall be used for publicity
or propaganda purposes or implementation
of any policy including boycott designed to
support or defeat legislation pending before
Congress or any State legislature.
SEC. 803. (a) None of the Federal funds provided under this Act to the agencies funded
by this Act, both Federal and District government agencies, that remain available for
obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026,
or provided from any accounts in the Treasury of the United States derived by the collection of fees available to the agencies funded by this Act, shall be available for obligation or expenditures for an agency through a
reprogramming of funds which—
(1) creates new programs;
(2) eliminates a program, project, or responsibility center;
(3) establishes or changes allocations specifically denied, limited or increased under
this Act;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H761

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(4) increases funds or personnel by any
means for any program, project, or responsibility center for which funds have been denied or restricted;
(5) re-establishes any program or project
previously deferred through reprogramming;
(6) augments any existing program,
project, or responsibility center through a
reprogramming of funds in excess of
$3,000,000 or 10 percent, whichever is less; or
(7) increases by 20 percent or more personnel assigned to a specific program,
project or responsibility center, unless prior
approval is received from the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
(b) The District of Columbia government is
authorized to approve and execute reprogramming and transfer requests of local
funds under this title through November 7,
2026.
SEC. 804. None of the Federal funds provided in this Act may be used by the District
of Columbia to provide for salaries, expenses,
or other costs associated with the offices of
United States Senator or United States Representative under section 4(d) of the District
of Columbia Statehood Constitutional Convention Initiatives of 1979 (D.C. Law 3–171;
D.C. Official Code, sec. 1–123).
SEC. 805. Except as otherwise provided in
this section, none of the funds made available by this Act or by any other Act may be
used to provide any officer or employee of
the District of Columbia with an official vehicle unless the officer or employee uses the
vehicle only in the performance of the officer’s or employee’s official duties. For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘official duties’’ does not include travel between the officer’s or employee’s residence and workplace, except in the case of—
(1) an officer or employee of the Metropolitan Police Department who resides in the
District of Columbia or is otherwise designated by the Chief of the Department;
(2) at the discretion of the Fire Chief, an
officer or employee of the District of Columbia Fire and Emergency Medical Services
Department who resides in the District of
Columbia and is on call 24 hours a day;
(3) at the discretion of the Director of the
Department of Corrections, an officer or employee of the District of Columbia Department of Corrections who resides in the District of Columbia and is on call 24 hours a
day;
(4) at the discretion of the Chief Medical
Examiner, an officer or employee of the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner who resides in the District of Columbia and is on
call 24 hours a day;
(5) at the discretion of the Director of the
Homeland Security and Emergency Management Agency, an officer or employee of the
Homeland Security and Emergency Management Agency who resides in the District of
Columbia and is on call 24 hours a day;
(6) the Mayor of the District of Columbia;
and
(7) the Chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia.
SEC. 806. (a) None of the Federal funds contained in this Act may be used by the District of Columbia Attorney General or any
other officer or entity of the District government to provide assistance for any petition
drive or civil action which seeks to require
Congress to provide for voting representation in Congress for the District of Columbia.
(b) Nothing in this section bars the District of Columbia Attorney General from reviewing or commenting on briefs in private
lawsuits, or from consulting with officials of
the District government regarding such lawsuits.
SEC. 807. None of the Federal funds contained in this Act may be used to distribute

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

any needle or syringe for the purpose of preventing the spread of blood borne pathogens
in any location that has been determined by
the local public health or local law enforcement authorities to be inappropriate for
such distribution.
SEC. 808. Nothing in this Act may be construed to prevent the Council or Mayor of
the District of Columbia from addressing the
issue of the provision of contraceptive coverage by health insurance plans, but it is the
intent of Congress that any legislation enacted on such issue should include a ‘‘conscience clause’’ which provides exceptions
for religious beliefs and moral convictions.
SEC. 809. (a) None of the Federal funds contained in this Act may be used to enact or
carry out any law, rule, or regulation to legalize or otherwise reduce penalties associated with the possession, use, or distribution
of any schedule I substance under the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.)
or any tetrahydrocannabinols derivative.
(b) No funds available for obligation or expenditure by the District of Columbia government under any authority may be used to
enact any law, rule, or regulation to legalize
or otherwise reduce penalties associated
with the possession, use, or distribution of
any schedule I substance under the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.)
or any tetrahydrocannabinols derivative for
recreational purposes.
SEC. 810. No funds available for obligation
or expenditure by the District of Columbia
government under any authority shall be expended for any abortion except where the life
of the mother would be endangered if the
fetus were carried to term or where the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest.
SEC. 811. (a) No later than 30 calendar days
after the date of the enactment of this Act,
the Chief Financial Officer for the District of
Columbia shall submit to the appropriate
committees of Congress, the Mayor, and the
Council of the District of Columbia, a revised appropriated funds operating budget in
the format of the budget that the District of
Columbia government submitted pursuant to
section 442 of the District of Columbia Home
Rule Act (D.C. Official Code, sec. 1–204.42),
for all agencies of the District of Columbia
government for fiscal year 2026 that is in the
total amount of the approved appropriation
and that realigns all budgeted data for personal services and other-than-personal services, respectively, with anticipated actual
expenditures.
(b) This section shall apply only to an
agency for which the Chief Financial Officer
for the District of Columbia certifies that a
reallocation is required to address unanticipated changes in program requirements.
SEC. 812. No later than 30 calendar days
after the date of the enactment of this Act,
the Chief Financial Officer for the District of
Columbia shall submit to the appropriate
committees of Congress, the Mayor, and the
Council for the District of Columbia, a revised appropriated funds operating budget
for the District of Columbia Public Schools
that aligns schools budgets to actual enrollment. The revised appropriated funds budget
shall be in the format of the budget that the
District of Columbia government submitted
pursuant to section 442 of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act (D.C. Official Code,
sec. 1–204.42).
SEC. 813. (a) Amounts appropriated in this
Act as operating funds may be transferred to
the District of Columbia’s enterprise and
capital funds and such amounts, once transferred, shall retain appropriation authority
consistent with the provisions of this Act.
(b) The District of Columbia government is
authorized to reprogram or transfer for operating expenses any local funds transferred or

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H762

reprogrammed in this or the four prior fiscal
years from operating funds to capital funds,
and such amounts, once transferred or reprogrammed, shall retain appropriation authority consistent with the provisions of this
Act.
(c) The District of Columbia government
may not transfer or reprogram for operating
expenses any funds derived from bonds,
notes, or other obligations issued for capital
projects.
SEC. 814. None of the Federal funds appropriated in this Act shall remain available for
obligation beyond the current fiscal year,
nor may any be transferred to other appropriations, unless expressly so provided herein.
SEC. 815. Except as otherwise specifically
provided by law or under this Act, not to exceed 50 percent of unobligated balances remaining available at the end of fiscal year
2026 from appropriations of Federal funds
made available for salaries and expenses for
fiscal year 2026 in this Act, shall remain
available through September 30, 2027, for
each such account for the purposes authorized: Provided, That a request shall be submitted to the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate for approval prior to the expenditure of
such funds: Provided further, That these requests shall be made in compliance with reprogramming guidelines outlined in section
803 of this Act.
SEC. 816. (a)(1) During fiscal year 2027, during a period in which neither a District of
Columbia continuing resolution or a regular
District of Columbia appropriation bill is in
effect, local funds are appropriated in the
amount provided for any project or activity
for which local funds are provided in the Act
referred to in paragraph (2) (subject to any
modifications enacted by the District of Columbia as of the beginning of the period during which this subsection is in effect) at the
rate set forth by such Act.
(2) The Act referred to in this paragraph is
the Act of the Council of the District of Columbia pursuant to which a proposed budget
is approved for fiscal year 2027 which (subject
to the requirements of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act) will constitute the local
portion of the annual budget for the District
of Columbia government for fiscal year 2027
for purposes of section 446 of the District of
Columbia Home Rule Act (sec. 1–204.46, D.C.
Official Code).
(b) Appropriations made by subsection (a)
shall cease to be available—
(1) during any period in which a District of
Columbia continuing resolution for fiscal
year 2027 is in effect; or
(2) upon the enactment into law of the regular District of Columbia appropriation bill
for fiscal year 2027.
(c) An appropriation made by subsection
(a) is provided under the authority and conditions as provided under this Act and shall
be available to the extent and in the manner
that would be provided by this Act.
(d) An appropriation made by subsection
(a) shall cover all obligations or expenditures incurred for such project or activity
during the portion of fiscal year 2027 for
which this section applies to such project or
activity.
(e) This section shall not apply to a project
or activity during any period of fiscal year
2027 if any other provision of law (other than
an authorization of appropriations)—
(1) makes an appropriation, makes funds
available, or grants authority for such
project or activity to continue for such period; or
(2) specifically provides that no appropriation shall be made, no funds shall be made
available, or no authority shall be granted
for such project or activity to continue for
such period.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

(f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect obligations of the government of the District of Columbia mandated
by other law.
SEC. 817. (a) During fiscal year 2027, during
a period in which a continuing resolution is
in effect, including a continuing resolution
that is in effect through the end of the fiscal
year, if the continuing resolution does not
include a provision that, by specific and explicit reference to the District of Columbia,
establishes a specific and separately identified appropriation for the District of Columbia, the District of Columbia is appropriated
and may expend local funds in the amounts
set forth under the heading ‘‘District of Columbia—District of Columbia Funds’’ in the
Act referred to in subsection (b) (subject to
any modifications enacted by the District of
Columbia as of the beginning of the period
during which this section is in effect) for
such programs and activities for which local
funds are provided in such Act at the rates
set forth by such Act.
(b) The Act referred to in subsection (a) is
the Act of the Council of the District of Columbia pursuant to which a proposed budget
is approved for fiscal year 2027 which (subject
to the requirements of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act) will constitute the local
portion of the annual budget for the District
of Columbia government for fiscal year 2027
for purposes of section 446 of the District of
Columbia Home Rule Act (sec. 1–204.46, D.C.
Official Code).
(c) Amounts appropriated by subsection (a)
are provided under the authority and conditions as provided under this Act and shall be
available to the extent and in the manner
that would be provided by this Act.
SEC. 818. (a) Section 244 of the Revised
Statutes of the United States relating to the
District of Columbia (sec. 9–1201.03, D.C. Official Code) does not apply with respect to any
railroads installed pursuant to the Long
Bridge Project.
(b) In this section, the term ‘‘Long Bridge
Project’’ means the project carried out by
the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Virginia to construct a new Long
Bridge adjacent to the existing Long Bridge
over the Potomac River, including related
infrastructure and other related projects, to
expand commuter and regional passenger
rail service and to provide bike and pedestrian access crossings over the Potomac
River.
SEC. 819. Not later than 45 days after the
last day of each quarter, each Federal and
District government agency appropriated
Federal funds in this Act shall submit to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate a quarterly budget report that includes total obligations of the Agency for that quarter for
each Federal funds appropriation provided in
this Act, by the source year of the appropriation.
SEC. 820. The District of Columbia College
Access Act of 1999 (sec. 38–2701 et seq., D.C.
Official Code), is amended—
(1) in section 3—
(A) in subsection (a)(2)(A), by striking
‘‘$10,000’’ and inserting ‘‘$15,000’’;
(B) in subsection (a)(2)(B), by striking
‘‘$50,000’’ and inserting ‘‘$75,000’’; and
(C) in subsection (b)(1)—
(i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘; and’’
and inserting a semicolon;
(ii) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as
subparagraph (C);
(iii) by inserting after subparagraph (A)
the following new subparagraph: ‘‘(B) after
making reductions under subparagraph (A),
ratably reduce the amount of the tuition and
fee payment of each eligible student who receives more than $10,000 for the award year;
and’’; and

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(iv) in subparagraph (C), as so redesignated, by striking ‘‘subparagraph (A)’’ and
inserting ‘‘subparagraph (B)’’; and
(2) in section 5—
(A) in subsection (a)(2)(A), by striking
‘‘$2,500’’ and inserting ‘‘$3,750’’;
(B) in subsection (a)(2)(B), by striking
‘‘$12,500’’ and inserting ‘‘$18,750’’; and
(C) in subsection (b)(1)—
(i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘; and’’
and inserting a semicolon;
(ii) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as
subparagraph (C);
(iii) by inserting after subparagraph (A)
the following new subparagraph: ‘‘(B) after
making reductions under subparagraph (A),
ratably reduce the amount of the tuition and
fee payment of each eligible student who receives more than $2,500 for the award year;
and’’; and
(iv) in subparagraph (C), as so redesignated, by striking ‘‘subparagraph (A)’’ and
inserting ‘‘subparagraph (B)’’.
SEC. 821. Except as expressly provided otherwise, any reference to ‘‘this Act’’ contained in this title or in title IV shall be
treated as referring only to the provisions of
this title or of title IV.
This division may be cited as the ‘‘Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
DIVISION B—NATIONAL SECURITY, DEPARTMENT OF STATE, AND RELATED
PROGRAMS APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
TITLE I
DEPARTMENT OF STATE AND RELATED
PROGRAMS
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
ADMINISTRATION OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
DIPLOMATIC PROGRAMS

For necessary expenses of the Department
of State and the Foreign Service not otherwise provided for, $9,358,236,000, of which
$839,910,000 may remain available until September 30, 2027, and of which up to
$3,758,836,000 may remain available until expended for Worldwide Security Protection:
Provided, That funds made available under
this heading shall be allocated in accordance
with paragraphs (1) through (4), as follows:
(1) HUMAN RESOURCES.—For necessary expenses for training, human resources management, and salaries, including employment without regard to civil service and
classification laws of persons on a temporary
basis (not to exceed $700,000), as authorized
by section 801 of the United States Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948
(62 Stat. 11; Chapter 36), $3,987,233,000, of
which up to $724,204,000 is for Worldwide Security Protection.
(2) OVERSEAS PROGRAMS.—For necessary
expenses for the regional bureaus of the Department of State and overseas activities as
authorized by law, $1,437,707,000.
(3) DIPLOMATIC POLICY AND SUPPORT.—For
necessary expenses for the functional bureaus of the Department of State, including
representation to certain international organizations in which the United States participates pursuant to treaties ratified pursuant
to the advice and consent of the Senate or
specific Acts of Congress, general administration, and arms control, nonproliferation,
and disarmament activities as authorized,
$871,645,000.
(4) SECURITY PROGRAMS.—For necessary expenses for security activities, $3,061,651,000,
of which up to $3,034,632,000 is for Worldwide
Security Protection.
(5) REPROGRAMMING.—Notwithstanding any
other provision of this Act, funds may be reprogrammed within and between paragraphs
(1) through (4) under this heading subject to
section 7015 of this Act.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

CONSULAR AND BORDER SECURITY PROGRAMS

REPRESENTATION EXPENSES

Of the amounts deposited in the Consular
and Border Security Programs account in
this or any prior fiscal year pursuant to section 7069(e) of the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2022 (division K of Public
Law 117–103), $513,000,000 shall be available
until expended for the purposes of such account, including to reduce passport backlogs
and reduce visa wait times: Provided, That
the Secretary of State may by regulation authorize State officials or the United States
Postal Service to collect and retain the execution fee for each application for a passport
accepted by such officials or by that Service.

For representation expenses as authorized,
$10,000,000.

CAPITAL INVESTMENT FUND

For necessary expenses of the Capital Investment Fund, as authorized, $399,700,000, to
remain available until expended.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General of the Department of State
as established by section 402(a)(1) of title 5,
United States Code, $135,550,000, of which
$20,333,000 may remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That of the funds
appropriated under this heading, up to
$6,000,000 may remain available until September 30, 2026 for the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction: Provided further, That funds appropriated under
this heading are made available notwithstanding section 209(a)(1) of the Foreign
Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 3929(a)(1)), as it
relates to post inspections.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL EXCHANGE
PROGRAMS

For necessary expenses of educational and
cultural exchange programs, as authorized,
$667,000,000, to remain available until expended, of which not less than $273,410,000
shall be for the Fulbright Program, not less
than $16,150,000 shall be for the Benjamin
Gilman International Scholarships Program,
not less than $99,750,000 shall be for the
International Visitor Leadership Program,
and not less than $35,630,000 shall be for the
Young Leaders Initiatives: Provided, That
fees or other payments received from, or in
connection with, English teaching, educational advising and counseling programs,
and exchange visitor programs as authorized
may be credited to this account, to remain
available until expended: Provided further,
That a portion of the Fulbright awards from
the Eurasia and Central Asia regions shall be
designated as Edmund S. Muskie Fellowships, following consultation with the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further,
That funds appropriated under this heading
that are made available for the Benjamin
Gilman International Scholarships Program
shall also be made available for the John S.
McCain Scholars Program, pursuant to section 7075 of the Department of State, Foreign
Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2019 (division F of Public Law
116–6): Provided further, That not later than
30 days after the date of enactment of this
Act, the Secretary of State shall consult
with the Committees on Appropriations on
the allocation of funds made available under
this heading by program, project, and activity: Provided further, That any substantive
modifications from the prior fiscal year to
programs funded under this heading in this
Act, including program consolidation and
closures, changes to eligibility criteria and
geographic scope, and implementing partners, shall be subject to prior consultation
with, and the regular notification procedures
of, the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That funds appropriated under
this heading shall be apportioned to the Department of State not later than 60 days
after the date of enactment of this Act.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H763

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PROTECTION OF FOREIGN MISSIONS AND
OFFICIALS

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided, to enable the Secretary of State to
provide for extraordinary protective services, as authorized, $30,890,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027.
EMBASSY SECURITY, CONSTRUCTION, AND
MAINTENANCE

For necessary expenses for carrying out
the Foreign Service Buildings Act of 1926 (22
U.S.C. 292 et seq.), preserving, maintaining,
repairing, and planning for real property
that are owned or leased by the Department
of State, and renovating, in addition to funds
otherwise available, the Harry S Truman
Building, $812,836,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2030, of which not to exceed $25,000 may be used for overseas representation expenses as authorized: Provided,
That none of the funds appropriated in this
paragraph shall be available for acquisition
of furniture, furnishings, or generators for
other departments and agencies of the
United States Government.
In addition, for the costs of worldwide security upgrades, acquisition, and construction as authorized, $1,199,856,000, to remain
available until expended.
EMERGENCIES IN THE DIPLOMATIC AND
CONSULAR SERVICE

For necessary expenses to enable the Secretary of State to meet unforeseen emergencies arising in the Diplomatic and Consular Service, as authorized, $8,885,000, to remain available until expended, of which not
to exceed $1,000,000 may be transferred to,
and merged with, funds appropriated by this
Act under the heading ‘‘Repatriation Loans
Program Account’’.
REPATRIATION LOANS PROGRAM ACCOUNT

For the cost of direct loans, $2,550,000, as
authorized: Provided, That such costs, including the cost of modifying such loans, shall be
as defined in section 502 of the Congressional
Budget Act of 1974: Provided further, That
such funds are available to subsidize gross
obligations for the principal amount of direct loans not to exceed $5,520,137.
PAYMENT TO THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE IN
TAIWAN

For necessary expenses to carry out the
Taiwan Relations Act (Public Law 96–8),
$35,964,000.
INTERNATIONAL CENTER, WASHINGTON,
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

Not to exceed $1,917,178 shall be derived
from fees collected from other executive
agencies for lease or use of facilities at the
International Center in accordance with section 4 of the International Center Act (Public Law 90–553), and, in addition, as authorized by section 5 of such Act, $745,000, to be
derived from the reserve authorized by such
section, to be used for the purposes set out in
that section.
PAYMENT TO THE FOREIGN SERVICE
RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY FUND

For payment to the Foreign Service Retirement and Disability Fund, as authorized,
$60,000,000.
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
CONTRIBUTIONS TO INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, to meet annual obligations of
membership in international multilateral organizations, pursuant to treaties ratified
pursuant to the advice and consent of the
Senate, conventions, or specific Acts of Con-

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

gress, $1,389,152,000, of which $96,240,000 may
remain available until September 30, 2027:
Provided, That the Secretary of State shall,
at the time of the submission of the President’s budget to Congress under section
1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, transmit to the Committees on Appropriations
the most recent biennial budget prepared by
the United Nations for the operations of the
United Nations: Provided further, That the
Secretary of State shall notify the Committees on Appropriations at least 15 days in advance (or in an emergency, as far in advance
as is practicable) of any United Nations action to increase funding for any United Nations program without identifying an offsetting decrease elsewhere in the United Nations budget: Provided further, That any payment of arrearages under this heading shall
be directed to activities that are mutually
agreed upon by the United States and the respective international organization and shall
be subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations:
Provided further, That none of the funds appropriated under this heading shall be available for a United States contribution to an
international organization for the United
States share of interest costs made known to
the United States Government by such organization for loans incurred on or after October 1, 1984, through external borrowings.
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL
PEACEKEEPING ACTIVITIES

For necessary expenses to pay assessed and
other expenses of international peacekeeping
activities directed to the maintenance or
restoration of international peace and security, $1,230,667,000, of which $615,334,000 may
remain available until September 30, 2027:
Provided, That none of the funds made available by this Act shall be obligated or expended for any new or expanded United Nations peacekeeping mission unless, at least
15 days in advance of voting for such mission
in the United Nations Security Council (or in
an emergency as far in advance as is practicable), the Committees on Appropriations
are notified of: (1) the estimated cost and duration of the mission, the objectives of the
mission, the national interest that will be
served, and the exit strategy; and (2) the
sources
of
funds,
including
any
reprogrammings or transfers, that will be
used to pay the cost of the new or expanded
mission, and the estimated cost in future fiscal years: Provided further, That none of the
funds appropriated under this heading may
be made available for obligation unless the
Secretary of State certifies and reports to
the Committees on Appropriations on a
peacekeeping mission-by-mission basis that
the United Nations is implementing effective
policies and procedures to prevent United
Nations employees, contractor personnel,
and peacekeeping troops serving in such mission from trafficking in persons, exploiting
victims of trafficking, or committing acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse or other violations of human rights, and to hold accountable individuals who engage in such acts
while participating in such mission, including prosecution in their home countries and
making information about such prosecutions
publicly available on the website of the
United Nations: Provided further, That the
Secretary of State shall work with the
United Nations and foreign governments
contributing peacekeeping troops to implement effective vetting procedures to ensure
that such troops have not violated human
rights: Provided further, That funds shall be
available for peacekeeping expenses unless
the Secretary of State determines that
United States manufacturers and suppliers
are not being given opportunities to provide
equipment, services, and material for United

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H764

Nations peacekeeping activities equal to
those being given to foreign manufacturers
and suppliers: Provided further, That none of
the funds appropriated or otherwise made
available under this heading may be used for
any United Nations peacekeeping mission
that will involve United States Armed
Forces under the command or operational
control of a foreign national, unless the
President’s military advisors have submitted
to the President a recommendation that
such involvement is in the national interest
of the United States and the President has
submitted to Congress such a recommendation: Provided further, That any payment of
arrearages with funds appropriated by this
Act shall be subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSIONS
For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, to meet obligations of the United
States arising under treaties, or specific
Acts of Congress, as follows:
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARY AND WATER
COMMISSION, UNITED STATES AND MEXICO

For necessary expenses for the United
States Section of the International Boundary and Water Commission, United States
and Mexico, and to comply with laws applicable to the United States Section, including
not to exceed $6,000 for representation expenses, as follows:
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For salaries and expenses, not otherwise
provided for, $67,300,000, of which $10,095,000
may remain available until September 30,
2027.
In addition, for expenses necessary to
carry out paragraph (3) of section 5602(b) of
the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2024 (Public Law 118–31),
$12,500,000, to remain available until expended.
CONSTRUCTION

For detailed plan preparation and construction of authorized projects, $78,000,000,
to remain available until expended, as authorized: Provided, That the operating plan
required by section 7062(a) of this Act shall
include, for each construction project, the
expected scope, timeline, and total cost, including out-year cost estimates for construction and operations and maintenance requirements: Provided further, That of the
funds appropriated under this heading in this
Act and prior Acts making appropriations
for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs for the United
States Section, up to $5,000,000 may be transferred to, and merged with, funds appropriated under the heading ‘‘Salaries and Expenses’’ to carry out the purposes of the
United States Section, which shall be subject
to prior consultation with, and the regular
notification procedures of, the Committees
on Appropriations: Provided further, That
such transfer authority is in addition to any
other transfer authority provided in this
Act.
AMERICAN SECTIONS, INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSIONS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided, for the International Joint Commission and the International Boundary Commission, United States and Canada, as authorized by treaties between the United
States and Canada or Great Britain, and for
grant programs of the North American Development Bank, including technical assistance grants and the Community Assistance
Program, $18,204,000: Provided, That of the
amount provided under this heading for the
International Joint Commission, up to
$1,250,000 may remain available until Sep-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

tember 30, 2027, and up to $9,000 may be made
available for representation expenses: Provided further, That of the amount provided
under this heading for the International
Boundary Commission, up to $1,000 may be
made available for representation expenses.
INTERNATIONAL FISHERIES COMMISSIONS

For necessary expenses for international
fisheries commissions, not otherwise provided for, as authorized by law, $68,570,000:
Provided, That the United States share of
such expenses may be advanced to the respective commissions pursuant to section
3324 of title 31, United States Code.
RELATED AGENCY
UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR GLOBAL MEDIA
INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING OPERATIONS

For necessary expenses to enable the
United States Agency for Global Media
(USAGM), as authorized, to carry out international communication activities, and to
make and supervise grants for radio, Internet, and television broadcasting to the Middle East, $643,000,000: Provided, That in addition to amounts otherwise available for such
purposes, up to $72,720,000 of the amount appropriated under this heading may remain
available until expended for satellite transmissions, global network distribution, and
Internet freedom programs: Provided further,
That of the total amount appropriated under
this heading, not to exceed $35,000 may be
used for representation expenses, of which
$10,000 may be used for such expenses within
the United States as authorized, and not to
exceed $30,000 may be used for representation
expenses of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Provided further, That of the funds appropriated under this heading, not less than
$30,000,000 shall be made available for the Office of Cuba Broadcasting (OCB): Provided
further, That funds made available pursuant
to the previous proviso shall be made available for medium- and short-wave broadcasting at not less than the fiscal year 2024
level and in a manner able to reach all provinces in Cuba with daily programming: Provided further, That funds appropriated under
this heading shall be allocated in accordance
with the table included under this heading in
the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act): Provided further, That
notwithstanding the previous proviso, funds
may be reprogrammed within and between
amounts designated in such table, subject to
the regular notification procedures of the
Committees on Appropriations, except that
no such reprogramming may reduce a designated amount by more than 10 percent:
Provided further, That if a subsequent Act of
Congress results in a reorganization or restructuring of the programs or authorities
funded under this heading such that the allocations set forth in such table can no longer
be applied as written, such allocations shall
be available for reprogramming among such
programs or authorities, consistent with
such Act, subject to prior consultation with,
and the regular notification procedures of,
the Committees on Appropriations: Provided
further, That the USAGM Chief Executive Officer shall notify the Committees on Appropriations within 15 days of any determination by the USAGM that any of its broadcast
entities, including its grantee organizations,
provides an open platform for international
terrorists or those who support international
terrorism: Provided further, That in addition
to funds made available under this heading,
and notwithstanding any other provision of
law, up to $5,000,000 in receipts from advertising and revenue from business ventures,
up to $500,000 in receipts from cooperating
international organizations, and up to
$1,000,000 in receipts from privatization ef-

PO 00000

Frm 00044

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

forts of the Voice of America and the International Broadcasting Bureau, shall remain
available until expended for carrying out authorized purposes: Provided further, That significant modifications to USAGM broadcast
hours previously justified to Congress, including changes to transmission platforms
(shortwave, medium wave, satellite, Internet, and television), for all USAGM language
services shall be subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on
Appropriations.
BROADCASTING CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS

For the purchase, rent, construction, repair, preservation, and improvement of facilities for radio, television, and digital
transmission and reception; the purchase,
rent, and installation of necessary equipment for radio, television, and digital transmission and reception, including to Cuba, as
authorized; and physical security worldwide,
in addition to amounts otherwise available
for such purposes, $9,700,000, to remain available until expended, as authorized.
RELATED PROGRAMS
THE ASIA FOUNDATION
For a grant to The Asia Foundation, as authorized by The Asia Foundation Act (22
U.S.C. 4402), $20,000,000, to remain available
until expended: Provided, That funds appropriated under this heading for such grant
shall be apportioned to the Foundation not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF PEACE
For necessary expenses of the United
States Institute of Peace, as authorized by
the United States Institute of Peace Act (22
U.S.C. 4601 et seq.), $20,000,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, which
shall not be used for construction activities.
CENTER FOR MIDDLE EASTERN-WESTERN
DIALOGUE TRUST FUND
For necessary expenses of the Center for
Middle Eastern-Western Dialogue Trust
Fund, as authorized by section 633 of the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State,
the Judiciary, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2004 (22 U.S.C. 2078), the total
amount of the interest and earnings accruing
to such Fund on or before September 30, 2026,
to remain available until expended.
EISENHOWER EXCHANGE FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
For necessary expenses of Eisenhower Exchange Fellowships, Incorporated, as authorized by sections 4 and 5 of the Eisenhower
Exchange Fellowship Act of 1990 (20 U.S.C.
5204–5205), all interest and earnings accruing
to the Eisenhower Exchange Fellowship Program Trust Fund on or before September 30,
2026, to remain available until expended: Provided, That none of the funds appropriated
herein shall be used to pay any salary or
other compensation, or to enter into any
contract providing for the payment thereof,
in excess of the rate authorized by section
5376 of title 5, United States Code; or for purposes which are not in accordance with section 200 of title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations, including the restrictions on compensation for personal services.
ISRAELI ARAB SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM
For necessary expenses of the Israeli Arab
Scholarship Program, as authorized by section 214 of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993 (22 U.S.C.
2452 note), all interest and earnings accruing
to the Israeli Arab Scholarship Fund on or
before September 30, 2026, to remain available until expended.
EAST-WEST CENTER
To enable the Secretary of State to provide
for carrying out the provisions of the Center
for Cultural and Technical Interchange Between East and West Act of 1960, by grant to

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

the Center for Cultural and Technical Interchange Between East and West in the State
of Hawaii, $22,000,000: Provided, That funds
appropriated under this heading for such
grant shall be apportioned to the Center not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR DEMOCRACY
For grants made by the Department of
State to the National Endowment for Democracy, as authorized by the National Endowment for Democracy Act (22 U.S.C. 4412),
$315,000,000, to remain available until expended, of which $210,316,000 shall be allocated in the traditional and customary manner, including for the core institutes, and
$104,684,000 shall be for democracy programs:
Provided, That the requirements of section
7062(a) of this Act shall not apply to funds
made available under this heading: Provided
further, That funds appropriated under this
heading shall be apportioned to the Endowment not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of this Act.
OTHER COMMISSIONS
COMMISSION FOR THE PRESERVATION OF
AMERICA’S HERITAGE ABROAD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the Commission
for the Preservation of America’s Heritage
Abroad, as authorized by chapter 3123 of title
54, United States Code, $770,000, of which
$116,000 may remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That the Commission may procure temporary, intermittent,
and other services notwithstanding paragraph (3) of section 312304(b) of such chapter:
Provided further, That such authority shall
terminate on October 1, 2026: Provided further, That the Commission shall notify the
Committees on Appropriations prior to exercising such authority.
UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON
INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the United
States Commission on International Religious Freedom, as authorized by title II of
the International Religious Freedom Act of
1998 (22 U.S.C. 6431 et seq.), $4,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, including not more than $4,000 for representation expenses.
COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN
EUROPE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Commission
on Security and Cooperation in Europe, as
authorized by Public Law 94–304 (22 U.S.C.
3001 et seq.), $3,059,000, including not more
than $6,000 for representation expenses, to
remain available until September 30, 2027.
CONGRESSIONAL-EXECUTIVE COMMISSION ON
THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Congressional-Executive Commission on the People’s
Republic of China, as authorized by title III
of the U.S.-China Relations Act of 2000 (22
U.S.C. 6911 et seq.), $2,300,000, including not
more than $3,000 for representation expenses,
to remain available until September 30, 2027.
UNITED STATES-CHINA ECONOMIC AND
SECURITY REVIEW COMMISSION
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the United
States-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, as authorized by section 1238 of
the Floyd D. Spence National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001 (22
U.S.C. 7002), $4,000,000, including not more
than $4,000 for representation expenses, to
remain available until September 30, 2027:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H765

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Provided, That the authorities, requirements,
limitations, and conditions contained in the
second through fifth provisos under this
heading in the Department of State, Foreign
Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2010 (division F of Public Law
111–117) shall continue in effect during fiscal
year 2026 and shall apply to funds appropriated under this heading.
HOUSE DEMOCRACY PARTNERSHIP
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the House Democracy Partnership established pursuant to
House Resolution 24, One Hundred Tenth
Congress, as carried forward by House Resolution 5, One Hundred Nineteenth Congress,
$2,300,000: Provided, That funds appropriated
under this heading shall be apportioned to
the House Democracy Partnership not later
than 60 days after the date of enactment of
this Act.
TITLE II
ADMINISTRATION OF ASSISTANCE
FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT
OPERATING EXPENSES

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of section 667 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, $111,988,000.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For the necessary expenses of the Office of
Inspector General with continued oversight
jurisdiction for foreign assistance programs
administered by the agency primarily responsible for administering part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151 et
seq.) and whose oversight activities were
funded under title II of prior Acts making
appropriations for the Department of State,
foreign operations, and related programs,
$62,500,000, of which $9,375,000 may remain
available until September 30, 2027, in accordance with section 409 of title 5, United States
Code, section 614(f) of the Millennium Challenge Act of 2003 (22 U.S.C. 7713(f)) and section 8A(a) of the Inspector General Act of
1978 (as enacted into law by section 1000(a) of
Public Law 106–113), as well as section 401 of
the Inter-American Foundation Act (22
U.S.C. 290f), and section 505 of the African
Development Foundation Act (22 U.S.C.
290h).
TITLE III
BILATERAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT
For necessary expenses to enable the President to carry out the provisions of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, and for other
purposes, as follows:
GLOBAL HEALTH PROGRAMS

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of chapters 1 and 10 of part I of
the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, for global
health activities, in addition to funds otherwise
available
for
such
purposes,
$3,531,975,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, and which shall be apportioned directly to the Department of State:
Provided, That this amount shall be made
available for training, equipment, and technical assistance to build the capacity of public health institutions and organizations in
developing countries, and for such activities
as: (1) child survival and maternal health
programs; (2) immunization and oral rehydration programs; (3) other health, nutrition, water and sanitation programs which
directly address the needs of mothers and
children, and related education programs; (4)
assistance for children displaced or orphaned
by causes other than AIDS; (5) programs for
the prevention, treatment, control of, and
research on HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, polio,
malaria, and other infectious diseases including neglected tropical diseases, and for

PO 00000

Frm 00045

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

assistance to communities severely affected
by HIV/AIDS, including children infected or
affected by AIDS; (6) disaster preparedness
training for health crises; (7) programs to
prevent, prepare for, and respond to unanticipated and emerging global health
threats, including zoonotic diseases; and (8)
family planning/reproductive health: Provided further, That funds appropriated under
this paragraph may be made available for
United States contributions to The GAVI Alliance and to a multilateral vaccine development partnership to support epidemic preparedness: Provided further, That funds made
available pursuant to the previous proviso
shall remain available until September 30,
2026: Provided further, That none of the funds
made available in this Act nor any unobligated balances from prior appropriations
Acts may be made available to any organization or program which, as determined by the
President of the United States, supports or
participates in the management of a program of coercive abortion or involuntary
sterilization: Provided further, That any determination made under the previous proviso
must be made not later than 6 months after
the date of enactment of this Act, and must
be accompanied by the evidence and criteria
utilized to make the determination: Provided
further, That none of the funds made available under this Act may be used to pay for
the performance of abortion as a method of
family planning or to motivate or coerce any
person to practice abortions: Provided further, That nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed to alter any existing statutory
prohibitions against abortion under section
104 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961: Provided further, That none of the funds made
available under this Act may be used to
lobby for or against abortion: Provided further, That in order to reduce reliance on
abortion in developing nations, funds shall
be available only to voluntary family planning projects which offer, either directly or
through referral to, or information about access to, a broad range of family planning
methods and services, and that any such voluntary family planning project shall meet
the following requirements: (1) service providers or referral agents in the project shall
not implement or be subject to quotas, or
other numerical targets, of total number of
births, number of family planning acceptors,
or acceptors of a particular method of family
planning (this provision shall not be construed to include the use of quantitative estimates or indicators for budgeting and planning purposes); (2) the project shall not include payment of incentives, bribes, gratuities, or financial reward to: (A) an individual in exchange for becoming a family
planning acceptor; or (B) program personnel
for achieving a numerical target or quota of
total number of births, number of family
planning acceptors, or acceptors of a particular method of family planning; (3) the
project shall not deny any right or benefit,
including the right of access to participate
in any program of general welfare or the
right of access to health care, as a consequence of any individual’s decision not to
accept family planning services; (4) the
project shall provide family planning acceptors comprehensible information on the
health benefits and risks of the method chosen, including those conditions that might
render the use of the method inadvisable and
those adverse side effects known to be consequent to the use of the method; and (5) the
project shall ensure that experimental contraceptive drugs and devices and medical
procedures are provided only in the context
of a scientific study in which participants
are advised of potential risks and benefits;
and, not less than 60 days after the date on
which the Secretary of State determines

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H766

that there has been a violation of the requirements contained in paragraph (1), (2),
(3), or (5) of this proviso, or a pattern or
practice of violations of the requirements
contained in paragraph (4) of this proviso,
the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a report containing a
description of such violation and the corrective action taken by the Department: Provided further, That in awarding grants for
natural family planning under section 104 of
the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 no applicant shall be discriminated against because
of such applicant’s religious or conscientious
commitment to offer only natural family
planning; and, additionally, all such applicants shall comply with the requirements of
the previous proviso: Provided further, That
for purposes of this Act or any other Act authorizing or appropriating funds for the Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs, the term ‘‘motivate’’, as it
relates to family planning assistance, shall
not be construed to prohibit the provision,
consistent with local law, of information or
counseling about all pregnancy options: Provided further, That information provided
about the use of condoms as part of projects
or activities that are funded from amounts
appropriated by this Act shall be medically
accurate and shall include the public health
benefits and failure rates of such use.
In addition, for necessary expenses to
carry out the provisions of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 for the prevention, treatment, and control of, and research on, HIV/
AIDS, $5,883,800,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2030, which shall be apportioned directly to the Department of State:
Provided, That funds appropriated under this
paragraph may be made available, notwithstanding any other provision of law, except
for the United States Leadership Against
HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Act of
2003 (Public Law 108–25), for a United States
contribution to the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (Global
Fund): Provided further, That the amount of
such contribution shall be $1,250,000,000: Provided further, That of the funds appropriated
under this paragraph, up to $22,000,000 may
be made available, in addition to amounts
otherwise available for such purposes, for administrative expenses of the United States
Global AIDS Coordinator.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE

For necessary expenses to enable the Secretary of State to carry out the provisions of
section 491 of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961 for international disaster relief, rehabilitation, and reconstruction assistance;
section 2(a) and (b) of the Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962 (22 U.S.C. 2601),
and other activities to meet refugee and migration needs; salaries and expenses of personnel and dependents as authorized by the
Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 3901 et
seq.); allowances as authorized by sections
5921 through 5925 of title 5, United States
Code; purchase and hire of passenger motor
vehicles; and services as authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code,
$5,400,000,000, to remain available until expended, of which not less than $6,500,000 shall
be made available for refugees resettling in
Israel: Provided, That consistent with section
491(d) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,
funds made available under this heading
shall be prioritized to reach those most in
need of relief and rehabilitation because of
natural and manmade disasters: Provided further, That of the funds appropriated under
this paragraph, not less than $2,970,000,000
shall be made available to carry out the provisions of section 491 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961: Provided further, That funds
appropriated under this heading shall be ap-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

portioned to the Department of State not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act: Provided further, That not
later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act and at the start of each
quarter thereafter until September 30, 2027,
the Secretary of State shall submit a spend
plan to the Committees on Appropriations
detailing the planned uses of funds, obligations, and disbursements as described under
this heading in the explanatory statement
described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act).
UNITED STATES EMERGENCY REFUGEE AND
MIGRATION ASSISTANCE FUND

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of section 2(c) of the Migration
and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962 (22 U.S.C.
2601(c)), $100,000,000, to remain available
until expended: Provided, That amounts
made available by this Act that are in excess
of the limitation contained in paragraph (2)
of such section shall be transferred to, and
merged with, funds made available by this
Act under the heading ‘‘International Humanitarian Assistance’’.
NATIONAL SECURITY INVESTMENT PROGRAMS

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of sections 103, 105, 106, 214, and
sections 251 through 255, and chapter 10 of
part I and chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961, the FREEDOM Support Act (Public Law 102–511), and the Support for East European Democracy (SEED)
Act of 1989 (Public Law 101–179), $6,766,874,000,
of which not less than fifteen percent of
amounts made available under this heading
shall be made available for programs in Africa, to remain available until September 30,
2027: Provided, That funds appropriated under
this heading shall be apportioned to the Department of State not later than 60 days
after the date of enactment of this Act.
DEMOCRACY FUND

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961 for the promotion of democracy globally, including to carry out the purposes of
section 502(b)(3) and (5) of Public Law 98–164
(22 U.S.C. 4411), $205,200,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, which shall be
made available for the Human Rights and
Democracy Fund of the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Department
of State: Provided, That funds appropriated
under this heading that are made available
to the National Endowment for Democracy
and its core institutes are in addition to
amounts otherwise made available by this
Act for such purposes: Provided further, That
the Assistant Secretary for Democracy,
Human Rights, and Labor, Department of
State, shall consult with the Committees on
Appropriations prior to the initial obligation
of funds appropriated under this paragraph:
Provided further, That funds appropriated
under this heading shall be apportioned to
the Department of State not later than 60
days after the date of enactment of this Act.
INDEPENDENT AGENCIES

ther, That funds transferred pursuant to the
previous proviso may not be derived from
amounts made available for Peace Corps
overseas operations: Provided further, That of
the funds appropriated under this heading,
not to exceed $104,000 may be available for
representation expenses, of which not to exceed $4,000 may be made available for entertainment expenses: Provided further, That in
addition to the requirements under section
7015(a) of this Act, the Peace Corps shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations
prior to any decision to open, close, or suspend a domestic or overseas office or a country program unless there is a substantial
risk to volunteers or other Peace Corps personnel: Provided further, That none of the
funds appropriated under this heading shall
be used to pay for abortions: Provided further,
That notwithstanding the previous proviso,
section 614 of division E of Public Law 113–76
shall apply to funds appropriated under this
heading.
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of the Millennium Challenge Act
of 2003 (22 U.S.C. 7701 et seq.) (MCA),
$830,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That section 605(e) of the
MCA (22 U.S.C. 7704(e)) shall apply to funds
appropriated under this heading: Provided
further, That funds appropriated under this
heading may be made available for a Millennium Challenge Compact entered into pursuant to section 609 of the MCA (22 U.S.C. 7708)
only if such Compact obligates, or contains a
commitment to obligate subject to the availability of funds and the mutual agreement of
the parties to the Compact to proceed, the
entire amount of the United States Government funding anticipated for the duration of
the Compact: Provided further, That of the
funds appropriated under this heading, not
to exceed $100,000 may be available for representation and entertainment expenses, of
which not to exceed $5,000 may be available
for entertainment expenses: Provided further,
That funds appropriated under this heading
shall be apportioned to the Corporation not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act: Provided further, That notwithstanding the limitations in sections
609(i) and 609(j) of the Millennium Challenge
Act of 2003 (22 U.S.C. 7708(i), 7708(j)), the Millennium Challenge Corporation may, subject
to the availability of funds, extend compacts
in Indonesia, Kosovo, Nepal, and Senegal, for
up to one additional year: Provided further,
That the Corporation shall notify the appropriate congressional committees prior to
providing any such extension.
INTER-AMERICAN FOUNDATION
For necessary expenses to carry out the
functions of the Inter-American Foundation
in accordance with the provisions of section
401 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1969,
$29,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That of the funds
appropriated under this heading, not to exceed $2,000 may be available for representation expenses.

PEACE CORPS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

UNITED STATES AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
FOUNDATION

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of the Peace Corps Act (22 U.S.C.
2501 et seq.), including the purchase of not to
exceed five passenger motor vehicles for administrative purposes for use outside of the
United States, $410,500,000, of which $7,800,000
is for the Office of Inspector General, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That the Director of the Peace Corps
may transfer to the Foreign Currency Fluctuations Account, as authorized by section
16 of the Peace Corps Act (22 U.S.C. 2515), an
amount not to exceed $5,000,000: Provided fur-

For necessary expenses to carry out the
African Development Foundation Act (title
V of Public Law 96–533; 22 U.S.C. 290h et
seq.), $12,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2027, of which not to exceed
$2,000 may be available for representation expenses: Provided, That funds made available
to grantees may be invested pending expenditure for project purposes when authorized
by the Board of Directors of the United
States African Development Foundation
(USADF): Provided further, That interest
earned shall be used only for the purposes for

PO 00000

Frm 00046

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

which the grant was made: Provided further,
That notwithstanding section 505(a)(2) of the
African Development Foundation Act (22
U.S.C. 290h–3(a)(2)), in exceptional circumstances the Board of Directors of the
USADF may waive the $250,000 limitation
contained in that section with respect to a
project and a project may exceed the limitation by up to 10 percent if the increase is due
solely to foreign currency fluctuation: Provided further, That the USADF shall submit
a report to the appropriate congressional
committees after each time such waiver authority is exercised: Provided further, That
the USADF may make rent or lease payments in advance from appropriations available for such purpose for offices, buildings,
grounds, and quarters in Africa as may be
necessary to carry out its functions: Provided
further, That the USADF may maintain bank
accounts outside the United States Treasury
and retain any interest earned on such accounts, in furtherance of the purposes of the
African Development Foundation Act: Provided further, That the USADF may not withdraw any appropriation from the Treasury
prior to the need of spending such funds for
program purposes.
UNITED STATES FOUNDATION FOR NATURAL
SECURITY AND COUNTERTERRORISM

For necessary expenses to carry out the
purposes of section 5102 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2025
(22 U.S.C. 10602), $100,000,000, to remain available until expended.
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of section 129 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, $30,000,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That
amounts made available under this heading
may be made available to contract for services as described in section 129(d)(3)(A) of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, without regard to the location in which such services
are performed.
DEBT RESTRUCTURING

For ‘‘Bilateral Economic Assistance—Department of the Treasury—Debt Restructuring’’ there is appropriated $52,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2029, for
the costs, as defined in section 502 of the
Congressional Budget Act of 1974, of modifying loans and loan guarantees for, or credits extended to, such countries as the President may determine, including the costs of
selling, reducing, or canceling amounts owed
to the United States pursuant to multilateral debt restructurings, including Paris
Club debt restructurings and the ‘‘Common
Framework for Debt Treatments beyond the
Debt Service Suspension Initiative’’: Provided, That such amounts may be used notwithstanding any other provision of law.
TITLE IV
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY ASSISTANCE
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT

For necessary expenses to carry out section 481 of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961, $1,400,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2027: Provided, That the Department of State may use the authority of
section 608 of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961, without regard to its restrictions, to receive excess property from an agency of the
United States Government for the purpose of
providing such property to a foreign country
or international organization under chapter
8 of part I of such Act, subject to the regular
notification procedures of the Committees
on Appropriations: Provided further, That

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H767

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

section 482(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act
of 1961 shall not apply to funds appropriated
under this heading, except that any funds
made available notwithstanding such section
shall be subject to the regular notification
procedures of the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That funds appropriated under this heading shall be made
available to support training and technical
assistance for foreign law enforcement, corrections, judges, and other judicial authorities, utilizing regional partners: Provided further, That funds made available under this
heading for Program Development and Support may be made available notwithstanding
pre-obligation requirements contained in
this Act, except for the notification requirements of section 7015: Provided further, That
funds appropriated under this heading shall
be apportioned to the Department of State
not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
NONPROLIFERATION, ANTI-TERRORISM,
DEMINING AND RELATED PROGRAMS

For necessary expenses for nonproliferation, anti-terrorism, demining and related
programs and activities, $870,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, to
carry out the provisions of chapter 8 of part
II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 for
anti-terrorism assistance, chapter 9 of part
II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, section 504 of the FREEDOM Support Act (22
U.S.C. 5854), section 23 of the Arms Export
Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2763), or the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961 for demining activities, the clearance of unexploded ordnance,
the destruction of small arms, and related
activities, notwithstanding any other provision of law, including activities implemented
through nongovernmental and international
organizations, and section 301 of the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961 for a United States
contribution to the Comprehensive Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty Preparatory Commission,
and for a voluntary contribution to the
International
Atomic
Energy
Agency
(IAEA): Provided, That funds made available
under this heading for the Nonproliferation
and Disarmament Fund shall be made available, notwithstanding any other provision of
law and subject to prior consultation with,
and the regular notification procedures of,
the Committees on Appropriations, to promote bilateral and multilateral activities relating to nonproliferation, disarmament, and
weapons destruction, and shall remain available until expended: Provided further, That
such funds may also be used for such countries other than the Independent States of
the former Soviet Union and international
organizations when it is in the national security interest of the United States to do so:
Provided further, That funds appropriated
under this heading may be made available
for the IAEA unless the Secretary of State
determines that Israel is being denied its
right to participate in the activities of that
Agency: Provided further, That funds made
available for conventional weapons destruction programs, including demining and related activities, in addition to funds otherwise available for such purposes, may be
used for administrative expenses related to
the operation and management of such programs and activities, subject to the regular
notification procedures of the Committees
on Appropriations.
PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of section 551 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, $335,458,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027: Provided,
That funds appropriated under this heading
may be used, notwithstanding section 660 of
the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, to provide assistance to enhance the capacity of

PO 00000

Frm 00047

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

foreign civilian security forces, including
gendarmes, to participate in peacekeeping
operations: Provided further, That of the
funds appropriated under this heading, not
less than $32,000,000 shall be made available
for a United States contribution to the Multinational Force and Observers mission in
the Sinai: Provided further, That of the funds
appropriated under this heading, up to
$148,300,000 may be made available to pay assessed expenses of international peacekeeping activities under the same terms and
conditions, as applicable, as funds appropriated by this Act under the heading ‘‘Contributions for International Peacekeeping
Activities’’.
FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT
INTERNATIONAL MILITARY EDUCATION AND
TRAINING

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of section 541 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, $119,152,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027: Provided,
That the civilian personnel for whom military education and training may be provided
under this heading may include civilians who
are not members of a government whose participation would contribute to improved
civil-military relations, civilian control of
the military, or respect for human rights:
Provided further, That of the funds appropriated under this heading, $3,500,000 shall
remain available until expended to increase
the participation of women in programs and
activities funded under this heading, following consultation with the Committees on
Appropriations: Provided further, That of the
funds appropriated under this heading, not
to exceed $50,000 may be available for entertainment expenses.
FOREIGN MILITARY FINANCING PROGRAM

For necessary expenses for grants to enable the President to carry out the provisions of section 23 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2763), $6,158,397,000: Provided, That to expedite the provision of assistance to foreign countries and international organizations, the Secretary of
State, following consultation with the Committees on Appropriations and subject to the
regular notification procedures of such Committees, may use the funds appropriated
under this heading to procure defense articles and services to enhance the capacity of
foreign security forces: Provided further, That
funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this heading shall be nonrepayable notwithstanding any requirement in
section 23 of the Arms Export Control Act:
Provided further, That funds made available
under this heading shall be obligated upon
apportionment in accordance with paragraph
(5)(C) of section 1501(a) of title 31, United
States Code.
None of the funds made available under
this heading shall be available to finance the
procurement of defense articles, defense
services, or design and construction services
that are not sold by the United States Government under the Arms Export Control Act
unless the foreign country proposing to
make such procurement has first signed an
agreement with the United States Government specifying the conditions under which
such procurement may be financed with such
funds: Provided, That all country and funding
level increases in allocations shall be submitted through the regular notification procedures of section 7015 of this Act: Provided
further, That funds made available under this
heading may be used, notwithstanding any
other provision of law, for demining, the
clearance of unexploded ordnance, and related activities, and may include activities
implemented through nongovernmental and
international organizations: Provided further,

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H768

That a country that is a member of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
or is a major non-NATO ally designated by
section 517(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act
of 1961 may utilize funds made available
under this heading for procurement of defense articles, defense services, or design and
construction services that are not sold by
the United States Government under the
Arms Export Control Act: Provided further,
That funds appropriated under this heading
shall be expended at the minimum rate necessary to make timely payment for defense
articles and services: Provided further, That
not more than $72,000,000 of the funds appropriated under this heading may be obligated
for necessary expenses, including the purchase of passenger motor vehicles for replacement only for use outside of the United
States, for the general costs of administering
military assistance and sales, except that
this limitation may be exceeded only
through the regular notification procedures
of the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That the Secretary of State
may use funds made available under this
heading pursuant to the previous proviso for
the administrative and other operational
costs of the Department of State related to
military assistance and sales, assistance
under section 551 of the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961, and Department of Defense security assistance programs, in addition to
funds otherwise available for such purposes:
Provided further, That up to $2,000,000 of the
funds made available pursuant to the previous proviso may be used for direct hire personnel, except that this limitation may be
exceeded by the Secretary of State following
consultation with the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That of the funds
made available under this heading for general costs of administering military assistance and sales, not to exceed $4,000 may be
available for entertainment expenses and not
to exceed $130,000 may be available for representation expenses: Provided further, That
not more than $1,589,585,805 of funds realized
pursuant to section 21(e)(1)(A) of the Arms
Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2761(e)(1)(A))
may be obligated for expenses incurred by
the Department of Defense during fiscal year
2026 pursuant to section 43(b) of the Arms
Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2792(b)), except
that this limitation may be exceeded only
through the regular notification procedures
of the Committees on Appropriations.
TITLE V
MULTILATERAL ASSISTANCE
FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT

CONTRIBUTION TO THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT
FUND

For payment to the Asian Development
Bank’s Asian Development Fund by the Secretary of the Treasury, $43,610,000, to remain
available until expended.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
BANK

For payment to the African Development
Bank by the Secretary of the Treasury for
the United States share of the paid-in portion of the increases in capital stock,
$54,649,000, to remain available until expended.
LIMITATION ON CALLABLE CAPITAL
SUBSCRIPTIONS

The United States Governor of the African
Development Bank may subscribe without
fiscal year limitation to the callable capital
portion of the United States share of increases in capital stock in an amount not to
exceed $8,656,174,624.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE EUROPEAN BANK FOR
RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

For payment to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development by the Secretary of the Treasury for the United States
share of the paid-in portion of the increases
in capital stock, $87,500,000, to remain available until expended.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE INTERNATIONAL FUND
FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

For payment to the International Fund for
Agricultural Development by the Secretary
of the Treasury, $54,000,000, to remain available until expended.
TREASURY INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
PROGRAMS

For contributions by the Secretary of the
Treasury to international financial institutions and trust funds administered by such
institutions, in addition to amounts otherwise available for such purposes, $75,000,000,
to remain available until expended: Provided,
That funds made available under this heading shall be subject to prior consultation
with, and the regular notification procedures
of, the Committees on Appropriations.
TITLE VI
EXPORT AND INVESTMENT ASSISTANCE
EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF THE UNITED STATES
INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5
U.S.C. App.), $8,860,000, of which up to
$1,329,000 may remain available until September 30, 2027.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND PROGRAMS

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of section 301 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, $339,000,000: Provided,
That not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
State shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a spend plan detailing the proposed allocation of funds under this heading
and the entities to be funded: Provided further, That such funds shall be subject to the
regular notification procedures of such Committees.
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY

For payment to the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development as trustee
for the Global Environment Facility by the
Secretary of the Treasury, $150,200,000, to remain available until expended.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

For payment to the International Development Association by the Secretary of the
Treasury, $1,066,184,000, to remain available
until expended.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PROGRAM ACCOUNT

The Export-Import Bank of the United
States is authorized to make such expenditures within the limits of funds and borrowing authority available to such corporation, and in accordance with law, and to
make such contracts and commitments without regard to fiscal year limitations, as provided by section 9104 of title 31, United
States Code, as may be necessary in carrying
out the program for the current fiscal year
for such corporation: Provided, That none of
the funds available during the current fiscal
year may be used to make expenditures, contracts, or commitments for the export of nuclear equipment, fuel, or technology to any
country, other than a nuclear-weapon state
as defined in Article IX of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons eligible to receive economic or military assistance under this Act, that has detonated a nuclear explosive after the date of enactment
of this Act.
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

For administrative expenses to carry out
the direct and guaranteed loan and insurance

PO 00000

Frm 00048

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

programs, including hire of passenger motor
vehicles and services as authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, and
not to exceed $30,000 for official reception
and representation expenses for members of
the Board of Directors, not to exceed
$125,000,000, of which up to $18,750,000 may remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That the Export-Import Bank (the
Bank) may accept, and use, payment or services provided by transaction participants for
legal, financial, or technical services in connection with any transaction for which an
application for a loan, guarantee or insurance commitment has been made: Provided
further, That notwithstanding subsection (b)
of section 117 of the Export Enhancement
Act of 1992, subsection (a) of such section
shall remain in effect until September 30,
2026: Provided further, That the Bank shall
charge fees for necessary expenses (including
special services performed on a contract or
fee basis, but not including other personal
services) in connection with the collection of
moneys owed the Bank, repossession or sale
of pledged collateral or other assets acquired
by the Bank in satisfaction of moneys owed
the Bank, or the investigation or appraisal
of any property, or the evaluation of the
legal, financial, or technical aspects of any
transaction for which an application for a
loan, guarantee or insurance commitment
has been made, or systems infrastructure directly supporting transactions: Provided further, That in addition to other funds appropriated for administrative expenses, such
fees shall be credited to this account for such
purposes, to remain available until expended.
PROGRAM BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS

For the cost of direct loans, loan guarantees, insurance, and tied-aid grants as authorized by section 10 of the Export-Import
Bank Act of 1945, as amended, not to exceed
$20,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2029: Provided, That such costs, including the cost of modifying such loans,
shall be as defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974: Provided further, That such funds shall remain available
until September 30, 2041, for the disbursement of direct loans, loan guarantees, insurance and tied-aid grants obligated in fiscal
years 2026 through 2029.
RECEIPTS COLLECTED

Receipts collected pursuant to the ExportImport Bank Act of 1945 (Public Law 79–173)
and the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990, in
an amount not to exceed the amount appropriated herein, shall be credited as offsetting
collections to this account: Provided, That
the sums herein appropriated from the General Fund shall be reduced on a dollar-fordollar basis by such offsetting collections so
as to result in a final fiscal year appropriation from the General Fund estimated at $0.
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
FINANCE CORPORATION
INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5
U.S.C. App.), $7,200,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027.
CORPORATE CAPITAL ACCOUNT

The United States International Development Finance Corporation (the Corporation)
is authorized to make such expenditures and
commitments within the limits of funds and
borrowing authority available to the Corporation, and in accordance with the law,
and to make such expenditures and commitments without regard to fiscal year limitations, as provided by section 9104 of title 31,
United States Code, as may be necessary in

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

carrying out the programs for the current
fiscal year for the Corporation: Provided,
That for necessary expenses of the activities
described in subsections (b), (c), (e), (f), and
(g) of section 1421 of the BUILD Act of 2018
(division F of Public Law 115–254) and for administrative expenses to carry out authorized activities described in section 1434(d) of
such Act, $983,250,000: Provided further, That
of the amount provided—
(1) $243,000,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2028, for administrative expenses to carry out authorized activities (including an amount for official reception and
representation expenses which shall not exceed $25,000); and
(2) $740,250,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2028, for the activities described in subsections (b), (c), (e), (f), and (g)
of section 1421 of the BUILD Act of 2018, except such amounts obligated in a fiscal year
for activities described in section 1421(c) of
such Act shall remain available for disbursement for the term of the underlying project:
Provided further, That amounts made available under this paragraph may be paid to the
‘‘United States International Development
Finance Corporation—Program Account’’ for
programs authorized by subsections (b), (e),
(f), and (g) of section 1421 of the BUILD Act
of 2018:
Provided further, That funds may only be obligated pursuant to section 1421(g) of the
BUILD Act of 2018 subject to prior consultation with the appropriate congressional committees and the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations:
Provided further, That funds appropriated by
this Act and prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign
operations, and related programs for support
by the Corporation in high-income and advancing income countries shall be subject to
prior consultation with the Committees on
Appropriations: Provided further, That in fiscal year 2026 collections of amounts described in section 1434(h) of the BUILD Act
of 2018 shall be credited as offsetting collections to this appropriation: Provided further,
That such collections collected in fiscal year
2026 in excess of $983,250,000 shall be credited
to this account and shall be available in future fiscal years only to the extent provided
in advance in appropriations Acts: Provided
further, That in fiscal year 2026, if such collections are less than $983,250,000, receipts
collected pursuant to the BUILD Act of 2018
and the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990, in
an amount equal to such shortfall, shall be
credited as offsetting collections to this appropriation: Provided further, That fees
charged for project-specific transaction costs
as described in section 1434(k) of the BUILD
Act of 2018, and other direct costs associated
with origination or monitoring services provided to specific or potential investors, shall
not be considered administrative expenses
for the purposes of this heading: Provided further, That such fees shall be credited to this
account for such purposes, to remain available until expended: Provided further, That
funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this heading may not be used to
provide any type of assistance that is otherwise prohibited by any other provision of law
or to provide assistance to any foreign country that is otherwise prohibited by any other
provision of law: Provided further, That the
sums herein appropriated from the General
Fund shall be reduced on a dollar-for-dollar
basis by the offsetting collections described
under this heading so as to result in a final
fiscal year appropriation from the General
Fund estimated at $547,450,000.
PROGRAM ACCOUNT

Amounts paid from ‘‘United States International Development Finance Corpora-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H769

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

tion—Corporate Capital Account’’ (CCA)
shall remain available until September 30,
2028: Provided, That amounts paid to this account from CCA or transferred to this account pursuant to section 1434(j) of the
BUILD Act of 2018 (division F of Public Law
115–254) shall be available for the costs of direct and guaranteed loans provided by the
Corporation pursuant to section 1421(b) of
such Act and the costs of modifying loans
and loan guarantees transferred to the Corporation pursuant to section 1463 of such
Act: Provided further, That such costs, including the cost of modifying such loans,
shall be as defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974: Provided further, That such amounts obligated in a fiscal
year shall remain available for disbursement
for the following 8 fiscal years: Provided further, That funds made available in this Act
and transferred to carry out the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 pursuant to section
1434(j) of the BUILD Act of 2018 may remain
available for obligation for 1 additional fiscal year: Provided further, That the total loan
principal or guaranteed principal amount
shall not exceed $15,000,000,000.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of section 661 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, $87,000,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027: Provided,
That of the funds appropriated under this
heading, not more than $5,000 may be available for representation and entertainment
expenses.
TITLE VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ALLOWANCES AND DIFFERENTIALS

SEC. 7001. Funds appropriated under title I
of this Act shall be available, except as otherwise provided, for allowances and differentials as authorized by subchapter 59 of title
5, United States Code; for services as authorized by section 3109 of such title and for hire
of passenger transportation pursuant to section 1343(b) of title 31, United States Code.
UNOBLIGATED BALANCES REPORT

SEC. 7002. Any department or agency of the
United States Government to which funds
are appropriated or otherwise made available
by this Act shall provide to the Committees
on Appropriations a quarterly accounting of
cumulative unobligated balances and obligated, but unexpended, balances by program,
project, and activity, and Treasury Account
Fund Symbol of all funds received by such
department or agency in fiscal year 2026 or
any previous fiscal year, disaggregated by
fiscal year: Provided, That the report required by this section shall be submitted not
later than 30 days after the end of each fiscal
quarter and should specify by account the
amount of funds obligated pursuant to bilateral agreements which have not been further
sub-obligated.
CONSULTING SERVICES

SEC. 7003. The expenditure of any appropriation under title I of this Act for any consulting service through procurement contract, pursuant to section 3109 of title 5,
United States Code, shall be limited to those
contracts where such expenditures are a
matter of public record and available for
public inspection, except where otherwise
provided under existing law, or under existing Executive order issued pursuant to existing law.
DIPLOMATIC FACILITIES

SEC. 7004. (a) CAPITAL SECURITY COST SHARING EXCEPTION.—Notwithstanding paragraph
(2) of section 604(e) of the Secure Embassy
Construction and Counterterrorism Act of
1999 (title VI of division A of H.R. 3427, as enacted into law by section 1000(a)(7) of Public

PO 00000

Frm 00049

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Law 106–113 and contained in appendix G of
that Act), as amended by section 111 of the
Department of State Authorities Act, Fiscal
Year 2017 (Public Law 114–323), a project to
construct a facility of the United States may
include office space or other accommodations for members of the United States Marine Corps.
(b) CONSULTATION AND NOTIFICATIONS.—
Funds appropriated by this Act and prior
Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs, which may be made available for the acquisition of property or award
of construction contracts for overseas United
States diplomatic facilities during fiscal
year 2026, shall be subject to prior consultation with, and the regular notification procedures of, the Committees on Appropriations:
Provided, That notifications pursuant to this
subsection shall include the information
enumerated under this section in House Report 119–217: Provided further, That the Secretary of State shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations at the early
project development stage for out-year construction projects, including to discuss security and non-security construction requirements, modifications to scope, and cost reductions identified for such projects, consistent with applicable laws and regulations:
Provided further, That the Secretary shall
submit a quarterly report to the Committees
on Appropriations on contingency savings
identified from funds appropriated under the
heading ‘‘Embassy Security, Construction,
and Maintenance’’ by prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State,
foreign operations, and related programs,
and the obligation of funds made available
by such savings shall be subject to prior consultation with the Committees on Appropriations.
(c) INTERIM AND TEMPORARY FACILITIES
ABROAD.—
(1) SECURITY VULNERABILITIES.—Funds appropriated by this Act under the heading
‘‘Embassy Security, Construction, and Maintenance’’ may be made available, following
consultation with the appropriate congressional committees, to address security
vulnerabilities at interim and temporary
United States diplomatic facilities abroad,
including physical security upgrades and
local guard staffing.
(2) CONSULTATION.—The opening, closure,
or any significant modification to an interim
or temporary United States diplomatic facility shall be subject to prior consultation
with the appropriate congressional committees and the regular notification procedures
of the Committees on Appropriations, except
that such consultation and notification may
be waived if there is a security risk to personnel.
(d) SOFT TARGETS.—Funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘Embassy Security, Construction, and Maintenance’’ may
be made available for security upgrades to
soft targets, including schools, recreational
facilities, residences, and places of worship
used by United States diplomatic personnel
and their dependents.
(e) FACILITIES.—None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this
Act may be used to move the United States
embassy to the State of Israel to a location
other than Jerusalem.
PERSONNEL ACTIONS

SEC. 7005. Any costs incurred by a department or agency funded under title I of this
Act resulting from personnel actions taken
in response to funding reductions included in
this Act shall be absorbed within the total
budgetary resources available under title I
to such department or agency: Provided,
That the authority to transfer funds between

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H770

appropriations accounts as may be necessary
to carry out this section is provided in addition to authorities included elsewhere in this
Act: Provided further, That use of funds to
carry out this section shall be treated as a
reprogramming of funds under section 7015 of
this Act.
PROHIBITION ON PUBLICITY OR PROPAGANDA

SEC. 7006. No part of any appropriation
contained in this Act shall be used for publicity or propaganda purposes within the
United States not authorized before enactment of this Act by Congress: Provided, That
up to $25,000 may be made available to carry
out the provisions of section 316 of the International Security and Development Cooperation Act of 1980 (Public Law 96–533; 22 U.S.C.
2151a note).
PROHIBITION AGAINST DIRECT FUNDING FOR
CERTAIN COUNTRIES

SEC. 7007. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available pursuant to titles III through VI of this Act shall be obligated or expended to finance directly any assistance or reparations for the governments
of Cuba, North Korea, or Iran: Provided, That
for purposes of this section, the prohibition
on obligations or expenditures shall include
direct loans, credits, insurance, and guarantees of the Export-Import Bank or its agents.
COUPS D’ÉTAT
SEC. 7008. (a) PROHIBITION.—None of the
funds appropriated or otherwise made available pursuant to titles III through VI of this
Act shall be obligated or expended to finance
directly any assistance to the government of
any country whose duly elected head of government is deposed by military coup d’état
or decree or, after the date of enactment of
this Act, a coup d’état or decree in which the
military plays a decisive role: Provided, That
assistance may be resumed to such government if the Secretary of State certifies and
reports to the appropriate congressional
committees that subsequent to the termination of assistance a democratically elected
government has taken office: Provided further, That the provisions of this section shall
not apply to assistance to promote democratic elections or public participation in
democratic processes, or to support a democratic transition: Provided further, That
funds made available pursuant to the previous provisos shall be subject to prior consultation with, and the regular notification
procedures of, the Committees on Appropriations.
(b) WAIVER.—The Secretary of State, following consultation with the heads of relevant Federal agencies, may waive the restriction in this section on a program-byprogram basis if the Secretary certifies and
reports to the Committees on Appropriations
that such waiver is in the national security
interest of the United States: Provided, That
funds made available pursuant to such waiver shall be subject to prior consultation
with, and the regular notification procedures
of, the Committees on Appropriations.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

TRANSFER OF FUNDS AUTHORITY

SEC. 7009. (a) DEPARTMENT OF STATE.—
(1) DEPARTMENT OF STATE.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not to exceed 5 percent of
any appropriation made available for the
current fiscal year for the Department of
State under title I of this Act may be transferred between, and merged with, such appropriations, but no such appropriation, except
as otherwise specifically provided, shall be
increased by more than 10 percent by any
such transfers, and no such transfer may be
made to increase the appropriation under the
heading ‘‘Representation Expenses’’.
(B) EMBASSY SECURITY.—Funds appropriated under the headings ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’, including for Worldwide Security

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

Protection, ‘‘Embassy Security, Construction, and Maintenance’’, and ‘‘Emergencies
in the Diplomatic and Consular Service’’ in
this Act may be transferred to, and merged
with, funds appropriated under such headings if the Secretary of State determines and
reports to the Committees on Appropriations
that to do so is necessary to implement the
recommendations of the Benghazi Accountability Review Board, for emergency evacuations, or to prevent or respond to security
situations and requirements, subject to the
regular notification procedures of such Committees.
(C) EMERGENCIES IN THE DIPLOMATIC AND
CONSULAR SERVICE.—Of the amount made
available under the heading ‘‘Diplomatic
Programs’’ for Worldwide Security Protection, not to exceed $50,000,000 may be transferred to, and merged with, funds made
available by this Act under the heading
‘‘Emergencies in the Diplomatic and Consular Service’’, to be available only for emergency evacuations and rewards, as authorized.
(D) CAPITAL INVESTMENT FUND.—Of the
amount made available under the heading,
‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’, up to $50,000,000
may be transferred to, and merged with,
funds made available in title I of this Act
under the heading ‘‘Capital Investment
Fund’’.
(E) PRIOR CONSULTATION.—The transfer authorities provided by subparagraphs (B), (C),
and (D) are in addition to any transfer authority otherwise available in this Act and
under any other provision of law and the exercise of such authority shall be subject to
prior consultation with the Committees on
Appropriations.
(2) REORGANIZATION.—Funds appropriated
by this Act and prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign
operations, and related programs under the
headings ‘‘Administration of Foreign Affairs’’ in title I and ‘‘Operating Expenses’’ in
title II may be transferred to and between
accounts under such headings if the Secretary of State determines such transfer is
necessary to implement a reorganization, redesign, or other plan as defined by section
7063(b) of this Act that is expressly authorized by a subsequent Act of Congress: Provided, That such transfer authority is in addition to any other transfer authority provided by this Act or any other Act and is
subject to prior consultation with, and the
regular notification procedures of, the Committees on Appropriations.
(3) TREATMENT AS REPROGRAMMING.—Any
transfer pursuant to this subsection shall be
treated as a reprogramming of funds under
section 7015 of this Act and shall not be
available for obligation or expenditure except in compliance with the procedures set
forth in that section.
(b) LIMITATION ON TRANSFERS OF FUNDS BETWEEN AGENCIES.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—None of the funds made
available under titles II through V of this
Act may be transferred to any department,
agency, or instrumentality of the United
States Government, except pursuant to a
transfer made by, or transfer authority provided in, this Act or any other appropriations Act.
(2) ALLOCATION AND TRANSFERS.—Notwithstanding paragraph (1), in addition to transfers made by, or authorized elsewhere in,
this Act, funds appropriated by this Act to
carry out the purposes of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 may be allocated or transferred to agencies of the United States Government pursuant to the provisions of sections 109, 610, and 632 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, and section 1434(j) of the
BUILD Act of 2018 (division F of Public Law
115–254).

PO 00000

Frm 00050

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(3) NOTIFICATION.—Any agreement entered
into by the Department of State with any
department, agency, or instrumentality of
the United States Government pursuant to
section 632(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act
of 1961 valued in excess of $2,000,000 and any
agreement made pursuant to section 632(a) of
such Act, with funds appropriated by this
Act or prior Acts making appropriations for
the Department of State, foreign operations,
and related programs under the headings
‘‘Global Health Programs’’, ‘‘Development
Assistance’’, ‘‘Economic Support Fund’’,
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’,
‘‘Assistance for Europe, Eurasia and Central
Asia’’, and ‘‘International Narcotics Control
and Law Enforcement’’ shall be subject to
the regular notification procedures of the
Committees on Appropriations: Provided,
That the requirement of this paragraph shall
not apply to such agreements with a department, agency, or instrumentality funded by
this Act.
(4) PRIOR CONSULTATION REQUIREMENT.—
Agreements between the Department of
State with any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States Government not funded by this Act or prior Acts
making appropriations for the Department
of State, foreign operations, and related programs, to transfer or allocate funds appropriated under the headings ‘‘International
Humanitarian Assistance’’ and ‘‘United
States Emergency Refugee and Migration
Assistance Fund’’ in this Act, or under the
headings ‘‘International Disaster Assistance’’, ‘‘Migration and Refugee Assistance’’,
and ‘‘United States Emergency Refugee and
Migration Assistance Fund’’ in prior Acts
making appropriations for the Department
of State, foreign operations, and related programs shall be subject to prior consultation
with the Committees on Appropriations, not
later than 7 days prior to the transfer of such
funds, except if to do so would pose an immediate and substantial risk to human health
or welfare: Provided, That in the case of any
such exception the information required by
such consultation shall be provided as early
as practicable, but in no event later than 3
days after taking the action to which the
consultation requirement was applicable,
and such information shall include a description of the circumstance necessitating such
exception.
(c) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
FINANCE CORPORATION.—Amounts
transferred pursuant to section 1434(j) of the
BUILD Act of 2018 (division F of Public Law
115–254) may only be transferred from funds
made available under title III of this Act:
Provided, That any such transfers, or any
other amounts transferred to the United
States International Development Finance
Corporation (the Corporation) pursuant to
any provision of law, shall be subject to prior
consultation with, and the regular notification procedures of, the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That the Secretary of State and the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation, as appropriate, shall
ensure that the programs funded by such
transfers are coordinated with, and complement, foreign assistance programs implemented by the Department of State.
(d) TRANSFER OF FUNDS BETWEEN ACCOUNTS.—None of the funds made available
under titles II through V of this Act may be
obligated under an appropriations account to
which such funds were not appropriated, except for transfers specifically provided for in
this Act, unless the President, not less than
5 days prior to the exercise of any authority
contained in the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961 to transfer funds, consults with and provides a written policy justification to the
Committees on Appropriations.
(e) AUDIT OF INTER-AGENCY TRANSFERS OF
FUNDS.—Any agreement for the transfer or

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

allocation of funds appropriated by this Act
or prior Acts making appropriations for the
Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs entered into between the
Department of State and another agency of
the United States Government under the authority of section 632(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, or any comparable provision of law, shall expressly provide that
the Inspector General (IG) for the agency receiving the transfer or allocation of such
funds, or other entity with audit responsibility if the receiving agency does not have
an IG, shall perform periodic program and financial audits of the use of such funds and
report to the Department of State upon completion of such audits: Provided, That such
audits shall be transmitted to the Committees on Appropriations by the Department of
State: Provided further, That funds transferred under such authority may be made
available for the cost of such audits.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

PROHIBITION AND LIMITATION ON CERTAIN
EXPENSES

SEC. 7010. (a) FIRST-CLASS TRAVEL.—None
of the funds made available by this Act may
be used for first-class travel by employees of
United States Government departments and
agencies funded by this Act in contravention
of section 301–10.122 through 301–10.124 of
title 41, Code of Federal Regulations.
(b) COMPUTER NETWORKS.—None of the
funds made available by this Act for the operating expenses of any United States Government department or agency may be used
to establish or maintain a computer network
for use by such department or agency unless
such network has filters designed to block
access to sexually explicit websites: Provided, That nothing in this subsection shall
limit the use of funds necessary for any Federal, State, Tribal, or local law enforcement
agency, or any other entity carrying out the
following activities: criminal investigations,
prosecutions, and adjudications; administrative discipline; and the monitoring of such
websites undertaken as part of official business.
(c) PROHIBITION ON PROMOTION OF TOBACCO.—None of the funds made available by
this Act shall be available to promote the
sale or export of tobacco or tobacco products
(including electronic nicotine delivery systems), or to seek the reduction or removal
by any foreign country of restrictions on the
marketing of tobacco or tobacco products
(including electronic nicotine delivery systems), except for restrictions which are not
applied equally to all tobacco or tobacco
products (including electronic nicotine delivery systems) of the same type.
(d) EMAIL SERVERS OUTSIDE THE .GOV DOMAIN.—None of the funds appropriated by
this Act under the headings ‘‘Diplomatic
Programs’’ and ‘‘Capital Investment Fund’’
that are made available to the Department
of State may be made available to support
the use or establishment of email accounts
or email servers created outside the .gov domain or not fitted for automated records
management as part of a Federal government records management program in contravention of the Presidential and Federal
Records Act Amendments of 2014 (Public
Law 113–187).
(e) REPRESENTATION AND ENTERTAINMENT
EXPENSES.—Each Federal department, agency, or entity funded in title I of this Act and
the Department of the Treasury and independent agencies funded in titles III or VI of
this Act, shall take steps to ensure that domestic and overseas representation and entertainment expenses further official agency
business and United States foreign policy interests, and—
(1) are primarily for fostering relations
outside of the Executive Branch;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H771

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(2) are principally for meals and events of
a protocol nature;
(3) are not for employee-only events; and
(4) do not include activities that are substantially of a recreational character.
(f) LIMITATIONS ON ENTERTAINMENT EXPENSES.—None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this Act under
the headings ‘‘International Military Education and Training’’ or ‘‘Foreign Military
Financing Program’’ for Informational Program activities or under the headings ‘‘Global Health Programs’’ and ‘‘National Security
Investment Programs’’ may be obligated or
expended to pay for—
(1) alcoholic beverages; or
(2) entertainment expenses for activities
that are substantially of a recreational character, including entrance fees at sporting
events, theatrical and musical productions,
and amusement parks.
ASSISTANCE EFFECTIVENESS AND
TRANSPARENCY

SEC. 7011. (a) STRATEGY.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 180 days
after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Secretary of State shall develop and submit
to the appropriate congressional committees
a multi-year strategy to improve the effectiveness of United States Government foreign assistance.
(2) ELEMENTS.—The strategy required by
this subsection shall include—
(A) methods used to determine the effectiveness of United States Government foreign assistance;
(B) analysis on using outcomes to inform
the allocation of such assistance;
(C) results of impact evaluations carried
out within the prior 12 months and a plan for
incorporating the results of such evaluations
into the design of future programs funded by
such assistance;
(D) analysis of opportunities to enhance
the effectiveness of such assistance by increasing partnerships with local organizations, including faith-based organizations, as
appropriate, including specific plans to provide grants, cooperative agreements, and
other awards of not more than $2,000,000, consistent with the requirements included in
the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act); and
(E) estimated costs associated with implementation of the strategy.
(3) SPECIFIC REFORMS.—The strategy required by this subsection shall include the
following specific reforms—
(A) an approval process for small grants
previously managed at the mission level, including public diplomacy and cultural preservation programs, by respective Chiefs of
Mission, the Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs, and the Under
Secretary of Political Affairs, as appropriate: Provided, That for purposes of this
section, the term ‘‘small grants’’ means a
grant with a value of less than $1,000,000;
(B) a certification process, on a countryby-country basis, to ensure that United
States assistance supports the implementation of a comprehensive assistance strategy
that promotes American interests abroad,
including a detailed definition of such interests, consistent with the requirements of
subparagraphs (C) and (D);
(C) a plan established prior to the obligation of United States assistance for the
winding down of such assistance, as appropriate, including transition and sustainment
of programs and activities to entities other
than the United States Government; and
(D) requirements for co-investment by recipient governments and cost matching from
sources other than the United States Government, including other international do-

PO 00000

Frm 00051

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

nors and the private sector, for assistance
made available by this Act, as appropriate.
(4) CONCURRENT RECOMMENDATIONS.—The
Secretary shall—
(A) convene a panel of experts and practitioners to make recommendations for the
strategy required by this subsection; and
(B) include all such recommendations in an
appendix to the strategy whether or not they
were incorporated into the strategy.
(5) CONSULTATION.—Not later than 45 days
after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Secretary shall consult with the Committees
on Appropriations on the requirements of
this subsection.
(b) BENEFICIARY FEEDBACK.—Funds appropriated by this Act that are made available
for monitoring and evaluation of assistance
under the headings ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ and ‘‘International Humanitarian Assistance’’ shall be made available for the regular and systematic collection of feedback obtained directly from beneficiaries to enhance the quality and relevance of such assistance: Provided, That the
Secretary of State shall regularly conduct
oversight to ensure that such feedback is
collected and used by implementing partners
to maximize the cost-effectiveness and utility of such assistance.
(c) EVALUATIONS.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under titles III and IV,
not less than $15,000,000, to remain available
until expended, shall be made available for
impact evaluations, including ex-post evaluations, of the effectiveness and sustainability of United States Government foreign
assistance programs: Provided, That funds
made available pursuant to this subsection
are in addition to funds otherwise made
available for such purposes.
(d) INNOVATION.—The Secretary of State
may use funds appropriated by this Act
under title III to make innovation incentive
awards in accordance with the terms and
conditions of section 7034(e)(4) of the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2019 (division F of Public Law 116–6), except that
each individual award may not exceed
$500,000.
(e) FOREIGN ASSISTANCE WEBSITE.—Funds
appropriated by this Act under title I, funds
made available for any independent agency
in title III, and funds made available under
the headings ‘‘Trade and Development Agency’’ and ‘‘United States International Development Finance Corporation’’, as appropriate, shall be made available to support
the provision of additional information on
United States Government foreign assistance
on the ‘‘ForeignAssistance.gov’’ website:
Provided, That all Federal agencies funded
under this Act shall provide such information on foreign assistance, upon request and
in a timely manner, to the Department of
State.
LIMITATION ON ASSISTANCE TO COUNTRIES IN
DEFAULT

SEC. 7012. No part of any appropriation provided under titles III through VI in this Act
shall be used to furnish assistance to the
government of any country which is in default during a period in excess of 1 calendar
year in payment to the United States of
principal or interest on any loan made to the
government of such country by the United
States pursuant to a program for which
funds are appropriated under this Act unless
the President determines, following consultation with the Committees on Appropriations, that assistance for such country is in
the national interest of the United States.
PROHIBITION ON TAXATION OF UNITED STATES
ASSISTANCE

SEC. 7013. (a) PROHIBITION ON TAXATION.—
None of the funds appropriated under titles

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H772

III through VI of this Act may be made
available to provide assistance for a foreign
country under a new bilateral agreement
governing the terms and conditions under
which such assistance is to be provided unless such agreement includes a provision
stating that assistance provided by the
United States shall be exempt from taxation,
or reimbursed, by the foreign government,
and the Secretary of State shall expeditiously seek to negotiate amendments to existing bilateral agreements, as necessary, to
conform with this requirement.
(b) NOTIFICATION AND REIMBURSEMENT OF
FOREIGN TAXES.—An amount equivalent to
200 percent of the total taxes assessed during
fiscal year 2026 on funds appropriated by this
Act and prior Acts making appropriations
for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs by a foreign
government or entity against United States
assistance programs, either directly or
through grantees, contractors, and subcontractors, shall be withheld from obligation from funds appropriated for assistance
for fiscal year 2027 and for prior fiscal years
and allocated for the central government of
such country or for the West Bank and Gaza
program, as applicable, if, not later than
September 30, 2027, such taxes have not been
reimbursed.
(c) DE MINIMIS EXCEPTION.—Foreign taxes
of a de minimis nature shall not be subject
to the provisions of subsection (b).
(d) REPROGRAMMING OF FUNDS.—Funds
withheld from obligation for each foreign
government or entity pursuant to subsection
(b) shall be reprogrammed for assistance for
countries which do not assess taxes on
United States assistance or which have an
effective arrangement that is providing substantial reimbursement of such taxes, and
that can reasonably accommodate such assistance in a programmatically responsible
manner.
(e) DETERMINATIONS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The provisions of this section shall not apply to any foreign government or entity that assesses such taxes if the
Secretary of State reports to the Committees on Appropriations that—
(A) such foreign government or entity has
an effective arrangement that is providing
substantial reimbursement of such taxes; or
(B) the foreign policy interests of the
United States outweigh the purpose of this
section to ensure that United States assistance is not subject to taxation.
(2) CONSULTATION.—The Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations at least 15 days prior to exercising
the authority of this subsection with regard
to any foreign government or entity.
(f) IMPLEMENTATION.—The Secretary of
State shall issue and update rules, regulations, or policy guidance, as appropriate, to
implement the prohibition against the taxation of assistance contained in this section.
(g) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section:
(1) BILATERAL AGREEMENT.—The term ‘‘bilateral agreement’’ refers to a framework bilateral agreement between the Government
of the United States and the government of
the country receiving assistance that describes the privileges and immunities applicable to United States foreign assistance for
such country generally, or an individual
agreement between the Government of the
United States and such government that describes, among other things, the treatment
for tax purposes that will be accorded the
United States assistance provided under that
agreement.
(2) TAXES AND TAXATION.—The term ‘‘taxes
and taxation’’ shall include value added
taxes and customs duties but shall not include individual income taxes assessed to
local staff.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

AVAILABILITY AND DESIGNATED FUNDING
LEVELS

SEC. 7014. (a) AVAILABILITY.—No part of
any appropriation contained in this Act shall
remain available for obligation after the expiration of the current fiscal year unless expressly so provided by this Act.
(b) REPROGRAMMING.—Funds appropriated
under titles III through VI of this Act which
are specifically designated may be reprogrammed for other programs within the
same account notwithstanding the designation if compliance with the designation is
made impossible by operation of any provision of this or any other Act: Provided, That
any such reprogramming shall be subject to
the regular notification procedures of the
Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That assistance that is reprogrammed
pursuant to this subsection shall be made
available under the same terms and conditions as originally provided.
(c) EXTENSION OF AVAILABILITY.—In addition to the authority contained in subsection
(b), the original period of availability of
funds appropriated by this Act and administered by the Department of State that are
specifically designated for particular programs or activities by this or any other Act
may be extended for an additional fiscal year
if the Secretary of State determines and reports promptly to the Committees on Appropriations that the termination of assistance
to a country or a significant change in circumstances makes it unlikely that such designated funds can be obligated during the
original period of availability: Provided, That
such designated funds that continue to be
available for an additional fiscal year shall
be obligated only for the purpose of such designation.
(d) OTHER ACTS.—Ceilings and specifically
designated funding levels contained in this
Act shall not be applicable to funds or authorities appropriated or otherwise made
available by any subsequent Act unless such
Act specifically so directs: Provided, That
specifically designated funding levels or minimum funding requirements contained in
any other Act shall not be applicable to
funds appropriated by this Act.
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

SEC. 7015. (a) NOTIFICATION OF CHANGES IN
PROGRAMS, PROJECTS, AND ACTIVITIES.—None
of the funds made available in titles I, II, and
VI, and under the headings ‘‘Peace Corps’’
and ‘‘Millennium Challenge Corporation’’, of
this Act or prior Acts making appropriations
for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs to the departments and agencies funded by this Act that
remain available for obligation in fiscal year
2026, or provided from any accounts in the
Treasury of the United States derived by the
collection of fees or of currency reflows or
other offsetting collections, or made available by transfer, to the departments and
agencies funded by this Act, shall be available for obligation to—
(1) create new programs;
(2) suspend or eliminate a program,
project, or activity;
(3) close, suspend, open, or reopen a mission or post;
(4) create, close, reorganize, downsize, or
rename bureaus, centers, or offices; or
(5) contract out or privatize any functions
or activities presently performed by Federal
employees;
unless previously justified to the Committees on Appropriations or such Committees
are notified 15 days in advance of such obligation.
(b) NOTIFICATION OF REPROGRAMMING OF
FUNDS.—None of the funds provided under titles I, II, and VI of this Act or prior Acts
making appropriations for the Department

PO 00000

Frm 00052

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

of State, foreign operations, and related programs, to the departments and agencies
funded under such titles that remain available for obligation in fiscal year 2026, or provided from any accounts in the Treasury of
the United States derived by the collection
of fees available to the department and agency funded under title I of this Act, shall be
available for obligation or expenditure for
programs, projects, or activities through a
reprogramming of funds in excess of
$1,000,000 or 10 percent, whichever is less,
that—
(1) augments or changes existing programs,
projects, or activities;
(2) relocates an existing office or employees;
(3) reduces by 10 percent funding for any
existing program, project, or activity, or
numbers of personnel by 10 percent as approved by Congress; or
(4) results from any general savings, including savings from a reduction in personnel, which would result in a change in existing programs, projects, or activities as approved by Congress;
unless the Committees on Appropriations are
notified 15 days in advance of such reprogramming of funds.
(c) NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENT.—None of
the funds made available by this Act under
the headings ‘‘Global Health Programs’’,
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’,
‘‘Democracy Fund’’, ‘‘Peace Corps’’, ‘‘Millennium
Challenge
Corporation’’,
‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’, ‘‘Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism,
Demining and Related Programs’’, ‘‘Peacekeeping Operations’’, ‘‘International Military Education and Training’’, ‘‘Foreign
Military
Financing
Program’’,
‘‘International Organizations and Programs’’,
‘‘United States International Development
Finance Corporation’’, and ‘‘Trade and Development Agency’’ shall be available for obligation for programs, projects, activities,
type of materiel assistance, countries, or
other operations not justified or in excess of
the amount justified to the Committees on
Appropriations for obligation under any of
these specific headings unless the Committees on Appropriations are notified 15 days in
advance of such obligation: Provided, That
the President shall not enter into any commitment of funds appropriated for the purposes of section 23 of the Arms Export Control Act for the provision of major defense
equipment, other than conventional ammunition, or other major defense items defined
to be aircraft, ships, missiles, or combat vehicles, not previously justified to Congress
or 20 percent in excess of the quantities justified to Congress unless the Committees on
Appropriations are notified 15 days in advance of such commitment: Provided further,
That requirements of this subsection or any
similar provision of this or any other Act
shall not apply to any reprogramming for a
program, project, or activity for which funds
are appropriated under titles III through VI
of this Act of less than 10 percent of the
amount previously justified to Congress for
obligation for such program, project, or activity for the current fiscal year: Provided
further, That any notification submitted pursuant to subsection (f) of this section shall
include information on the use of notwithstanding authority.
(d) DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PROGRAMS
AND FUNDING NOTIFICATIONS.—
(1) PROGRAMS.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act or prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State,
foreign operations, and related programs
may be made available to support or continue any program initially funded under
any authority of title 10, United States Code,
or any Act making or authorizing appropriations for the Department of Defense, unless

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

the Secretary of State, in consultation with
the Secretary of Defense and in accordance
with the regular notification procedures of
the Committees on Appropriations, submits
a justification to such Committees that includes a description of, and the annual estimated costs associated with, the support or
continuation of such program.
(2) FUNDING.—Funds transferred by the Department of Defense to the Department of
State for assistance for foreign countries and
international organizations shall be subject
to the regular notification procedures of the
Committees on Appropriations.
(3) NOTIFICATION ON EXCESS DEFENSE ARTICLES.—Prior to providing excess Department
of Defense articles in accordance with section 516(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961, the Department of Defense shall notify
the Committees on Appropriations to the
same extent and under the same conditions
as other committees pursuant to subsection
(f) of that section: Provided, That before
issuing a letter of offer to sell excess defense
articles under the Arms Export Control Act,
the Department of Defense shall notify the
Committees on Appropriations in accordance
with the regular notification procedures of
such Committees if such defense articles are
significant military equipment (as defined in
section 47(9) of the Arms Export Control Act)
or are valued (in terms of original acquisition cost) at $7,000,000 or more, or if notification is required elsewhere in this Act for the
use of appropriated funds for specific countries that would receive such excess defense
articles: Provided further, That such Committees shall also be informed of the original acquisition cost of such defense articles.
(e) WAIVER.—Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, the requirements of this
section or any similar provision of this Act
or any other Act, including any prior Act,
requiring notification in accordance with the
regular notification procedures of, or consultations with, the Committees on Appropriations may only be waived if failure to do
so would pose a substantial risk to human
health or welfare: Provided, That in case of
any such waiver, notification to, or consultation with, the Committees on Appropriations
shall be provided as early as practicable, but
in no event later than 3 days after taking the
action to which such notification requirement was applicable, in the context of the
circumstances necessitating such waiver:
Provided further, That any notification provided pursuant to such a waiver shall contain an explanation of the emergency circumstances: Provided further, That no other
provision of law relating to such assistance
may be construed to authorize a waiver or
alteration of the notification requirements
of this section, or any other notification or
consultation required by this Act or prior
Acts, unless such provision explicitly cites
to and supersedes this proviso.
(f) COUNTRY NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.—
None of the funds appropriated under titles
III through VI of this Act may be obligated
or expended for assistance for Afghanistan,
Burma, Cambodia, Colombia, Cuba, Egypt,
El Salvador, Georgia, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Libya, Mexico, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Russian Federation, Somalia, South Sudan,
Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Ukraine, Venezuela,
Yemen, and Zimbabwe except as provided
through the regular notification procedures
of the Committees on Appropriations.
(g) TRUST FUNDS.—Funds appropriated or
otherwise made available in title III of this
Act and prior Acts making funds available
for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs that are made
available for a trust fund held by an international financial institution shall be subject to the regular notification procedures of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H773

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

the Committees on Appropriations, and such
notification shall include the information
specified under this section in House Report
119–217.
(h) OTHER PROGRAM NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.—
(1) OTHER PROGRAMS.—Funds appropriated
by this Act that are made available for the
following programs and activities shall be
subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations:
(A) the Power Africa and Prosper Africa
initiatives;
(B) the Indo-Pacific Strategy;
(C) assistance made available pursuant to
section 7066 of this Act;
(D) the Countering PRC Influence Fund
and the Countering Russian Influence Fund;
and
(E) the America First Opportunity Fund.
(2) ARMS SALES.—The reports, notifications, and certifications, and any other documents, required to be submitted pursuant to
section 36(a) of the Arms Export Control Act
(22 U.S.C. 2776), and such documents submitted pursuant to section 36(b) through (d)
of such Act with respect to countries that
have received assistance provided with funds
appropriated by this Act or prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of
State, foreign operations, and related programs, shall be concurrently submitted to
the Committees on Appropriations and shall
include information about the source of
funds for any sale or transfer, as applicable,
if known at the time of submission.
(3) DEOBLIGATED BALANCES.—An obligation
in excess of $2,000,000 from deobligated balances of funds appropriated by prior Acts
making appropriations for the Department
of State, foreign operations, and related programs that remain available due to the exercise of the authority in section 7011 of such
Acts shall be subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
(i) WITHHOLDING OF FUNDS.—Funds appropriated by this Act under titles III and IV
that are withheld from obligation or otherwise not programmed as a result of application of a provision of law in this or any other
Act shall, if reprogrammed, be subject to the
regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
(j) REQUIREMENT TO INFORM.—The Secretary of State shall promptly inform the appropriate congressional committees of each
instance in which funds appropriated by this
Act for assistance have been diverted or destroyed, to include the type and amount of
assistance, a description of the incident and
parties involved, and an explanation of the
response of the Department of State: Provided, That the requirement to inform of this
subsection shall also apply to the circumstances and in the manner described
under this section in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
(k) PRIOR CONSULTATION REQUIREMENT.—
The Secretary of State, the Chief Executive
Officer of the United States International
Development Finance Corporation, and the
Chief Executive Officer of the Millennium
Challenge Corporation shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations at least 7
days prior to informing a government of, or
publicly announcing a decision on, the suspension or early termination of assistance to
a country or a territory, including as a result of an interagency review of such assistance, from funds appropriated by this Act or
prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs: Provided, That such consultation shall include a detailed justification for such suspension, including a description of the assistance being suspended.

PO 00000

Frm 00053

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

DOCUMENTS, REPORT POSTING, RECORDS MANAGEMENT, AND RELATED CYBERSECURITY
PROTECTIONS

SEC. 7016. (a) DOCUMENT REQUESTS.—None
of the funds appropriated or made available
pursuant to titles III through VI of this Act
shall be available to a nongovernmental organization, including any contractor, which
fails to provide upon timely request any document, file, or record necessary to the auditing requirements of the Department of
State.
(b) PUBLIC POSTING OF REPORTS.—
(1) Any Federal agency funded by this Act
shall maintain a public website, and, except
as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), any report required by this Act to be submitted to
Congress shall be posted on the public
website of such agency not later than 45 days
following the receipt of such report by Congress.
(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply to a report if—
(A) the head of such agency determines and
reports to the Committees on Appropriations
in the transmittal letter accompanying such
report that—
(i) the public posting of the report would
compromise national security, including the
conduct of diplomacy; or
(ii) the report contains proprietary or
other privileged information; or
(B) the public posting of the report is specifically exempted in House Report 119–217 or
the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act).
(3) The agency posting such report shall do
so only after the report has been made available to the Committees on Appropriations.
(4) The head of the agency posting such report shall do so in a central location on the
public website of such agency.
(c) RECORDS MANAGEMENT AND RELATED
CYBERSECURITY PROTECTIONS.—The heads of
Federal agencies funded under titles I and II
of this Act shall—
(1) regularly review and update the policies, directives, and oversight necessary to
comply with Federal statutes, regulations,
and presidential executive orders and memoranda concerning the preservation of all
records made or received in the conduct of
official business, including record emails, instant messaging, and other online tools;
(2) use funds appropriated by this Act to
improve Federal records management pursuant to the Federal Records Act (44 U.S.C.
Chapters 21, 29, 31, and 33) and other applicable Federal records management statutes,
regulations, or policies for such agencies;
(3) direct departing employees, including
senior officials, that all Federal records generated by such employees belong to the Federal Government;
(4) substantially reduce, compared to the
previous fiscal year, the response time for
identifying and retrieving Federal records,
including requests made pursuant to section
552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly
known as the ‘‘Freedom of Information
Act’’); and
(5) strengthen cybersecurity measures to
mitigate vulnerabilities, including those resulting from the use of personal email accounts or servers outside the .gov domain,
improve the process to identify and remove
inactive user accounts, update and enforce
guidance related to the control of national
security information, and implement the
recommendations of the applicable reports of
the cognizant Office of Inspector General.
USE OF FUNDS IN CONTRAVENTION OF THIS ACT

SEC. 7017. If the President makes a determination not to comply with any provision
of this Act on constitutional grounds, the
head of the relevant Federal agency shall notify the Committees on Appropriations in

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H774

writing within 5 days of such determination,
the basis for such determination and any resulting changes to program or policy.
PROHIBITION ON FUNDING FOR ABORTIONS AND
INVOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

SEC. 7018. None of the funds made available
to carry out part I of the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961, as amended, may be used to pay
for the performance of abortions as a method
of family planning or to motivate or coerce
any person to practice abortions. None of the
funds made available to carry out part I of
the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as
amended, may be used to pay for the performance of involuntary sterilization as a
method of family planning or to coerce or
provide any financial incentive to any person
to undergo sterilizations. None of the funds
made available to carry out part I of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended,
may be used to pay for any biomedical research which relates in whole or in part, to
methods of, or the performance of, abortions
or involuntary sterilization as a means of
family planning. None of the funds made
available to carry out part I of the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, may be
obligated or expended for any country or organization if the President certifies that the
use of these funds by any such country or organization would violate any of the above
provisions related to abortions and involuntary sterilizations.
ALLOCATIONS AND REPORTS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

SEC. 7019. (a) ALLOCATION TABLES.—Subject
to subsection (b), funds appropriated by this
Act under titles III through V shall be made
available at not less than the amounts specifically designated in the respective tables
included in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act): Provided, That such designated amounts for foreign countries and international organizations shall serve as the amounts for such
countries and international organizations
transmitted to Congress in the report required by section 653(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, and shall be made available for such foreign countries and international organizations notwithstanding the
date of the transmission of such report.
(b) AUTHORIZED DEVIATIONS.—Unless otherwise provided for by this Act, the Secretary
of State may only deviate up to 10 percent
below the amounts specifically designated in
the respective tables included in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in
the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act): Provided, That such percentage may be exceeded only if the Secretary of
State determines and reports in writing to
the Committees on Appropriations on a caseby-case basis that such deviation is necessary to respond to significant, exigent, or
unforeseen events, or to address other exceptional circumstances directly related to the
national security interest of the United
States, including a description of such
events or circumstances: Provided further,
That deviations pursuant to the preceding
proviso may not exceed 50 percent and shall
be subject to prior consultation with, and
the regular notification procedures of, the
Committees on Appropriations.
(c) LIMITATION.—For specifically designated amounts that are included, pursuant
to subsection (a), in the report required by
section 653(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act
of 1961, deviations authorized by subsection
(b) may only take place after submission of
such report.
(d) EXCEPTIONS.—
(1) Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply
to—
(A) funds for which the initial period of
availability has expired; and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

(B) amounts designated by this Act as minimum funding requirements.
(2) The authority of subsection (b) to deviate from amounts designated in the respective tables included in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act) shall not apply to the table included
under the heading ‘‘Global Health Programs’’ in such statement.
(3) With respect to the amounts designated
for ‘‘Global Programs’’ in the table under the
heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ included in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act), the matter preceding the first proviso
in subsection (b) of this section shall be applied by substituting ‘‘5 percent’’ for ‘‘10 percent’’, and the provisos in such subsection
(b) shall not apply.
(e) REPORTS AND CONSULTATIONS.—The Secretary of State and other designated officials, as appropriate, shall submit the reports and conduct the consultations required, in the manner described, in House
Report 119–217 and the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act), unless otherwise directed in such explanatory statement.
(f) CLARIFICATION.—Funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘International
Humanitarian Assistance’’ shall not be included for purposes of meeting amounts designated for countries in this Act, unless such
heading is specifically designated as the
source of funds.
(g) REPORT.—Not later than 45 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations the report required
by section 653(a) of the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961 for fiscal year 2025: Provided, That
such report shall also include details on the
allocation of funds at the program, project,
and activity level for meeting the congressionally directed amounts specifically designated for a purpose in the Department of
State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2024 (division F of
Public Law 118–47), as carried forward by the
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2025 (division A of Public Law 119–4), to include the
amounts specifically designated in title VII
of such Acts: Provided further, That not later
than 30 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, the Secretary shall consult with
the Committees on Appropriations on the
structure and details to accompany such report.
MULTI-YEAR PLEDGES
SEC. 7020. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this Act may
be used to make any pledge for future year
funding for any multilateral or bilateral program funded in titles III through VI of this
Act unless such pledge meets the requirements contained under this section in House
Report 119–217.
PROHIBITION ON ASSISTANCE TO GOVERNMENTS
SUPPORTING INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM

SEC. 7021. (a) LETHAL MILITARY EQUIPMENT
EXPORTS.—
(1) PROHIBITION.—None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available under titles III through VI of this Act may be made
available to any foreign government which
provides lethal military equipment to a
country the government of which the Secretary of State has determined supports
international terrorism for purposes of section 1754(c) of the Export Control Reform
Act of 2018 (50 U.S.C. 4813(c)): Provided, That
the prohibition under this section with respect to a foreign government shall terminate 12 months after that government ceases

PO 00000

Frm 00054

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

to provide such military equipment: Provided
further, That this section applies with respect to lethal military equipment provided
under a contract entered into after October
1, 1997.
(2) DETERMINATION.—Assistance restricted
by paragraph (1) or any other similar provision of law, may be furnished if the President determines that to do so is important
to the national interest of the United States.
(3) REPORT.—Whenever the President
makes a determination pursuant to paragraph (2), the President shall submit to the
Committees on Appropriations a report with
respect to the furnishing of such assistance,
including a detailed explanation of the assistance to be provided, the estimated dollar
amount of such assistance, and an explanation of how the assistance furthers the
United States national interest.
(b) BILATERAL ASSISTANCE.—
(1) LIMITATIONS.—Funds appropriated for
bilateral assistance in titles III through VI
of this Act and funds appropriated under any
such title in prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign
operations, and related programs, shall not
be made available to any foreign government
which the President determines—
(A) grants sanctuary from prosecution to
any individual or group which has committed an act of international terrorism;
(B) otherwise supports international terrorism; or
(C) is controlled by an organization designated as a terrorist organization under section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality
Act (8 U.S.C. 1189).
(2) WAIVER.—The President may waive the
application of paragraph (1) to a government
if the President determines that national security or humanitarian reasons justify such
waiver: Provided, That the President shall
publish each such waiver in the Federal Register and, at least 15 days before the waiver
takes effect, shall notify the Committees on
Appropriations of the waiver (including the
justification for the waiver) in accordance
with the regular notification procedures of
the Committees on Appropriations.
AUTHORIZATION REQUIREMENTS

SEC. 7022. Funds appropriated by this Act,
except funds appropriated under the heading
‘‘Trade and Development Agency’’, may be
obligated and expended notwithstanding section 10 of Public Law 91–672 (22 U.S.C. 2412),
section 15 of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 2680), section
313 of the Foreign Relations Authorization
Act, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995 (22 U.S.C.
6212), and section 504(a)(1) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3094(a)(1)).
DEFINITION OF PROGRAM, PROJECT, AND
ACTIVITY

SEC. 7023. For the purpose of titles II
through VI of this Act, ‘‘program, project,
and activity’’ shall be defined at the appropriations Act account level and shall include
all appropriations and authorizations Acts
funding directives, ceilings, and limitations
with the exception that for the ‘‘National
Security Investment Programs’’, ‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’, and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing
Program’’ accounts, ‘‘program, project, and
activity’’ shall also be considered to include
country, regional, and central program level
funding within each such account, either
as—
(1) justified to Congress; or
(2) allocated by the Executive Branch in
accordance with the report required by section 653(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961 or as modified pursuant to section 7019
of this Act.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

CLARIFICATION

SEC. 7024. Unless expressly provided to the
contrary, provisions of this or any other Act,
including provisions contained in prior Acts
authorizing or making appropriations for the
Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs, shall not be construed to
prohibit activities authorized by or conducted under the Peace Corps Act, the InterAmerican Foundation Act, or the African
Development Foundation Act: Provided, That
prior to conducting activities in a country
for which assistance is prohibited, the agency shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations and report to such Committees
within 15 days of taking such action.
COMMERCE, TRADE AND SURPLUS COMMODITIES
SEC. 7025. (a) WORLD MARKETS.—None of
the funds appropriated or made available
pursuant to titles III through VI of this Act
for direct assistance and none of the funds
otherwise made available to the Export-Import Bank and the United States International Development Finance Corporation
shall be obligated or expended to finance any
loan, any assistance, or any other financial
commitments for establishing or expanding
production of any commodity for export by
any country other than the United States, if
the commodity is likely to be in surplus on
world markets at the time the resulting productive capacity is expected to become operative and if the assistance will cause substantial injury to United States producers of
the same, similar, or competing commodity:
Provided, That such prohibition shall not
apply to the Export-Import Bank if in the
judgment of its Board of Directors the benefits to industry and employment in the
United States are likely to outweigh the injury to United States producers of the same,
similar, or competing commodity, and the
Chairman of the Board so notifies the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further,
That this subsection shall not prohibit—
(1) activities in a country that is eligible
for assistance from the International Development Association, is not eligible for assistance from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and does not export on a consistent basis the agricultural
commodity with respect to which assistance
is furnished; or
(2) activities in a country the President determines is recovering from widespread conflict, a humanitarian crisis, or a complex
emergency.
(b) EXPORTS.—None of the funds appropriated by this or any other Act to carry out
chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961 shall be available for any testing
or breeding feasibility study, variety improvement or introduction, consultancy,
publication, conference, or training in connection with the growth or production in a
foreign country of an agricultural commodity for export which would compete with
a similar commodity grown or produced in
the United States: Provided, That this subsection shall not prohibit—
(1) activities designed to increase food security in developing countries where such
activities will not have a significant impact
on the export of agricultural commodities of
the United States;
(2) research activities intended primarily
to benefit United States producers;
(3) activities in a country that is eligible
for assistance from the International Development Association, is not eligible for assistance from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and does not export on a consistent basis the agricultural
commodity with respect to which assistance
is furnished; or
(4) activities in a country the President determines is recovering from widespread con-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H775

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

flict, a humanitarian crisis, or a complex
emergency.
(c) INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.—The Secretary of the Treasury shall
instruct the United States executive director
of each international financial institution to
use the voice and vote of the United States
to oppose any assistance by such institution,
using funds appropriated or otherwise made
available by this Act, for the production or
extraction of any commodity or mineral for
export, if it is in surplus on world markets
and if the assistance will cause substantial
injury to United States producers of the
same, similar, or competing commodity.
SEPARATE ACCOUNTS

SEC. 7026. (a) SEPARATE ACCOUNTS FOR
LOCAL CURRENCIES.—
(1) AGREEMENTS.—If assistance is furnished
to the government of a foreign country
under chapters 1 and 10 of part I or chapter
4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961 under agreements which result in the
generation of local currencies of that country, the Secretary of State shall—
(A) require that local currencies be deposited in a separate account established by
that government;
(B) enter into an agreement with that government which sets forth—
(i) the amount of the local currencies to be
generated; and
(ii) the terms and conditions under which
the currencies so deposited may be utilized,
consistent with this section; and
(C) establish by agreement with that government the responsibilities of the Department of State and that government to monitor and account for deposits into and disbursements from the separate account.
(2) USES OF LOCAL CURRENCIES.—As may be
agreed upon with the foreign government,
local currencies deposited in a separate account pursuant to subsection (a), or an
equivalent amount of local currencies, shall
be used only—
(A) to carry out chapter 1 or 10 of part I or
chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961 (as the case may be), for such purposes as—
(i) project and sector assistance activities;
or
(ii) debt and deficit financing; or
(B) for the administrative requirements of
the United States Government.
(3) PROGRAMMING ACCOUNTABILITY.—The
Department of State shall take all necessary
steps to ensure that the equivalent of the
local currencies disbursed pursuant to subsection (a)(2)(A) from the separate account
established pursuant to subsection (a)(1) are
used for the purposes agreed upon pursuant
to subsection (a)(2).
(4) TERMINATION OF ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS.—Upon termination of assistance to a
country under chapter 1 or 10 of part I or
chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961 (as the case may be), any
unencumbered balances of funds which remain in a separate account established pursuant to subsection (a) shall be disposed of
for such purposes as may be agreed to by the
government of that country and the United
States Government.
(b) SEPARATE ACCOUNTS FOR CASH TRANSFERS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—If assistance is made
available to the government of a foreign
country, under chapter 1 or 10 of part I or
chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961, as cash transfer assistance or as
nonproject sector assistance, that country
shall be required to maintain such funds in a
separate account and not commingle with
any other funds.
(2) APPLICABILITY OF OTHER PROVISIONS OF
LAW.—Such funds may be obligated and ex-

PO 00000

Frm 00055

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

pended notwithstanding provisions of law
which are inconsistent with the nature of
this assistance, including provisions which
are referenced in the Joint Explanatory
Statement of the Committee of Conference
accompanying House Joint Resolution 648
(House Report No. 98–1159).
(3) NOTIFICATION.—At least 15 days prior to
obligating any such cash transfer or nonproject sector assistance, the President shall
submit a notification through the regular
notification procedures of the Committees
on Appropriations, which shall include a detailed description of how the funds proposed
to be made available will be used, with a discussion of the United States interests that
will be served by such assistance (including,
as appropriate, a description of the economic
policy reforms that will be promoted by such
assistance).
(4) EXEMPTION.—Nonproject sector assistance funds may be exempt from the requirements of paragraph (1) only through the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
ELIGIBILITY FOR ASSISTANCE

SEC. 7027. (a) ASSISTANCE THROUGH NONGOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS.—Restrictions contained in this or any other Act with
respect to assistance for a country shall not
be construed to restrict assistance in support
of programs of nongovernmental organizations from funds appropriated by this Act to
carry out the provisions of chapters 1, 10, 11,
and 12 of part I and chapter 4 of part II of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, the FREEDOM Support Act (Public Law 102–511), and
the Support for East European Democracy
(SEED) Act of 1989 (Public Law 101–179): Provided, That before using the authority of this
subsection to furnish assistance in support of
programs of nongovernmental organizations,
the President shall notify the Committees on
Appropriations pursuant to the regular notification procedures, including a description
of the program to be assisted, the assistance
to be provided, and the reasons for furnishing such assistance: Provided further,
That nothing in this subsection shall be construed to alter any existing statutory prohibitions against abortion or involuntary
sterilizations contained in this or any other
Act.
(b) PUBLIC LAW 480.—During fiscal year
2026, restrictions contained in this or any
other Act with respect to assistance for a
country shall not be construed to restrict assistance under the Food for Peace Act (Public Law 83–480; 7 U.S.C. 1721 et seq.): Provided,
That none of the funds appropriated to carry
out title I of such Act and made available
pursuant to this subsection may be obligated
or expended except as provided through the
regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
(c) EXCEPTION.—This section shall not
apply—
(1) with respect to section 620A of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 or any comparable provision of law prohibiting assistance to countries that support international
terrorism; or
(2) with respect to section 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 or any comparable provision of law prohibiting assistance to the government of a country that
violates internationally recognized human
rights.
PROMOTION OF UNITED STATES ECONOMIC
INTERESTS

SEC. 7028. (a) DIPLOMATIC ENGAGEMENT.—
Consistent with section 704 of the Championing American Business Through Diplomacy Act of 2019 (title VII of division J of
Public Law 116–94), the Secretary of State, in
consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, shall prioritize the allocation of

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H776

funds appropriated by this Act under the
heading ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’ for support
of Chief of Mission diplomatic engagement
to foster commercial relations and safeguard
United States economic and business interests in the country in which each Chief of
Mission serves, including activities and initiatives to create and maintain an enabling
environment, promote and protect such interests, and resolve commercial disputes:
Provided, That each Mission Resource Request and Bureau Resource Request shall include amounts required to prioritize the activities described in this subsection.
(b) TRAINING.—In carrying out section 705
of title VII of division J of Public Law 116–
94, the Secretary of State shall annually assess training needs across the economic and
commercial diplomacy issue areas and ensure, after a review of course offerings,
course attendance records, and course evaluation results, that current offerings meet
training needs.
(c) ASSISTANCE.—
(1) The Secretary of State should direct
each Chief of Mission to consider how best to
advance and support commercial relations
and the safeguarding of United States business interests in the development and execution of the applicable Integrated Country
Strategy and the Mission Resource Request
for each country receiving bilateral assistance from funds appropriated by this Act.
(2) Of the funds appropriated by this Act
under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, not less than $5,000,000
shall be made available to enhance and expand Department of State coordination with
the Department of Commerce on the furtherance of national and economic security interests, subject to the coordination and concurrence of the Assistant Secretary for Global Markets and Director General, United
States Foreign Commercial Service: Provided, That such funds shall not be used to
subsidize or replicate ongoing activities of
the United State Foreign Commercial Service, and may not be used for programs or activities in the United States: Provided further, That such funds are subject to prior
consultation with, and the regular notification procedures of, the Committees on Appropriations.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

SEC. 7029. (a) EVALUATIONS.—The Secretary
of the Treasury shall instruct the United
States executive director of each international financial institution to use the
voice of the United States to encourage such
institution to adopt and implement a publicly available policy, including the strategic
use of peer reviews and external experts, to
conduct independent, in-depth evaluations of
the effectiveness of at least 35 percent of all
loans, grants, programs, and significant analytical non-lending activities in advancing
the institution’s goals of reducing poverty
and promoting equitable economic growth,
consistent with relevant safeguards, to ensure that decisions to support such loans,
grants, programs, and activities are based on
accurate data and objective analysis.
(b) SAFEGUARDS.—
(1) STANDARDS.—The Secretary of the
Treasury shall instruct the United States
Executive Director of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development
and the International Development Association to use the voice and vote of the United
States to oppose any loan, grant, policy, or
strategy if such institution has adopted and
is implementing any social or environmental
safeguard relevant to such loan, grant, policy, or strategy that provides less protection
than World Bank safeguards in effect on September 30, 2015.
(2) ACCOUNTABILITY, STANDARDS, AND BEST
PRACTICES.—The Secretary of the Treasury

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

shall instruct the United States executive director of each international financial institution to use the voice and vote of the
United States to oppose loans or other financing for projects unless such projects—
(A) provide for accountability and transparency,
including
the
collection,
verification, and publication of beneficial
ownership information related to extractive
industries and on-site monitoring during the
life of the project;
(B) will be developed and carried out in accordance with best practices regarding environmental conservation, cultural protection,
and empowerment of local populations, including free, prior and informed consent of
affected Indigenous communities;
(C) do not provide incentives for, or facilitate, forced displacement or other violations
of human rights; and
(D) do not partner with or otherwise involve enterprises owned or controlled by the
armed forces.
(c) COMPENSATION.—None of the funds appropriated under title V of this Act may be
made as payment to any international financial institution while the United States executive director to such institution is compensated by the institution at a rate which,
together with whatever compensation such
executive director receives from the United
States, is in excess of the rate provided for
an individual occupying a position at level
IV of the Executive Schedule under section
5315 of title 5, United States Code, or while
any alternate United States executive director to such institution is compensated by the
institution at a rate in excess of the rate
provided for an individual occupying a position at level V of the Executive Schedule
under section 5316 of title 5, United States
Code.
(d) HUMAN RIGHTS.—The Secretary of the
Treasury shall instruct the United States executive director of each international financial institution to use the voice and vote of
the United States to promote human rights
due diligence and risk management, as appropriate, in connection with any loan,
grant, policy, or strategy of such institution.
(e) FRAUD AND CORRUPTION.—The Secretary
of the Treasury shall instruct the United
States executive director of each international financial institution to use the
voice of the United States to include in loan,
grant, and other financing agreements improvements in borrowing countries’ financial
management and judicial capacity to investigate, prosecute, and punish fraud and corruption.
(f) BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP INFORMATION.—
The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct
the United States executive director of each
international financial institution to use the
voice of the United States to encourage such
institution to collect, verify, and publish, to
the maximum extent practicable, beneficial
ownership information (excluding proprietary information) for any corporation or
limited liability company, other than a publicly listed company, that receives funds
from any such financial institution.
PROTECTIONS.—The
(g)
WHISTLEBLOWER
Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the
United States executive director of each
international financial institution to use the
voice of the United States to encourage such
institution to effectively implement and enforce policies and procedures which meet or
exceed best practices in the United States
for the protection of whistleblowers from retaliation, including—
(1) protection against retaliation for internal and lawful public disclosure;
(2) legal burdens of proof;
(3) statutes of limitation for reporting retaliation;

PO 00000

Frm 00056

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(4) access to binding independent adjudicative bodies, including shared cost and selection external arbitration; and
(5) results that eliminate the effects of
proven retaliation, including provision for
the restoration of prior employment.
(h) GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS AND PROCEDURES.—The Secretary of the Treasury shall
instruct the United States executive director
of each international financial institution to
use the voice of the United States to support
independent investigative and adjudicative
mechanisms and procedures that meet or exceed best practices in the United States to
provide due process and fair compensation,
including the right to reinstatement, for employees who are subjected to harassment,
discrimination, retaliation, false allegations,
or other misconduct.
(i) CAPITAL INCREASES.—None of the funds
appropriated by this Act may be made available to support a new capital increase for an
international financial institution unless the
President submits a budget request for such
increase to Congress and the Secretary of
the Treasury concurrent with such request
determines and reports to the Committees
on Appropriations that—
(1) the capital increase sets such institution on a path to meet its regional or global
objectives, as appropriate, including its overarching strategic framework and vision for
its role in development finance, and such increase includes agreement on internal reforms and policy measures necessary to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the
institution; and
(2) the capital increase does not increase
the voting power of the People’s Republic of
China in such institution relative to that of
the United States, unless the Secretary of
the Treasury certifies and reports to the appropriate congressional committees that
such capital increase is in the national interest of the United States.
(j) OPPOSITION TO LENDING TO THE PEOPLE’S
REPUBLIC OF CHINA.—The Secretary of the
Treasury shall instruct the United States executive director at each multilateral development bank to use the voice and vote of the
United States to oppose any loan, extension
of financial assistance, or technical assistance by such bank to the People’s Republic
of China.
(k) REPORT.—Not later than 120 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit a report
to the Committees on Appropriations detailing any funding provided in the prior calendar year by a financial intermediary fund
overseen by the Department of the Treasury
to the People’s Republic of China or any
country or region subject to comprehensive
sanctions by the United States.
ECONOMIC RESILIENCE INITIATIVE

SEC. 7030. (a) Of the funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, not less than
$155,000,000 shall be made available for the
Economic Resilience Initiative to enhance
the economic security and stability of the
United States and partner countries, including through efforts to counter economic coercion: Provided, That funds made available
by this section may only be made available
following consultation with, and the regular
notification procedures of, the Committees
on Appropriations, and shall include support
for—
(1) strategic infrastructure investments,
which shall be administered by the Secretary
of State in consultation with the heads of
other relevant Federal agencies;
(2) activities to enhance critical mineral
supply chain security; and
(3) the Cyberspace, Digital Connectivity,
and Related Technologies Fund in accordance with Chapter 10 of Part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961: Provided, That

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

the authority of section 592(f) of such Act
may apply to amounts made available for
such Fund under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ and such funds
may be made available for the Digital
Connectivity and Cybersecurity Partnership
program consistent with section 6306 of the
Department of State Authorization Act of
2023 (division F of Public Law 118–31).
(b) Funds appropriated by subsection (a)
may be transferred to, and merged with,
funds appropriated by this Act to the Export-Import Bank of the United States under
the heading ‘‘Program Account’’, to the
United States International Development Finance Corporation under the heading ‘‘Corporate Capital Account’’, and under the
heading ‘‘Trade and Development Agency’’:
Provided, That such transfer authority is in
addition to any other transfer authority provided by this Act or any other Act, and is
subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
(c) Of the funds appropriated under title III
of this Act, not less than $185,250,000 shall be
made available for energy development and
security programs for countries globally
through approaches consistent with section 3
of the Electrify Africa Act (Public Law 114–
121), to improve energy access, productivity,
and self-reliance, including to counter the
influence of the People’s Republic of China
and increase the economic competitiveness
of the United States in the energy sector.
(d) Section 7030(c) of division F of Public
Law 118–47 shall apply during fiscal year
2026.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT, BUDGET
TRANSPARENCY, AND ANTI-CORRUPTION
SEC. 7031. (a) LIMITATION ON DIRECT GOVERNMENT-TO-GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE.—
(1) REQUIREMENTS.—Funds appropriated by
this Act may be made available for direct
government-to-government assistance only
if—
(A) the requirements included in section
7031(a)(1)(A) through (E) of the Department
of State, Foreign Operations, and Related
Programs Appropriations Act, 2019 (division
F of Public Law 116–6) are fully met; and
(B) the government of the recipient country is taking steps to reduce corruption.
(2) CONSULTATION AND NOTIFICATION.—In addition to the requirements in paragraph (1),
funds may only be made available for direct
government-to-government assistance subject to prior consultation with, and the regular notification procedures of, the Committees on Appropriations: Provided, That such
notification shall contain an explanation of
how the proposed activity meets the requirements of paragraph (1): Provided further, That
the requirements of this paragraph shall
only apply to direct government-to-government assistance in excess of $2,500,000 and all
funds available for cash transfer, budget support, and cash payments to individuals.
(3) SUSPENSION OF ASSISTANCE.—The Secretary of State shall suspend any direct government-to-government assistance if the
Secretary has credible information of material misuse of such assistance, unless the
Secretary reports to the Committees on Appropriations that it is in the national interest of the United States to continue such assistance, including a justification, or that
such misuse has been appropriately addressed.
(4) SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION.—The Secretary of State shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations, concurrent with the
fiscal year 2027 congressional budget justification materials, amounts planned for assistance described in paragraph (1) by country, proposed funding amount, source of
funds, and type of assistance.
(5) DEBT SERVICE PAYMENT PROHIBITION.—
None of the funds made available by this Act

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H777

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

may be used by the government of any foreign country for debt service payments owed
by any country to any international financial institution or to the Government of the
People’s Republic of China.
(b) NATIONAL BUDGET AND CONTRACT
TRANSPARENCY.—
(1) MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS OF FISCAL
TRANSPARENCY.—The
Secretary of State
shall continue to update and strengthen the
‘‘minimum requirements of fiscal transparency’’ for each government receiving assistance appropriated by this Act, as identified in the report required by section 7031(b)
of the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2014 (division K of Public Law 113–
76).
(2) DETERMINATION AND REPORT.—For each
government identified pursuant to paragraph
(1), the Secretary of State, not later than 180
days after the date of enactment of this Act,
shall make or update any determination of
‘‘significant progress’’ or ‘‘no significant
progress’’ in meeting the minimum requirements of fiscal transparency, and make such
determinations publicly available in an annual ‘‘Fiscal Transparency Report’’ to be
posted on the Department of State website:
Provided, That such report shall include the
elements included under this section in
House Report 118–146.
(3) ASSISTANCE.—Not less than $5,000,000 of
the funds appropriated by this Act under the
heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ shall be made available for programs
and activities to assist governments identified pursuant to paragraph (1) to improve
budget transparency and to support civil society organizations in such countries that
promote budget transparency.
AND
HUMAN
(c)
ANTI-KLEPTOCRACY
RIGHTS.—
(1) INELIGIBILITY.—
(A) Officials of foreign governments and
their immediate family members about
whom the Secretary of State has credible information have been involved, directly or indirectly, in significant corruption, including
corruption related to the extraction of natural resources, or a gross violation of human
rights, including the wrongful detention of
locally employed staff of a United States
diplomatic mission or a United States citizen or national, shall be ineligible for entry
into the United States.
(B) Concurrent with the application of subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall, as appropriate, refer the matter to the Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the
Treasury, to determine whether to apply
sanctions authorities in accordance with
United States law to block the transfer of
property and interests in property, and all financial transactions, in the United States
involving any person described in such subparagraph.
(C) The Secretary shall also publicly or
privately designate or identify the officials
of foreign governments and their immediate
family members about whom the Secretary
has such credible information without regard
to whether the individual has applied for a
visa.
(2) EXCEPTION.—Individuals shall not be ineligible for entry into the United States pursuant to paragraph (1) if such entry would
further important United States law enforcement objectives or is necessary to permit the
United States to fulfill its obligations under
the United Nations Headquarters Agreement:
Provided, That nothing in paragraph (1) shall
be construed to derogate from United States
Government obligations under applicable
international agreements.
(3) WAIVER.—The Secretary may waive the
application of paragraph (1) if the Secretary
determines that the waiver would serve a

PO 00000

Frm 00057

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

compelling national interest or that the circumstances which caused the individual to
be ineligible have changed sufficiently.
(4) REPORT.—Not later than 30 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, and every
90 days thereafter until September 30, 2027,
the Secretary of State shall submit a report,
including a classified annex if necessary, to
the appropriate congressional committees
and the Committees on the Judiciary describing the information related to corruption or violation of human rights concerning
each of the individuals found ineligible in
the previous 12 months pursuant to paragraph (1)(A) as well as the individuals who
the Secretary designated or identified pursuant to paragraph (1)(B), or who would be ineligible but for the application of paragraph
(2), a list of any waivers provided under paragraph (3), and the justification for each waiver.
(5) POSTING OF REPORT.—Any unclassified
portion of the report required under paragraph (4) shall be posted on the Department
of State website.
(6) CLARIFICATION.—For purposes of paragraphs (1), (4), and (5), the records of the Department of State and of diplomatic and consular offices of the United States pertaining
to the issuance or refusal of visas or permits
to enter the United States shall not be considered confidential.
(d) EXTRACTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES.—
(1) ASSISTANCE.—Funds appropriated by
this Act shall be made available to promote
and support transparency and accountability
of expenditures and revenues related to the
extraction of natural resources, including by
strengthening implementation and monitoring of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, implementing and enforcing section 8204 of the Food, Conservation,
and Energy Act of 2008 (Public Law 110–246;
122 Stat. 2052) and the amendments made by
such section, and to prevent the sale of conflict minerals, and for technical assistance
to promote independent audit mechanisms
and support civil society participation in
natural resource management.
(2) PUBLIC DISCLOSURE AND INDEPENDENT
AUDITS.—
(A) The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the executive director of each international financial institution to use the
voice and vote of the United States to oppose
any assistance by such institutions (including any loan, credit, grant, or guarantee) to
any country for the extraction and export of
a natural resource if the government of such
country has in place laws, regulations, or
procedures to prevent or limit the public disclosure of company payments as required by
United States law, and unless such government has adopted laws, regulations, or procedures in the sector in which assistance is
being considered that: (1) accurately account
for and publicly disclose payments to the
government by companies involved in the extraction and export of natural resources; (2)
include independent auditing of accounts receiving such payments and the public disclosure of such audits; and (3) require public
disclosure of agreement and bidding documents, as appropriate.
(B) The requirements of subparagraph (A)
shall not apply to assistance for the purpose
of building the capacity of such government
to meet the requirements of such subparagraph.
DEMOCRACY PROGRAMS

SEC. 7032. (a) FUNDING.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the headings ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, ‘‘Democracy Fund’’, and ‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’,
$2,175,000,000 should be made available for democracy programs as described under this

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H778

section in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act).
(b) AUTHORITIES.—
(1) AVAILABILITY.—Funds made available
by this Act for democracy programs pursuant to subsection (a) and under the heading
‘‘National Endowment for Democracy’’ may
be made available notwithstanding any other
provision of law, and with regard to the National Endowment for Democracy (NED),
any regulation.
(2) BENEFICIARIES.—Funds made available
by this Act for the NED are made available
pursuant to the authority of the National
Endowment for Democracy Act (title V of
Public Law 98–164), including all decisions regarding the selection of beneficiaries.
(c) DEFINITION OF DEMOCRACY PROGRAMS.—
For purposes of funds appropriated by this
Act, the term ‘‘democracy programs’’ means
programs that support good governance,
credible and competitive elections, freedom
of expression, association, assembly, and religion, human rights, labor rights, independent media, and the rule of law, and that
otherwise strengthen the capacity of democratic political parties, governments, nongovernmental organizations and institutions, and citizens to support the development of democratic states and institutions
that are responsive and accountable to citizens.
(d) RESTRICTIONS ON FOREIGN GOVERNMENT
INTERFERENCE.—
(1) PRIOR APPROVAL.—With respect to the
provision of assistance for democracy programs in this Act, the organizations implementing such assistance, the specific nature
of the assistance, and the participants in
such programs shall not be subject to prior
approval by the government of any foreign
country.
(2) DISCLOSURE OF IMPLEMENTING PARTNER
INFORMATION.—If the Secretary of State determines that the government of the country
is undemocratic or has engaged in or condoned harassment, threats, or attacks
against organizations implementing democracy programs, any new bilateral agreement
governing the terms and conditions under
which assistance is provided to such country
shall not require the disclosure of the names
of implementing partners of democracy programs, and the Secretary of State shall expeditiously seek to negotiate amendments to
existing bilateral agreements, as necessary,
to conform to this requirement.
(e) PROTECTION OF CIVIL SOCIETY ACTIVISTS
AND JOURNALISTS.—Funds appropriated by
this Act under the headings ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ and ‘‘Democracy
Fund’’ shall be made available to support
and protect members of civil society and
journalists who have been threatened, harassed, or attacked.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM

SEC. 7033. (a) INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS
FREEDOM OFFICE.—Funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’ shall be made available for the Office
of International Religious Freedom, Department of State.
(b) ASSISTANCE.—
(1) Of the funds appropriated by this Act
under the headings ‘‘National Security Investment
Programs’’
and
‘‘Democracy
Fund’’, not less than $40,000,000 shall be made
available for international religious freedom
programs: Provided, That such funds shall be
the responsibility of the Ambassador-atLarge for International Religious Freedom,
in consultation with other relevant United
States Government officials: Provided further, That such funds shall be prioritized for
programs in countries designated as a country of particular concern for religious free-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

dom pursuant to section 402(b)(1)(A)(ii) of the
International Religious Freedom Act of 1998
(22 U.S.C. 6442).
(2) Funds appropriated by this Act under
the heading ‘‘International Humanitarian
Assistance’’ shall be made available for humanitarian assistance for vulnerable and
persecuted ethnic and religious minorities,
including victims of genocide designated by
the Secretary of State and other groups that
have suffered crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing.
(c) AUTHORITY.—Funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ may be made
available notwithstanding any other provision of law for assistance for ethnic and religious minorities in Iraq and Syria.
SPECIAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 7034. (a) VICTIMS OF WAR, DISPLACED
CHILDREN, AND DISPLACED BURMESE.—Funds
appropriated in title III of this Act that are
made available for victims of war, displaced
children, displaced Burmese, and to combat
trafficking in persons and assist victims of
such trafficking may be made available notwithstanding any other provision of law.
(b) FORENSIC ASSISTANCE.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the headings
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’
and ‘‘International Narcotics Control and
Law Enforcement’’, not less than $15,000,000
shall be made available for forensic assistance related to combating human trafficking
as well as the exhumation and identification
of victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide: Provided, That such
funds shall be in addition to funds made
available by this Act and prior Acts making
appropriations for the Department of State,
foreign operations, and related programs for
assistance for countries.
(c) DIRECTIVES AND AUTHORITIES.—
(1) GENOCIDE VICTIMS MEMORIAL SITES.—
Funds appropriated by this Act under the
heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ may be made available as contributions to establish and maintain memorial
sites of genocide, subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on
Appropriations.
(2) EXCHANGE VISITOR PROGRAM.—None of
the funds made available by this Act may be
used to modify the Exchange Visitor Program administered by the Department of
State to implement the Mutual Educational
and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 (Public
Law 87–256; 22 U.S.C. 2451 et seq.), except
through the formal rulemaking process pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act
(5 U.S.C. 551 et seq.) and notwithstanding the
exception to such rulemaking process in
such Act: Provided, That funds made available for such purpose shall only be made
available after consultation with, and subject to the regular notification procedures
of, the Committees on Appropriations, regarding how any proposed modification
would affect the public diplomacy goals of,
and the estimated economic impact on, the
United States: Provided further, That such
consultation shall take place not later than
30 days prior to the publication in the Federal Register of any regulatory action modifying the Exchange Visitor Program.
(3) PAYMENTS.—Funds appropriated by this
Act and prior Acts making appropriations
for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs under the headings ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’, except for
funds designated by Congress as an emergency requirement pursuant to a concurrent
resolution on the budget or the Balanced
Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
of 1985, are available to provide payments
pursuant to section 901(i)(2) of title IX of division J of the Further Consolidated Appro-

PO 00000

Frm 00058

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

priations Act, 2020 (22 U.S.C. 2680b(i)(2)): Provided, That funds made available pursuant to
this paragraph shall be subject to prior consultation with the Committees on Appropriations.
(4) PROGRAM COORDINATION.—The fourth
proviso under the heading ‘‘International
Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’ in
the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2022 (division K of Public Law 117–
103) shall continue in effect during fiscal
year 2026 and apply to funds appropriated
under such heading in this Act.
(d) PARTNER VETTING.—Prior to initiating
a partner vetting program, providing a direct
vetting option, or making a significant
change to the scope of an existing partner
vetting program, the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations: Provided, That the Secretary of
State may restrict the award of, terminate,
or cancel contracts, grants, or cooperative
agreements or require an awardee to restrict
the award of, terminate, or cancel a subaward based on information in connection
with a partner vetting program.
(e) INTERNATIONAL CHILD ABDUCTIONS.—The
Secretary of State should withhold funds appropriated under title III of this Act for assistance for the central government of any
country that is not taking appropriate steps
to comply with the Convention on the Civil
Aspects of International Child Abductions,
done at the Hague on October 25, 1980: Provided, That the Secretary shall report to the
Committees on Appropriations within 15
days of withholding funds under this subsection.
(f) CONTINGENCIES.—During fiscal year 2026,
the President may use up to $125,000,000
under the authority of section 451 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, notwithstanding
any other provision of law.
(g) TRANSFER OF FUNDS FOR EXTRAORDINARY PROTECTION.—The Secretary of State
may transfer to, and merge with, funds
under the heading ‘‘Protection of Foreign
Missions and Officials’’ unobligated balances
of expired funds appropriated under the
heading ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’ for fiscal
year 2026, at no later than the end of the
fifth fiscal year after the last fiscal year for
which such funds are available for the purposes for which appropriated: Provided, That
not more than $50,000,000 may be transferred.
(h) IMPACT ON JOBS.—Section 7056 of the
Department of State, Foreign Operations,
and Related Programs Appropriations Act,
2021 (division K of Public Law 116–260) shall
continue in effect during fiscal year 2026.
(i) EXTENSION OF AUTHORITIES.—
(1) INCENTIVES FOR CRITICAL POSTS.—The
authority contained in section 1115(d) of the
Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2009 (Public Law 111–32) shall remain in effect through
September 30, 2026.
(2) TRANSFER OF BALANCES.—Section 7081(h)
of the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2017 (division J of Public Law 115–
31) shall continue in effect during fiscal year
2026.
(3) PROTECTIVE SERVICES.—Section 7071 of
the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2022 (division K of Public Law 117–
103) shall continue in effect during fiscal
year 2026 and shall apply to funds appropriated by this Act.
(4) EXTENSIONS.—
(A) Chapter 5 of title I of the Emergency
Wartime Supplemental Appropriations Act,
2003 (Public Law 108–11; 117 Stat. 576) is
amended under the heading ‘‘Loan Guarantees to Israel’’—
(i) in the matter preceding the first proviso, by striking ‘‘September 30, 2030’’ and
inserting ‘‘September 30, 2031’’; and

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

(ii) in the second proviso, by striking ‘‘September 30, 2030’’ and inserting ‘‘September
30, 2031’’.
(B) Section 7030(b) of the Department of
State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2024 (division J of
Public Law 118–47) shall continue in effect
during fiscal year 2026 and shall—
(i) also apply to funds appropriated by this
Act under the heading ‘‘National Security
Investment Programs’’ and to the countries
of Costa Rica and Panama; and
(ii) be applied by substituting ‘‘Department of State’’ for ‘‘United States Agency
for International Development’’.
(5) CATEGORICAL ELIGIBILITY.—The Foreign
Operations, Export Financing, and Related
Programs Appropriations Act, 1990 (Public
Law 101–167) is amended—
(A) in section 599D (8 U.S.C. 1157 note)—
(i) in subsection (b)(3), by striking ‘‘and
2025’’ and inserting ‘‘2025, and 2026’’; and
(ii) in subsection (e), by striking ‘‘2025’’
each place it appears and inserting ‘‘2026’’;
and
(B) in section 599E(b)(2) (8 U.S.C. 1255 note),
by striking ‘‘2025’’ and inserting ‘‘2026’’.
(j) HIV/AIDS WORKING CAPITAL FUND.—
Funds available in the HIV/AIDS Working
Capital Fund established pursuant to section
525(b)(1) of the Foreign Operations, Export
Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2005 (Public Law 108–447) may be
made available for pharmaceuticals and
other products for child survival, malaria,
tuberculosis, and emerging infectious diseases to the same extent as HIV/AIDS pharmaceuticals and other products, subject to
the terms and conditions in such section:
Provided, That the authority in section
525(b)(5) of the Foreign Operations, Export
Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2005 (Public Law 108–447) shall be
exercised by the Secretary of State with respect to funds deposited for such non-HIV/
AIDS pharmaceuticals and other products,
and shall be subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That the Secretary shall include in the congressional
budget justification an accounting of budgetary resources, disbursements, balances,
and reimbursements related to such fund.
(k) FOUNDATION.—Subtitle A of title LI of
division E of the Servicemember Quality of
Life Improvement and National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2025 (Public
Law 118–159) is amended—
(1) in section 5101(6) (22 U.S.C. 10601(6)), by
striking ‘‘International Conservation’’ and
inserting ‘‘Natural Security and Counterterrorism’’; and
(2) in section 5102 (22 U.S.C. 10602)—
(A) in the section heading, by striking
‘‘international conservation’’ and inserting
‘‘natural security and counterterrorism’’;
and
(B) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ‘‘International Conservation’’ and inserting ‘‘Natural Security and Counterterrorism’’.
(l) DEFINITIONS.—
(1) APPROPRIATE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES.—Unless otherwise defined in this Act,
for purposes of this Act the term ‘‘appropriate congressional committees’’ means the
Committees on Appropriations and Foreign
Relations of the Senate and the Committees
on Appropriations and Foreign Affairs of the
House of Representatives.
(2) CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATIONS.—The
term ‘‘regular notification procedures of the
Committees on Appropriations’’ means such
Committees shall be notified not less than 15
days in advance of the obligation of funds:
Provided, That such notifications shall include the information detailed under this
section in the explanatory statement de-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H779

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

scribed in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act).
(3) FUNDS APPROPRIATED BY THIS ACT AND
PRIOR ACTS.—Unless otherwise defined in this
Act, for purposes of this Act the term ‘‘funds
appropriated by this Act and prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of
State, foreign operations, and related programs’’ means funds that remain available
for obligation, and have not expired.
(4) INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.—In this Act ‘‘international financial
institutions’’ means the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, the
International Development Association, the
International Finance Corporation, the
Inter-American Development Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the International Fund for Agricultural Development,
the Asian Development Bank, the Asian Development Fund, the Inter-American Investment Corporation, the North American Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the African
Development Bank, the African Development Fund, and the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency.
(5) PACIFIC ISLANDS COUNTRIES.—In this
Act, the term ‘‘Pacific Islands countries’’
means the Cook Islands, the Republic of Fiji,
the Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of the
Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Nauru, Niue, the
Republic of Palau, the Independent State of
Papua New Guinea, the Independent State of
Samoa, the Solomon Islands, the Kingdom of
Tonga, Tuvalu, and the Republic of Vanuatu.
(6) PRIOR CONSULTATION.—For the purposes
of this Act, the term ‘‘prior consultation’’
means a substantive engagement between a
relevant Federal agency and the Committees
on Appropriations at least 7 days prior to
any public announcement or submission of a
notification in which such Committees are
provided with details and the opportunity to
engage on—
(A) the proposed use of funds, as applicable;
(B) the development, content, or conduct
of a program, project, or activity; and
(C) the proposed decision to be taken.
(7) SPEND PLAN.—In this Act, the term
‘‘spend plan’’ means a plan for the uses of
funds appropriated for a particular entity,
country, program, purpose, or account and
which shall include, at a minimum, a description of—
(A) realistic and sustainable goals, criteria
for measuring progress, and a timeline for
achieving such goals;
(B) amounts and sources of funds by account;
(C) how such funds will complement other
ongoing or planned programs; and
(D) implementing partners, to the maximum extent practicable.
(8) SUCCESSOR OPERATING UNIT.—Any reference to a particular operating unit or office in this Act or prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs shall
be deemed to include any successor operating unit performing the same or similar
functions.
(9) THIS ACT.—This Act shall be deemed to
be an Act making appropriations for the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and
Related Programs for purposes of any provision of law citing, or referring to amounts
made available by, such an Act.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND SECURITY

SEC. 7035. (a) ASSISTANCE.—
(1) COMMUNITY-BASED POLICE ASSISTANCE.—
Funds made available under titles III and IV
of this Act to carry out the provisions of
chapter 1 of part I and chapters 4 and 6 of
part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,

PO 00000

Frm 00059

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

may be used, notwithstanding section 660 of
that Act, to enhance the effectiveness and
accountability of civilian police authority
through training and technical assistance in
human rights, the rule of law, anti-corruption, strategic planning, and through assistance to foster civilian police roles that support democratic governance, including assistance for programs to prevent conflict, respond to disasters, address gender-based violence, and foster improved police relations
with the communities they serve.
(2) COMBAT CASUALTY CARE.—
(A) Consistent with the objectives of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and the Arms
Export Control Act, funds appropriated by
this Act under the headings ‘‘Peacekeeping
Operations’’ and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’ shall be made available for
combat casualty training and equipment in
an amount above the prior fiscal year.
(B) The Secretary of State shall offer combat casualty care training and equipment as
a component of any package of lethal assistance funded by this Act with funds appropriated under the headings ‘‘Peacekeeping
Operations’’ and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’: Provided, That the requirement of this subparagraph shall apply to a
country in conflict, unless the Secretary determines that such country has in place, to
the maximum extent practicable, functioning combat casualty care treatment and
equipment that meets or exceeds the standards recommended by the Committee on
Tactical Combat Casualty Care: Provided further, That any such training and equipment
for combat casualty care shall be made
available through an open and competitive
process.
(3) TRAINING RELATED TO INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW.—The Secretary of State
shall offer training related to the requirements of international humanitarian law as
a component of any package of lethal assistance funded by this Act with funds appropriated under the headings ‘‘Peacekeeping
Operations’’ and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’: Provided, That the requirement of this paragraph shall not apply to a
country that is a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), is a
major non-NATO ally designated by section
517(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,
or is complying with international humanitarian law: Provided further, That any such
training shall be made available through an
open and competitive process.
(4) INTERNATIONAL PRISON CONDITIONS.—
Funds appropriated by this Act under the
headings ‘‘National Security Investment
Programs’’ and ‘‘International Narcotics
Control and Law Enforcement’’ shall be
made available for assistance to eliminate
inhumane conditions in foreign prisons and
other detention facilities, notwithstanding
section 660 of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961: Provided, That the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the proposed uses of such funds
prior to obligation and not later than 60 days
after the date of enactment of this Act: Provided further, That such funds shall be in addition to funds otherwise made available by
this Act for such purpose.
(5) MANAGEMENT AND TRANSPARENCY OF ASSISTANCE.—Of the funds appropriated by this
Act under the heading ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’, not less than $2,500,000 shall be made
available for the Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, Department of State, in accordance with the purposes specified under this
heading in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act).
(b) AUTHORITIES.—
(1) RECONSTITUTING CIVILIAN POLICE AUTHORITY.—In providing assistance with funds

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H780

appropriated by this Act under section
660(b)(6) of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961, support for a nation emerging from instability may be deemed to mean support for
regional, district, municipal, or other subnational entity emerging from instability, as
well as a nation emerging from instability.
(2) DISARMAMENT, DEMOBILIZATION, AND REINTEGRATION.—Section 7034(d) of the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2015 (division J of Public Law 113–235) shall continue
in effect during fiscal year 2026, and shall
apply to funds made available by this Act
under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’.
(3) COMMERCIAL LEASING OF DEFENSE ARTICLES.—Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, and subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations, the authority of section 23(a) of
the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2763)
may be used to provide financing to Israel,
Egypt, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and major non-NATO allies for
the procurement by leasing (including leasing with an option to purchase) of defense articles from United States commercial suppliers, not including Major Defense Equipment (other than helicopters and other types
of aircraft having possible civilian application), if the President determines that there
are compelling foreign policy or national security reasons for those defense articles
being provided by commercial lease rather
than by government-to-government sale
under such Act.
(4) SPECIAL DEFENSE ACQUISITION FUND.—
Not to exceed $900,000,000 may be obligated
pursuant to section 51(c)(2) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2795(c)(2)) for the
purposes of the Special Defense Acquisition
Fund (the Fund), to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028: Provided,
That the provision of defense articles and defense services to foreign countries or international organizations from the Fund shall
be subject to the concurrence of the Secretary of State.
(5) EXTENSION OF WAR RESERVE STOCKPILE
AUTHORITY.—Section 514(b)(2)(A) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C.
2321h(b)(2)(A)) is amended by striking ‘‘2027’’
and inserting ‘‘2028’’.
CLARIFICATION.—Notwith(6)
PROGRAM
standing section 503(a)(3) of Public Law 87–
195 (22 U.S.C. 2311(a)(3)), the procurement of
defense articles and services funded on a
non-repayable basis under section 23 of the
Arms Export Control Act may be priced to
include the costs of salaries of members of
the Armed Forces of the United States engaged in security assistance activities pursuant to 10 U.S.C. 341 (relating to the State
Partnership Program): Provided, That this
paragraph shall only apply to funds that remain available for obligation in fiscal year
2026.
(7) FOREIGN MILITARY FINANCING DIRECT
LOANS AND LOAN GUARANTEES.—Through fiscal year 2027, the terms and conditions provided in section 2606(a) and (b) of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2022 (Public
Law 117–103; 136 Stat. 785) shall apply in the
same manner and to the same extent to
amounts made available by this Act under
the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing
Program’’, except that the limitations on
amounts made available for direct loans and
loan guarantees under sections 2606(a) and
(b) shall each be increased by an additional
$8,000,000,000, and the phrase ‘‘, except with
respect to the initial obligation of funds for
such costs’’ shall be inserted before the period in the final proviso of section 2606(a) and
the final proviso of section 2606(b).
(8) CONTINUATION OF AUTHORITY.—Section
7035(b)(7) of the Department of State, For-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

eign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2024 (division F of Public
Law 118–47) shall continue in effect during
fiscal year 2026.
(c) LIMITATIONS.—
(1) CHILD SOLDIERS.—Funds appropriated by
this Act should not be used to support any
military training or operations that include
child soldiers.
(2) LANDMINES AND CLUSTER MUNITIONS.—
any
(A)
LANDMINES.—Notwithstanding
other provision of law, demining equipment
available to the Department of State and
used in support of the clearance of landmines
and unexploded ordnance for humanitarian
purposes may be disposed of on a grant basis
in foreign countries, subject to such terms
and conditions as the Secretary of State may
prescribe.
(B) CLUSTER MUNITIONS.—No military assistance shall be furnished for cluster munitions, no defense export license for cluster
munitions may be issued, and no cluster munitions or cluster munitions technology
shall be sold or transferred, unless—
(i) the submunitions of the cluster munitions, after arming, do not result in more
than 1 percent unexploded ordnance across
the range of intended operational environments, and the agreement applicable to the
assistance, transfer, or sale of such cluster
munitions or cluster munitions technology
specifies that the cluster munitions will only
be used against clearly defined military targets and will not be used where civilians are
known to be present or in areas normally inhabited by civilians; or
(ii) such assistance, license, sale, or transfer is for the purpose of demilitarizing or
permanently disposing of such cluster munitions.
(3) CROWD CONTROL.—If the Secretary of
State has information that a unit of a foreign security force uses excessive force to repress peaceful expression or assembly concerning corruption, harm to the environment
or human health, or the fairness of electoral
processes, or in countries that are undemocratic or undergoing democratic transition,
the Secretary shall promptly determine if
such information is credible: Provided, That
if the information is determined to be credible, funds appropriated by this Act should
not be used for tear gas, small arms, light
weapons, ammunition, or other items for
crowd control purposes for such unit, unless
the Secretary of State determines that the
foreign government is taking effective measures to bring the responsible members of
such unit to justice.
(4) OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY.—
(A) Prior to the signing of a new Letter of
Offer and Acceptance (LOA) involving funds
appropriated under the heading ‘‘Foreign
Military Financing Program’’, the Secretary
of State shall consult with each recipient
government to ensure that the LOA between
the United States and such recipient government complies with the purposes of section 4
of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C.
2754) and that the defense articles, services,
and training procured with funds appropriated under such heading are consistent
with United States national security policy.
(B) The Secretary of State shall promptly
inform the appropriate congressional committees of any instance in which the Secretary of State has credible information that
such assistance was used in a manner contrary to such agreement.
(d) OTHER MATTERS.—
(1) SECURITY ASSISTANCE REPORT.—Not
later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a report on funds obligated and expended during fiscal year 2025, by country
and purpose of assistance, including for

PO 00000

Frm 00060

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

sustainment of Department of Defense security cooperation programs, and under the
headings
‘‘Peacekeeping
Operations’’,
‘‘International Military Education and
Training’’, and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing
Program’’.
(2) ANNUAL FOREIGN MILITARY TRAINING REPORT.—For the purposes of implementing
section 656 of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961, the term ‘‘military training provided to
foreign military personnel by the Department of Defense and the Department of
State’’ shall be deemed to include all military training provided by foreign governments with funds appropriated to the Department of Defense or the Department of
State, except for training provided by the
government of a country designated by section 517(b) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2321k(b)) as
a major non-NATO ally: Provided, That such
third-country training shall be clearly identified in the report submitted pursuant to
section 656 of such Act.
(3) LEAHY LAW.—For purposes of implementing section 620M of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, the term ‘‘credible information’’ means information that, considering
the source of such information and the surrounding circumstances, supports a reasonable belief that a violation has occurred, and
shall not be determined solely on the basis of
the number of sources; whether the source
has been critical of a policy of the United
States Government or its security partners;
whether the source has a personal connection to the information being reported; or
whether the United States Government is
able to independently verify the information.
COUNTERING THE FLOW OF FENTANYL AND
OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS

SEC. 7036. (a) ASSISTANCE.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the headings
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’
and ‘‘International Narcotics Control and
Law Enforcement’’, not less than $150,000,000
shall be made available for programs to
counter the flow of fentanyl, fentanyl precursors, and other synthetic drugs into the
United States: Provided, That such funds
shall be in addition to funds otherwise made
available for such purposes.
(b) USES OF FUNDS.—Funds made available
pursuant to subsection (a) shall be made
available to support—
(1) efforts to stop the flow of fentanyl,
fentanyl precursors, and other synthetic
drugs and their precursor materials to the
United States from and through the People’s
Republic of China (PRC), Mexico, and other
countries;
(2) law enforcement cooperation and capacity building efforts aimed at disrupting and
dismantling transnational criminal organizations involved in the production and trafficking of fentanyl, fentanyl precursors, and
other synthetic drugs;
(3) implementation of the Fighting Emerging Narcotics Through Additional Nations to
Yield Lasting Results Act (part 7 of subtitle
C of the James M. Inhofe National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023, Public Law 117–263); and
(4) engagement, including through multilateral organizations and frameworks, to
catalyze collective action to address the public health and security threats posed by
fentanyl, fentanyl precursors, and other synthetic drugs, including through the Global
Coalition to Address Synthetic Drug
Threats.
PALESTINIAN STATEHOOD

SEC. 7037. (a) LIMITATION ON ASSISTANCE.—
None of the funds appropriated under titles
III through VI of this Act may be provided to
support a Palestinian state unless the Secretary of State determines and certifies to

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

the appropriate congressional committees
that—
(1) the governing entity of a new Palestinian state—
(A) has demonstrated a firm commitment
to peaceful co-existence with the State of
Israel; and
(B) is taking appropriate measures to
counter terrorism and terrorist financing in
the West Bank and Gaza, including the dismantling of terrorist infrastructures, and is
cooperating with appropriate Israeli and
other appropriate security organizations;
and
(2) the Palestinian Authority (or the governing entity of a new Palestinian state) is
working with other countries in the region
to vigorously pursue efforts to establish a
just, lasting, and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East that will enable Israel and an
independent Palestinian state to exist within
the context of full and normal relationships,
which should include—
(A) termination of all claims or states of
belligerency;
(B) respect for and acknowledgment of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, and political independence of every state in the area
through measures including the establishment of demilitarized zones;
(C) their right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries free from
threats or acts of force;
(D) freedom of navigation through international waterways in the area; and
(E) a framework for achieving a just settlement of the refugee problem.
(b) SENSE OF CONGRESS.—It is the sense of
Congress that the governing entity should
enact a constitution assuring the rule of law,
an independent judiciary, and respect for
human rights for its citizens, and should
enact other laws and regulations assuring
transparent and accountable governance.
(c) WAIVER.—The President may waive subsection (a) if the President determines that
it is important to the national security interest of the United States to do so.
(d) EXEMPTION.—The restriction in subsection (a) shall not apply to assistance intended to help reform the Palestinian Authority and affiliated institutions, or the
governing entity, in order to help meet the
requirements of subsection (a), consistent
with the provisions of section 7040 of this Act
(‘‘Limitation on Assistance for the Palestinian Authority’’).
PROHIBITION ON ASSISTANCE TO THE
PALESTINIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION

SEC. 7038. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this Act may
be used to provide equipment, technical support, consulting services, or any other form
of assistance to the Palestinian Broadcasting
Corporation.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

ASSISTANCE FOR THE WEST BANK AND GAZA

SEC. 7039. (a) OVERSIGHT.—For fiscal year
2026, 30 days prior to the initial obligation of
funds for the bilateral West Bank and Gaza
Program, the Secretary of State shall certify
to the Committees on Appropriations that
procedures have been established to assure
the Comptroller General of the United States
will have access to appropriate United States
financial information in order to review the
uses of United States assistance for the Program funded under the heading ‘‘National
Security Investment Programs’’ for the West
Bank and Gaza.
(b) VETTING.—Prior to the obligation of
funds appropriated by this Act under the
heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ for assistance for the West Bank and
Gaza, the Secretary of State shall take all
appropriate steps to ensure that such assistance is not provided to or through any individual, private or government entity, or edu-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H781

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

cational institution that the Secretary
knows or has reason to believe advocates,
plans, sponsors, engages in, or has engaged
in, terrorist activity nor, with respect to private entities or educational institutions,
those that have as a principal officer of the
entity’s governing board or governing board
of trustees any individual that has been determined to be involved in, or advocating
terrorist activity or determined to be a
member of a designated foreign terrorist organization: Provided, That the Secretary of
State shall, as appropriate, establish procedures specifying the steps to be taken in carrying out this subsection and shall terminate assistance to any individual, entity, or
educational institution which the Secretary
has determined to be involved in or advocating terrorist activity.
(c) PROHIBITION.—
(1) RECOGNITION OF ACTS OF TERRORISM.—
None of the funds appropriated under titles
III through VI of this Act for assistance
under the West Bank and Gaza Program may
be made available for—
(A) the purpose of recognizing or otherwise
honoring individuals who commit, or have
committed acts of terrorism; and
(B) any educational institution located in
the West Bank or Gaza that is named after
an individual who the Secretary of State determines has committed an act of terrorism.
(2) SECURITY ASSISTANCE AND REPORTING REQUIREMENT.—Notwithstanding any other provision of law, none of the funds made available by this or prior appropriations Acts, including funds made available by transfer,
may be made available for obligation for security assistance for the West Bank and
Gaza until the Secretary of State reports to
the Committees on Appropriations on—
(A) the benchmarks that have been established for security assistance for the West
Bank and Gaza and on the extent of Palestinian compliance with such benchmarks;
and
(B) the steps being taken by the Palestinian Authority to end torture and other
cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment of
detainees, including by bringing to justice
members of Palestinian security forces who
commit such crimes.
(d) OVERSIGHT BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
STATE.—
(1) The Secretary of State shall ensure
that Federal or non-Federal audits of all
contractors and grantees, and significant
subcontractors and sub-grantees, under the
West Bank and Gaza Program, are conducted
at least on an annual basis to ensure, among
other things, compliance with this section.
(2) Of the funds appropriated by this Act,
up to $1,400,000 may be used by the Office of
Inspector General of the Department of
State for audits, investigations, and other
activities in furtherance of the requirements
of this subsection: Provided, That such funds
are in addition to funds otherwise available
for such purposes.
(e) COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE UNITED
STATES AUDIT.—Subsequent to the certification specified in subsection (a), the Comptroller General of the United States shall
conduct an audit and an investigation of the
treatment, handling, and uses of all funds for
the bilateral West Bank and Gaza Program,
including all funds provided as cash transfer
assistance, in fiscal year 2026 under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, and such audit shall address—
(1) the extent to which such Program complies with the requirements of subsections
(b) and (c); and
(2) an examination of all programs,
projects, and activities carried out under
such Program, including both obligations
and expenditures.
(f) NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES.—Funds made
available in this Act for West Bank and Gaza

PO 00000

Frm 00061

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

shall be subject to the regular notification
procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
LIMITATION ON ASSISTANCE FOR THE
PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY

SEC. 7040. (a) PROHIBITION OF FUNDS.—None
of the funds appropriated by this Act to
carry out the provisions of chapter 4 of part
II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 may
be obligated or expended with respect to providing funds to the Palestinian Authority.
(b) WAIVER.—The prohibition included in
subsection (a) shall not apply if the President certifies in writing to the Speaker of
the House of Representatives, the President
pro tempore of the Senate, and the Committees on Appropriations that waiving such
prohibition is important to the national security interest of the United States.
(c) PERIOD OF APPLICATION OF WAIVER.—
Any waiver pursuant to subsection (b) shall
be effective for no more than a period of 6
months at a time and shall not apply beyond
12 months after the enactment of this Act.
(d) REPORT.—Whenever the waiver authority pursuant to subsection (b) is exercised,
the President shall submit a report to the
Committees on Appropriations detailing the
justification for the waiver, the purposes for
which the funds will be spent, and the accounting procedures in place to ensure that
the funds are properly disbursed: Provided,
That the report shall also detail the steps
the Palestinian Authority has taken to arrest terrorists, confiscate weapons and dismantle the terrorist infrastructure.
(e) CERTIFICATION.—If the President exercises the waiver authority under subsection
(b), the Secretary of State must certify and
report to the Committees on Appropriations
prior to the obligation of funds that the Palestinian Authority has established a single
treasury account for all Palestinian Authority financing and all financing mechanisms
flow through this account, no parallel financing mechanisms exist outside of the Palestinian Authority treasury account, and
there is a single comprehensive civil service
roster and payroll, and the Palestinian Authority is acting to counter incitement of violence against Israelis and is supporting activities aimed at promoting peace, coexistence, and security cooperation with Israel.
(f) PROHIBITION TO HAMAS AND THE PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION.—
(1) None of the funds appropriated in titles
III through VI of this Act may be obligated
for salaries of personnel of the Palestinian
Authority located in Gaza or may be obligated or expended for assistance to Hamas or
any entity effectively controlled by Hamas,
any power-sharing government of which
Hamas is a member, or that results from an
agreement with Hamas and over which
Hamas exercises undue influence.
(2) Notwithstanding the limitation of paragraph (1), assistance may be provided to a
power-sharing government only if the President certifies and reports to the Committees
on Appropriations that such government, including all of its ministers or such equivalent, has publicly accepted and is complying
with the principles contained in section
620K(b)(1)(A) and (B) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended.
(3) The President may exercise the authority in section 620K(e) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as added by the Palestinian
Anti-Terrorism Act of 2006 (Public Law 109–
446) with respect to this subsection.
(4) Whenever the certification pursuant to
paragraph (2) is exercised, the Secretary of
State shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations within 120 days of the
certification and every quarter thereafter on
whether such government, including all of
its ministers or such equivalent are continuing to comply with the principles contained in section 620K(b)(1)(A) and (B) of the

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H782

Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended:
Provided, That the report shall also detail
the amount, purposes and delivery mechanisms for any assistance provided pursuant
to the abovementioned certification and a
full accounting of any direct support of such
government.
(5) None of the funds appropriated under titles III through VI of this Act may be obligated for assistance for the Palestine Liberation Organization.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

SEC. 7041. (a) EGYPT.—
(1) ASSISTANCE.—Of the funds appropriated
by this Act, not less than $1,425,000,000
should be made available for assistance for
Egypt, of which—
(A) not less than $125,000,000 shall be made
available from funds under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, of
which not less than $40,000,000 should be
made available for higher education programs, including not less than $15,000,000 for
scholarships for Egyptian students with high
financial need to attend not-for-profit institutions of higher education in Egypt that are
currently accredited by a regional accrediting agency recognized by the United States
Department of Education, or meets standards equivalent to those required for United
States institutional accreditation by a regional accrediting agency recognized by such
Department: Provided, That such funds shall
be made available for democracy programs,
and for development programs in the Sinai;
and
(B) not less than $1,300,000,000 shall be
made available from funds under the heading
‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’, to
remain available until September 30, 2027,
subject to the requirements of paragraphs (3)
and (4): Provided, That such funds may be
transferred to an interest bearing account in
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, following consultation with the Committees on
Appropriations and the uses of any interest
earned on such funds shall be subject to the
regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
(2) ADDITIONAL SECURITY ASSISTANCE.—In
addition to amounts made available pursuant to paragraph (1), not less than $75,000,000
of the funds appropriated under the heading
‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’ shall
be made available for assistance for Egypt.
(3) CERTIFICATION AND REPORT.—Funds appropriated by this Act that are available for
assistance for Egypt may be made available
notwithstanding any other provision of law
restricting assistance for Egypt, except for
this subsection and section 620M of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, and may only be
made available for assistance for the Government of Egypt if the Secretary of State certifies and reports to the Committees on Appropriations that such government is—
(A) sustaining the strategic relationship
with the United States; and
(B) meeting its obligations under the 1979
Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty.
(4) WITHHOLDING.—Of the funds made available pursuant to paragraph (1)(B), $320,000,000
shall be withheld from obligation until the
Secretary certifies and reports to the Committees on Appropriations that the Government of Egypt is meeting the requirements
under this section in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided, That the Secretary may
waive such requirement if the Secretary determines and reports to the Committees on
Appropriations that such funds are necessary
for counterterrorism, border security, or
nonproliferation programs or that it is otherwise important to the national security interest of the United States to do so, includ-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

ing a detailed justification for the use of
such waiver and the reasons why any of the
requirements cannot be met: Provided further, That the report required by the previous proviso shall be submitted in unclassified form but may be accompanied by a classified annex.
(b) IRAN.—
(1) FUNDING.—Funds appropriated by this
Act under the headings ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’, ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, and ‘‘Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism, Demining and Related Programs’’
shall be made available—
(A) to support the United States policy to
prevent Iran from achieving the capability
to produce or otherwise obtain a nuclear
weapon;
(B) to support an expeditious response to
any violation of United Nations Security
Council Resolutions or to efforts that advance Iran’s nuclear program;
(C) to support the implementation and enforcement of sanctions against Iran for support of nuclear weapons development, terrorism, human rights abuses, and ballistic
missile and weapons proliferation; and
(D) for democracy programs in support of
the aspirations of the Iranian people.
(2) REPORTS.—
(A) SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT.—The Secretary
of State shall submit to the Committees on
Appropriations the semi-annual report required by section 135(d)(4) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2160e(d)(4)), as
added by section 2 of the Iran Nuclear Agreement Review Act of 2015 (Public Law 114–17).
(B) SANCTIONS REPORT.—Not later than 180
days after the date of enactment of this Act,
the Secretary of State, in consultation with
the Secretary of the Treasury, shall submit
to the appropriate congressional committees
a report on—
(i) the status of United States bilateral
sanctions on Iran;
(ii) the reimposition and renewed enforcement of secondary sanctions; and
(iii) the impact such sanctions have had on
Iran’s destabilizing activities throughout the
Middle East.
(3) LIMITATIONS.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act may be—
(A) used to implement an agreement with
the Government of Iran relating to the nuclear program of Iran, or a renewal of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action adopted
on October 18, 2015, in contravention of the
Iran Nuclear Agreement Review Act of 2015
(42 U.S.C. 2160e);
(B) made available to any foreign entity or
person that is subject to United Nations or
United States bilateral sanctions with respect to the Government of Iran; or
(C) used to revoke the designation of the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps as a Foreign Terrorist Organization pursuant to section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality
Act (8 U.S.C. 1189).
(c) ISRAEL.—Of the funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’, not less than
$3,300,000,000 shall be available for grants
only for Israel: Provided, That funds appropriated by this Act under the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’ and made
available for assistance for Israel shall be
disbursed within 30 days of the date of enactment of this Act: Provided further, That to
the extent that the Government of Israel requests that funds be used for such purposes,
grants made available for Israel under this
heading shall, as agreed by the United States
and Israel, be available for advanced weapons systems, of which not less than
$250,300,000 shall be available for the procurement in Israel of defense articles and defense
services, including research and development.

PO 00000

Frm 00062

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(d) JORDAN.—
(1) Of the funds appropriated by this Act
under titles III and IV, not less than
$1,650,000,000 shall be made available for assistance for Jordan, of which not less than
$845,100,000 shall be made available for budget support for the Government of Jordan and
not less than $425,000,000 shall be made available under the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’.
(2) In addition to amounts made available
pursuant to paragraph (1), not less than
$400,000,000 of the funds appropriated under
the heading ‘‘National Security Investment
Programs’’ shall be made available for assistance for Jordan, which shall be made
available for budget support, and not less
than $50,000,000 of the funds appropriated
under the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’ shall be made available for assistance for Jordan.
(e) LEBANON.—
(1) LIMITATION.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act may be made available
for the Lebanese Internal Security Forces
(ISF) or the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) if
the ISF or the LAF is controlled by a foreign
terrorist organization, as designated pursuant to section 219 of the Immigration and
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1189).
(2) SECURITY ASSISTANCE.—
(A) Funds appropriated by this Act under
the headings ‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’ and ‘‘Foreign
Military Financing Program’’ that are made
available for assistance for Lebanon may be
made available for programs and equipment
for the ISF and the LAF to address security
and stability requirements in areas affected
by conflict in Syria, following consultation
with the appropriate congressional committees.
(B) Funds appropriated by this Act under
the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing
Program’’ that are made available for assistance for Lebanon may only be made available for programs to—
(i) professionalize the LAF to mitigate internal and external threats from non-state
actors, including Hizballah;
(ii) strengthen the security of borders and
combat terrorism, including training and
equipping the LAF to secure the borders of
Lebanon and address security and stability
requirements in areas affected by conflict in
Syria, interdicting arms shipments, and preventing the use of Lebanon as a safe haven
for terrorist groups; and
(iii) implement United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1701:
Provided, That prior to obligating funds
made available by this subparagraph for assistance for the LAF, the Secretary of State
shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a spend plan, including actions to
be taken to ensure equipment provided to
the LAF is used only for the intended purposes, except such plan may not be considered as meeting the notification requirements under section 7015 of this Act or under
section 634A of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961: Provided further, That any notification
submitted pursuant to such section shall include any funds specifically intended for lethal military equipment.
(3) ASSISTANCE.—Funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ that are made
available for assistance for Lebanon may be
made available notwithstanding section 1224
of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act,
Fiscal Year 2003 (Public Law 107–228; 22
U.S.C. 2346 note).
(f) SYRIA.—
(1) NON-LETHAL ASSISTANCE.—Funds appropriated by this Act under titles III and IV
may be made available, notwithstanding any

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

other provision of law, for non-lethal stabilization assistance for Syria, including for
emergency medical and rescue response and
chemical weapons investigations.
(2) LIMITATIONS.—Funds appropriated by
this Act and made available for assistance
for Syria may not be made available for—
(A) a project or activity that supports or
otherwise legitimizes the Government of
Iran, foreign terrorist organizations (as designated pursuant to section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1189)),
or a proxy of Iran in Syria; and
(B) activities that further the strategic objectives of the Government of the Russian
Federation that the Secretary of State determines may threaten or undermine United
States national security interests.
(3) CONSULTATION.—Funds appropriated by
this Act and prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign
operations, and related programs that are
made available for any new program,
project, or activity in Syria shall be subject
to prior consultation with the appropriate
congressional committees.
(g) TUNISIA.—Funds appropriated under titles III and IV of this Act shall be made
available for assistance for Tunisia for the
purposes described under this section in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act), following consultation
with the Committees on Appropriations.
(h) WEST BANK AND GAZA.—
(1) REPORT ON ASSISTANCE.—Prior to the
initial obligation of funds made available by
this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ for assistance for
the West Bank and Gaza, the Secretary of
State shall report to the Committees on Appropriations that the purpose of such assistance is to—
(A) advance Middle East peace;
(B) improve security in the region;
(C) continue support for transparent and
accountable government institutions;
(D) promote a private sector economy; or
(E) address urgent humanitarian needs.
(2) LIMITATIONS.—
(A)(i) None of the funds appropriated under
the heading ‘‘National Security Investment
Programs’’ in this Act may be made available for assistance for the Palestinian Authority, if after the date of enactment of this
Act—
(I) the Palestinians obtain the same standing as member states or full membership as
a state in the United Nations or any specialized agency thereof outside an agreement negotiated between Israel and the Palestinians;
or
(II) the Palestinians initiate an International Criminal Court (ICC) judicially authorized investigation, or actively support
such an investigation, that subjects Israeli
nationals to an investigation for alleged
crimes against Palestinians.
(ii) The Secretary of State may waive the
restriction in clause (i) of this subparagraph
resulting from the application of subclause
(I) of such clause if the Secretary certifies to
the Committees on Appropriations that to do
so is in the national security interest of the
United States, and submits a report to such
Committees detailing how the waiver and
the continuation of assistance would assist
in furthering Middle East peace.
(B)(i) The President may waive the provisions of section 1003 of the Foreign Relations
Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989
(Public Law 100–204) if the President determines and certifies in writing to the Speaker
of the House of Representatives, the President pro tempore of the Senate, and the appropriate congressional committees that the
Palestinians have not, after the date of enactment of this Act—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H783

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(I) obtained in the United Nations or any
specialized agency thereof the same standing
as member states or full membership as a
state outside an agreement negotiated between Israel and the Palestinians; and
(II) initiated or actively supported an ICC
investigation against Israeli nationals for alleged crimes against Palestinians.
(ii) Not less than 90 days after the President is unable to make the certification pursuant to clause (i) of this subparagraph, the
President may waive section 1003 of Public
Law 100–204 if the President determines and
certifies in writing to the Speaker of the
House of Representatives, the President pro
tempore of the Senate, and the Committees
on Appropriations that the Palestinians have
entered into direct and meaningful negotiations with Israel: Provided, That any waiver
of the provisions of section 1003 of Public
Law 100–204 under clause (i) of this subparagraph or under previous provisions of law
must expire before the waiver under this
clause may be exercised.
(iii) Any waiver pursuant to this subparagraph shall be effective for no more than a
period of 6 months at a time and shall not
apply beyond 12 months after the enactment
of this Act.
(3) GAZA OVERSIGHT.—
(A) CERTIFICATION.—The Secretary of State
shall certify and report to the appropriate
congressional committees not later than 15
days after the date of enactment of this Act,
that—
(i) oversight policies, processes, and procedures have been established by the Department of State and are in use to prevent the
diversion to Hamas and other terrorist and
extremist entities in Gaza and the misuse or
destruction by such entities of assistance,
including through international organizations; and
(ii) such policies, processes, and procedures
have been developed in coordination with
other bilateral and multilateral donors and
the Government of Israel, as appropriate.
(B) OVERSIGHT POLICY AND PROCEDURES.—
The Secretary of State shall submit to the
appropriate congressional committees, concurrent with the submission of the certification required in subparagraph (A), a written description of the oversight policies,
processes, and procedures for funds appropriated by this Act that are made available
for assistance for Gaza, including specific actions to be taken should such assistance be
diverted, misused, or destroyed, and the role
of the Government of Israel in the oversight
of such assistance.
(C) REQUIREMENT TO INFORM.—The Secretary of State shall promptly inform the appropriate congressional committees of each
instance in which funds appropriated by this
Act that are made available for assistance
for Gaza have been diverted, misused, or destroyed, to include the type of assistance, a
description of the incident and parties involved, and an explanation of the response of
the Department of State.
(D) THIRD PARTY MONITORING.—Funds appropriated by this Act shall be made available for third party monitoring of assistance
for Gaza, including end use monitoring, following consultation with the appropriate
congressional committees.
(E) REPORT.—Not later than 90 days after
the initial obligation of funds appropriated
by this Act that are made available for assistance for Gaza, and every 90 days thereafter until all such funds are expended, the
Secretary of State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report detailing the amount and purpose of such assistance provided during each respective
quarter, including a description of the specific entity implementing such assistance.

PO 00000

Frm 00063

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(F) ASSESSMENT.—Not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of this Act and
every 90 days thereafter until September 30,
2027, the Secretary of State, in consultation
with the Director of National Intelligence
and other heads of elements of the intelligence community that the Secretary considers relevant, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report assessing whether funds appropriated by this
Act and made available for assistance for the
West Bank and Gaza have been diverted to or
destroyed by Hamas or other terrorist and
extremist entities in the West Bank and
Gaza: Provided, That such report shall include details on the amount and how such
funds were made available and used by such
entities: Provided further, That such report
may be submitted in classified form, if necessary.
(G) CONSULTATION.—Not later than 30 days
after the date of enactment of this Act but
prior to the initial obligation of funds made
available by this Act for humanitarian assistance for Gaza, the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the amount and anticipated
uses of such funds.
(4) APPLICATION OF TAYLOR FORCE ACT.—
Funds appropriated by this Act under the
heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ that are made available for assistance for the West Bank and Gaza shall be
made available consistent with section
1004(a) of the Taylor Force Act (title X of division S of Public Law 115–141).
(5) SECURITY REPORT.—The reporting requirements in section 1404 of the Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2008 (Public Law
110–252) shall apply to funds made available
by this Act, including a description of modifications, if any, to the security strategy of
the Palestinian Authority.
(6) INCITEMENT REPORT.—Not later than 90
days after the date of enactment of this Act,
the Secretary of State shall submit a report
to the appropriate congressional committees
detailing steps taken by the Palestinian Authority to counter incitement of violence
against Israelis and to promote peace and coexistence with Israel.
AFRICA

SEC. 7042. (a) CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC.—
Funds appropriated by this Act under the
heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ may be made available for a contribution to the Special Criminal Court in
Central African Republic.
(b) COUNTRIES OF THE AFRICAN GREAT
LAKES REGION.—
(1) PEACE AGREEMENT AND REGIONAL ECONOMIC
INTEGRATION.—Funds
appropriated
under titles III and IV of this Act shall be
made available to support the June 27, 2025
Peace Agreement Between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Republic of
Rwanda and implementation of the Regional
Economic Integration Framework, including
for cross-border security and education programs, east-west economic linkages, and
health security in Virunga National Park
and adjoining national parks in Rwanda: Provided, That such funds shall prioritize sectors deemed critical by the Secretary of
State to the national security and economic
interests of the United States, including the
mining sector and other natural resources:
Provided further, That such funds shall also
be made available to facilitate regional economic integration and investment, including
with Burundi and Uganda: Provided further,
That such funds may only be made available
following consultation with, and the regular
notification procedures of, the Committees
on Appropriations, and in accordance with
the requirements contained under this section in the explanatory statement described

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H784

in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act): Provided further,
That not less than $60,000,000 shall be made
available for such purposes, which are in addition to amounts made available for assistance for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Rwanda, including
for bilateral assistance for such countries.
(2) DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO.—
Funds appropriated under titles III and IV of
this Act shall be made available for bilateral
assistance for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (DRC) for agriculture, global
health, law enforcement programs, humanitarian assistance, and programs to address
violence against women and girls, including
in Eastern DRC.
(3) REPUBLIC OF RWANDA.—Funds appropriated under titles III and IV of this Act
shall be made available for bilateral assistance for the Republic of Rwanda, including
for maternal and child health programs, programs to combat malaria, and continued
support for the Government of Rwanda’s
education reform efforts.
(4) ASSISTANCE RESTRICTION.—Funds appropriated by this Act under the heading ‘‘International Military Education and Training’’
for the central government of a country in
the African Great Lakes region may be made
available only for Expanded International
Military Education and Training and professional military education until the Secretary of State determines and reports to the
Committees on Appropriations that such
government is not facilitating or otherwise
participating in destabilizing activities in a
neighboring country, including aiding and
abetting armed groups.
(c) COUNTER ILLICIT ARMED GROUPS.—
Funds appropriated by this Act shall be
made available for programs and activities
in areas affected by the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) or other illicit armed groups in
Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, including
to improve physical access, telecommunications infrastructure, and early-warning
mechanisms and to support the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration
of former LRA combatants, especially child
soldiers.
(d) ETHIOPIA.—Funds appropriated by this
Act that are made available for assistance
for Ethiopia should be used to support—
(1) political dialogue;
(2) civil society and the protection of
human rights;
(3) investigations and prosecutions of gross
violations of human rights;
(4) efforts to provide unimpeded access to,
and monitoring of, humanitarian assistance;
and
(5) the restoration of basic services in
areas impacted by conflict.
(e) NIGERIA.—
(1) CERTIFICATION.—Of the funds appropriated under titles III and IV of this Act
that are made available for assistance for
the central Government of Nigeria, 50 percent may not be obligated until the Secretary of State certifies to the Committees
on Appropriations that such Government
is—
(A) taking effective steps to prevent and
respond to violence and hold perpetrators accountable;
(B) prioritizing resources to support victims of such violence, including internally
displaced persons;
(C) actively facilitating the safe return, resettlement, and reconstruction of communities impacted by the violence; and
(D) allocating sufficient resources to address the conditions in subparagraphs (A)
through (C).
(2) PROGRAM PRIORITIZATION.—Funds appropriated under titles III and IV of this Act

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

that are made available for assistance for Nigeria shall be made available on a costmatching basis to the maximum extent practicable and used to support—
(A)
atrocities
prevention,
including
through early warning systems;
(B) advancing religious freedom;
(C) investigations and prosecutions of violence committed by Fulani militia groups,
jihadist terror groups, and criminal gangs;
(D) the effectiveness and accountability of
police and security forces for the protection
of civilians from militia or terrorist attack;
(E) the delivery of humanitarian assistance;
(F) the restoration of basic services in
areas impacted by conflict including through
faith-based and local organizations; and
(G) the development of demobilization, disarmament, and reintegration efforts to address the challenge of illegal weapons trafficking and related security risks, pursuant
to section 7035(b)(2) of this Act.
Comptroller
(3)
ACCOUNTABILITY.—The
General of the United States shall conduct
an independent audit of all United States
foreign assistance provided to Nigeria during
the 5 fiscal years preceding enactment of
this Act: Provided, That such audit shall assess the criteria enumerated under this section in the explanatory statement described
in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act).
(f) SOUTH SUDAN.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act under title IV may be
made available for assistance for the central
Government of South Sudan, except to support implementation of a viable peace agreement in South Sudan.
(g) SUDAN.—
(1) LIMITATION.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act under title IV may be
made available for assistance for the central
Government of Sudan, except to support implementation of a viable peace agreement in
Sudan.
(2) CONSULTATION.—Funds appropriated by
this Act and prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign
operations, and related programs that are
made available for any new program,
project, or activity in Sudan shall be subject
to prior consultation with the appropriate
congressional committees.
(h) ZIMBABWE.—
(1) INSTRUCTION.—The Secretary of the
Treasury shall instruct the United States executive director of each international financial institution to vote against any extension by the respective institution of any loan
or grant to the Government of Zimbabwe, except to meet basic human needs or to promote democracy, unless the Secretary of
State certifies and reports to the Committees on Appropriations that the rule of law
has been restored, including respect for ownership and title to property, and freedoms of
expression, association, and assembly.
(2) LIMITATION.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act shall be made available
for assistance for the central Government of
Zimbabwe, except for health and education,
unless the Secretary of State certifies and
reports as required in paragraph (1).
EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

SEC. 7043. (a) BURMA.—
(1) USES OF FUNDS.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, not
less than $121,000,000 shall be made available
for assistance for Burma for the purposes described in section 5575 of the Burma Act of
2022 (subtitle E of title LV of division E of
Public Law 117–263) and section 7043(a) of the
Department of State, Foreign Operations,
and Related Programs Appropriations Act,
2023 (division K of Public Law 117–328): Pro-

PO 00000

Frm 00064

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

vided, That the authorities, limitations, and
conditions contained in section 7043(a) of division K of Public Law 117–328 shall apply to
funds made available for assistance for
Burma under this Act, except for the minimum funding requirements and paragraph
(1)(B): Provided further, That for the purposes
of section 5575 of the Burma Act of 2022 and
assistance for Burma made available by this
Act and prior Acts making appropriations
for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs, ‘‘non-lethal assistance’’ shall include equipment and associated training as described under this section in the explanatory statement described
in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act).
(2) ASSISTANCE.—Of the funds appropriated
by subsection (a), not less than the following
amounts shall be made available for assistance for Burma—
(A) $75,000,000 for assistance programs, including in Thailand and India, and cross border programs;
(B) $10,000,000 for governance and federalism programs, including at the local and
state levels;
(C) $7,000,000 for atrocities prevention and
accountability programs, including for documentation and preservation of evidence;
(D) $1,000,000 for accountability and justice
programs for crimes against the Rohingya;
(E) $25,000,000 for non-lethal assistance,
consistent with the requirements of paragraph (1);
(F) $1,500,000 for support for current and
former political prisoners; and
(G) $1,500,000 for deserter programs, consistent with the requirements of paragraph
(3).
(3) DESERTER PROGRAMS.—Pursuant to section 7043(a)(1)(A) of division K of Public Law
117–328, as continued in effect by this subsection, funds appropriated by this Act and
prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs that are made available for
assistance for Burma shall be made available
for programs and activities to support deserters from the military junta and its allied
entities, following consultation with the appropriate congressional committees.
(b) INDO-PACIFIC STRATEGY.—
(1) ASSISTANCE.—Of the funds appropriated
under titles III and IV of this Act, not less
than $1,800,000,000 shall be made available to
support implementation of the Indo-Pacific
Strategy.
(2) COUNTERING PRC INFLUENCE FUND.—Of
the funds appropriated or otherwise made
available by this Act under the headings
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’,
‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law
Enforcement’’, ‘‘Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism, Demining and Related Programs’’,
and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’,
not less than $400,000,000 shall be made available for a Countering PRC Influence Fund to
counter the influence of the Government of
the People’s Republic of China and the Chinese Communist Party and entities acting
on their behalf globally, which shall be subject to prior consultation with the Committees on Appropriations: Provided, That such
funds are in addition to amounts otherwise
made available for such purposes: Provided
further, That up to 10 percent of such funds
shall be held in reserve to respond to unanticipated opportunities to counter PRC influence: Provided further, That funds made
available pursuant to this paragraph under
the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing
Program’’ may remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided further, That funds
appropriated by this Act for such Fund under
the headings ‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’, ‘‘Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism, Demining and Related

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

Programs’’, and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing
Program’’ may be transferred to, and merged
with, funds appropriated under such headings: Provided further, That such transfer authority is in addition to any other transfer
authority provided by this Act or any other
Act, and is subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
(3) RESTRICTION ON USES OF FUNDS.—None
of the funds appropriated by this Act and
prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs may be made available for
any project or activity that directly supports or promotes—
(A) the Belt and Road Initiative or any
dual-use infrastructure projects of the People’s Republic of China; or
(B) the use of technology, including biotechnology, digital, telecommunications,
and cyber, developed by the People’s Republic of China unless the Secretary of State, in
consultation with the heads of other Federal
agencies, as appropriate, determines that
such use does not adversely impact the national security of the United States.
(4) MAPS.—None of the funds made available by this Act should be used to create,
procure, or display any map that inaccurately depicts the territory and social and
economic system of Taiwan and the islands
or island groups administered by Taiwan authorities.
(5) TREASURY APPROPRIATIONS FUND SYMBOL
97–11 X 8242 REPROGRAMMING.—Of the grant balances in the Foreign Military Sales Trust
Fund, identified by Treasury Appropriations
Fund Symbol 97–11 X 8242, which are not currently applied to an active FMS case and
which were appropriated prior to fiscal year
2016, $50,000,000 shall be deobligated, as appropriate, and shall be available for assistance for countries in the Indo-Pacific region
and for the purposes of the Countering PRC
Influence Fund, in addition to any funds otherwise made available for such purposes,
under the same authorities and conditions as
amounts made available under this subsection.
(c) LAOS.—Funds appropriated by this Act
under titles III and IV shall be made available for assistance for Laos, including for assistance for persons with disabilities caused
by unexploded ordnance accidents, and funds
may be made available for programs to assist
persons with severe physical mobility, cognitive, or developmental disabilities in areas
sprayed with Agent Orange: Provided, That
funds made available pursuant to this subsection may be used, in consultation with
the Government of Laos, for assessments of
the existence of dioxin contamination resulting from the use of Agent Orange in Laos
and the feasibility and cost of remediation.
(d) MISSION AUSTRALIA.—Funds appropriated by this Act and prior Acts making
appropriations for the Department of State,
foreign operations, and related programs
under the heading ‘‘Administration of Foreign Affairs’’ shall be made available to increase the number of Department of State
personnel and improve the requisite facilities necessary to advance the national security policy objectives of the United States in
Australia, including through AUKUS implementation: Provided, That such expanded
presence shall be reflected in the operating
plan submitted pursuant to section 7062 of
this Act, following consultation with the appropriate congressional committees.
(e) NORTH KOREA.—
(1) CYBERSECURITY.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act or prior Acts making
appropriations for the Department of State,
foreign operations, and related programs
may be made available for assistance for the
central government of a country the Sec-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H785

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

retary of State determines and reports to the
appropriate congressional committees engages in significant transactions contributing materially to the malicious cyber-intrusion capabilities of the Government of
North Korea: Provided, That the Secretary of
State shall submit the report required by
section 209 of the North Korea Sanctions and
Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (Public Law
114–122; 22 U.S.C. 9229) to the Committees on
Appropriations: Provided further, That the
Secretary of State may waive the application of the restriction in this paragraph with
respect to assistance for the central government of a country if the Secretary determines and reports to the appropriate congressional committees that to do so is important to the national security interest of
the United States, including a description of
such interest served.
(2) BROADCASTS.—Funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘International
Broadcasting Operations’’ shall be made
available to maintain broadcasting hours
into North Korea at levels not less than the
prior fiscal year.
(3) HUMAN RIGHTS.—Funds appropriated by
this Act under the headings ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ and ‘‘Democracy
Fund’’ shall be made available for the promotion of human rights in North Korea: Provided, That the authority of section 7032(b)(1)
of this Act shall apply to such funds.
(4) LIMITATION ON USE OF FUNDS.—None of
the funds made available by this Act under
the heading ‘‘National Security Investment
Programs’’ may be made available for assistance for the Government of North Korea.
(f) PACIFIC ISLANDS COUNTRIES.—
(1) OPERATIONS.—Funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘Administration
of Foreign Affairs’’ shall be made available
to increase the United States diplomatic and
development presence in Pacific Islands
countries (PICs), including the number and
location of facilities and personnel, and to
enhance the communications capacity of
such personnel: Provided, That such expanded
presence shall be reflected in the operating
plan submitted pursuant to section 7062 of
this Act, following consultation with the appropriate congressional committees.
(2) ASSISTANCE.—Of the funds appropriated
by this Act under the headings ‘‘National Security
Investment
Programs’’,
‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’, ‘‘Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism,
Demining and Related Programs’’, and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’, not less
than $175,000,000 shall be made available for
assistance for PICs: Provided, That funds appropriated by this Act that are made available for the Countering PRC Influence Fund
shall be made available for assistance for
PICs, in addition to funds made available
under this paragraph: Provided further, That
funds made available by this paragraph for
assistance for PICs shall be made available
for programs and activities to strengthen
and expand cooperation between the United
States and higher education institutions in
PICs, to be awarded on a competitive basis:
Provided further, That of the funds made
available by this paragraph for assistance for
PICs: not less than $5,000,000 shall be made
available for trilateral programs; not less
than $7,500,000 shall be made available for
unexploded ordnance clearance, including in
Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, and
Kiribati; and not less than $20,000,000 shall be
made available for a regional financing facility established by the Pacific Islands Forum
to build preparedness against natural disasters.
(g) PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA.—
(1) PROHIBITION.—
None of the funds appropriated by this Act
may be made available for assistance for the

PO 00000

Frm 00065

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Government of the People’s Republic of
China or the Chinese Communist Party.
(2) HONG KONG.—Of the funds appropriated
by this Act under the heading ‘‘Democracy
Fund’’, not less than $5,000,000 shall be made
available for democracy and Internet freedom programs for Hong Kong, including
legal and other support for democracy activists.
(h) PHILIPPINES.—
(1) ASSISTANCE.—Of the funds appropriated
by this Act under titles III and IV, not less
than $180,300,000 shall be made available for
assistance for the Philippines, of which not
less than $80,300,000 shall be made available
under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ and not less than
$100,000,000 shall be made available under the
heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’.
(2) LIMITATION.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act under the heading ‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’ may be made available for counternarcotics assistance for the Philippines, except for drug demand reduction, maritime
law enforcement, or transnational interdiction.
(i) PUBLIC LAW 106–554.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the headings ‘‘Educational and Cultural Exchange Programs’’
and ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, not less than $11,500,000 shall be
made available to carry out the purposes of
the Vietnam Education Foundation Act of
2000 (title II of division B of H.R. 5666, as enacted by section 1(a)(4) of Public Law 106–554
and contained in appendix D of such Act; 114
Stat. 2763A–257; 22 U.S.C. 2452 note).
(j) TAIWAN.—
(1) GLOBAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
FRAMEWORK.—Of the funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, not less than
$4,000,000 shall be made available for the
Global Cooperation and Training Framework, which shall be administered by the
American Institute in Taiwan.
(2) FOREIGN MILITARY FINANCING PROGRAM.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act
under the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’, not less than $300,000,000 shall
be made available for assistance for Taiwan:
Provided, That the Secretary of State, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense,
shall prioritize the delivery of defense articles and services for Taiwan.
(3) FOREIGN MILITARY FINANCING PROGRAM
LOAN AND LOAN GUARANTEE AUTHORITY.—
Funds appropriated by this Act and prior
Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs under the heading ‘‘Foreign
Military Financing Program’’, except for
amounts designated as an emergency requirement pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the budget or the Balanced Budget
and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985,
may be made available for the costs, as defined in section 502 of the Congressional
Budget Act of 1974, of direct loans and loan
guarantees for Taiwan, as authorized by section 5502(g) of the Taiwan Enhanced Resilience Act (subtitle A of title LV of division
E of Public Law 117–263).
(4) FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.—Funds appropriated by this Act under the heading ‘‘Payment to the American Institute in Taiwan’’
shall be made available for the Taiwan Fellowship Program.
(5) CONSULTATION.—Not later than 60 days
after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Secretary of State shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations on the uses of
funds made available pursuant to this subsection: Provided, That such funds shall be
subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H786

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(k) TIBET.—
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, of the funds appropriated by this Act
under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment
Programs’’,
not
less
than
$10,000,000 shall be made available to nongovernmental organizations with experience
working with Tibetan communities to support activities which preserve cultural traditions and promote sustainable development,
education, and environmental conservation
in Tibetan communities in the Tibet Autonomous Region and in other Tibetan communities in China.
(2) Of the funds appropriated by this Act
under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, not less than $8,000,000
shall be made available for programs to promote and preserve Tibetan culture and language in the refugee and diaspora Tibetan
communities, development, and the resilience of Tibetan communities and the Central Tibetan Administration in India and
Nepal, and to assist in the education and development of the next generation of Tibetan
leaders from such communities: Provided,
That such funds are in addition to amounts
made available in paragraph (1) for programs
inside Tibet.
(3) Of the funds appropriated by this Act
under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, not less than $5,000,000
shall be made available for programs to
strengthen the capacity of the Central Tibetan Administration, of which up to
$1,500,000 may be made available to address
economic growth and capacity building activities, including for displaced Tibetan refugee families in India and Nepal to help
meet basic needs, following consultation
with the Committees on Appropriations.
(4) Funds made available for assistance for
Tibet by this subsection shall be made available as described under this section in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act).
(5) Section 7031(c) of this Act shall be applied to officials of the Government of the
People’s Republic of China and other governments in the South Asia region about whom
the Secretary of State has credible information have been involved in a gross violation
of human rights against the people of Tibet
in the Tibet Autonomous Region or other Tibetan communities in the People’s Republic
of China and the region.
(l) VIETNAM.—Funds appropriated under titles III and IV of this Act shall be made
available for assistance for Vietnam, of
which not less than—
(1) $30,000,000 shall be made available for
health and disability programs to assist persons with severe physical mobility, cognitive, or developmental disabilities: Provided, That such funds shall be prioritized to
assist persons whose disabilities may be related to the use of Agent Orange and exposure to dioxin, or are the result of
unexploded ordnance accidents;
(2) $20,000,000 shall be made available, notwithstanding any other provision of law, for
activities related to the remediation of
dioxin contaminated sites in Vietnam and
may be made available for assistance for the
Government of Vietnam, including the military, for such purposes;
(3) $3,000,000 shall be made available for the
Reconciliation/Vietnamese
Wartime
Accounting Initiative; and
(4) $3,500,000 shall be made available for
higher education programs.
SOUTH AND CENTRAL ASIA

SEC. 7044. (a) AFGHANISTAN.—None of the
funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act and prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

foreign operations, and related programs
may be made available for assistance to the
Taliban.
(b) PAKISTAN.—Of the funds appropriated
under titles III and IV of this Act that are
made available for assistance for Pakistan,
$33,000,000 shall be withheld from obligation
until the Secretary of State reports to the
Committees on Appropriations that Dr.
Shakil Afridi has been released from prison
and cleared of all charges relating to the assistance provided to the United States in locating Osama bin Laden.
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

SEC. 7045. (a) ASSISTANCE FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN.—Funds appropriated
by this Act under titles III and IV and made
available for countries in Latin America and
the Caribbean shall be prioritized for programs as described under this section in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act).
(b) CENTRAL AMERICA.—
(1) ASSISTANCE.—Funds appropriated under
titles III and IV of this Act shall be made
available for assistance for countries in Central America, including Panama and Costa
Rica, consistent with subsection (a), which
shall include programs to—
(A) combat corruption and impunity in
such countries, including, as appropriate,
with offices of Attorneys General;
(B) reduce violence against women and
girls; and
(C) support locally-led development in El
Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras.
(2) LIMITATION ON ASSISTANCE TO CERTAIN
CENTRAL GOVERNMENTS.—
(A) Of the funds made available pursuant
to paragraph (1) under the heading ‘‘National
Security Investment Programs’’ and under
title IV of this Act, 50 percent of such funds
that are made available for assistance for
each of the central governments of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras may only
be obligated after the Secretary of State certifies and reports to the Committees on Appropriations that such government is—
(i) combating corruption and impunity, including investigating and prosecuting government officials, military personnel, and
police officers credibly alleged to be corrupt,
and improving strategies to combat money
laundering and other global financial crimes;
(ii) implementing reforms, policies, and
programs to strengthen the rule of law, including increasing the transparency of public
institutions, strengthening the independence
of judicial and electoral institutions, and improving the transparency of political campaign and political party financing;
(iii) protecting the rights of human rights
defenders, trade unionists, journalists, civil
society groups, opposition political parties,
and the independence of the media;
(iv) taking demonstrable actions to secure
national borders and stem mass migration
toward Mexico and the United States, including positive governance related to combating crime and violence, building economic opportunity, improving government
services, and protecting human rights;
(v) providing effective and accountable law
enforcement and security for its citizens,
curtailing the role of the military in public
security, and upholding due process of law;
(vi) implementing programs to reduce violence against women and girls;
(vii) implementing policies to reduce poverty and promote economic growth and opportunity, including the implementation of
reforms to strengthen educational systems,
vocational training programs, and programs
for at-risk youth;
(viii) cooperating with the United States
to counter drug trafficking, human traf-

PO 00000

Frm 00066

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ficking
and
smuggling,
and
other
transnational crime;
(ix) cooperating with the United States
and other governments in the region to facilitate the return, repatriation, and reintegration of migrants; and
(x) implementing policies that improve the
environment for businesses, including foreign businesses, to operate and invest, including executing tax reform in a transparent manner, ensuring effective legal
mechanisms for reimbursements of tax refunds owed to United States businesses, and
resolving disputes involving the confiscation
of real property of United States entities.
(B) EXCEPTIONS.—The limitation of subparagraph (A) shall not apply to funds appropriated by this Act that are made available
for—
(i) judicial entities to combat corruption
and impunity;
(ii) programs to promote and protect
human rights and to investigate human
rights abuses;
(iii) support for women’s economic empowerment;
(iv) prevention of violence against women
and girls;
(v) humanitarian assistance; and
(vi) food security programs.
(C) FOREIGN MILITARY FINANCING PROGRAM.—None of the funds appropriated by
this Act under the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’ may be made
available for assistance for El Salvador, Guatemala, or Honduras, except for programs
that support humanitarian assistance and
disaster response.
(c) COLOMBIA.—
(1) PRE-OBLIGATION REPORTS.—Prior to the
initial obligation of funds appropriated by
this Act and made available for assistance
for Colombia, the Secretary of State shall
submit the reports required under this section in the explanatory statement described
in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act).
(2) WITHHOLDING OF FUNDS.—
(A) COUNTERNARCOTICS.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the heading
‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law
Enforcement’’ that are made available for
assistance for Colombia, 25 percent may be
obligated only if the Secretary of State certifies and reports to the Committees on Appropriations that in the previous 12 months
the Government of Colombia has—
(i) reduced overall coca cultivation, production, and drug trafficking;
(ii) continued cooperating with the United
States on joint counternarcotics operations;
and
(iii) maintained extradition cooperation
with the United States.
(B) HUMAN RIGHTS.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’ and made
available for assistance for Colombia, 20 percent may be obligated only if the Secretary
of State certifies and reports to the Committees on Appropriations that the requirements under this section in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act) have been met.
(3) EXCEPTIONS.—The limitations of paragraph (2) shall not apply to funds made available for aviation instruction and maintenance, and maritime and riverine security
programs.
(4) AUTHORITY.—Aircraft supported by
funds appropriated by this Act and prior
Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs and made available for assistance for Colombia may be used to transport personnel and supplies involved in drug

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

eradication and interdiction, including security for such activities, and to provide transport in support of alternative development
programs and investigations by civilian judicial authorities.
(5) LIMITATION.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act or prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State,
foreign operations, and related programs
that are made available for assistance for
Colombia may be made available for payment of reparations to conflict victims, compensation to demobilized combatants, or
cash subsidies for agrarian reforms associated with the implementation of the 2016
agreement between the Government of Colombia and illegal armed groups.
(d) CUBA.—
(1) DEMOCRACY PROGRAMS.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the heading
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’,
not less than $25,000,000 shall be made available to promote democracy and strengthen
civil society in Cuba, including to support
political prisoners: Provided, That no funds
shall be obligated for business promotion,
economic reform, entrepreneurship, or any
other assistance that is not democracy building as expressly authorized in the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity (LIBERTAD)
Act of 1996 and the Cuban Democracy Act of
1992.
(2) PROHIBITIONS.—None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this
Act or prior Acts making appropriations for
the Department of State, foreign operations,
and related programs may be used to eliminate or diminish the Cuba Restricted List as
maintained by the Department of State, or
to otherwise allow, facilitate or encourage
financial transactions with entities on the
Cuba Restricted List, as well as other entities or individuals within the Cuban military
or Cuban intelligence services, high level
members of the Communist Party, those licensed by the Cuban government, or the immediate family members of these entities or
individuals.
(3) PROHIBITION ON SUPPORT FOR CUBAN MILITARY AND SECURITY INSTITUTIONS.—None of
the funds appropriated or otherwise made
available by this Act or prior Acts making
appropriations for the Department of State,
foreign operations, and related programs
may be made available to any individual or
entity that—
(A) engages in financial transactions with,
transfers funds to, or otherwise provides material support to the Ministry of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Cuba, the Ministry
of the Interior of Cuba, or any subdivision,
agency, or instrumentality thereof;
(B) engages in activities that directly or
indirectly support, facilitate, or benefit the
operations, revenue generation, or international commercial activities of such Ministries;
(C) is owned or controlled by, or acts on behalf of, any entity described in subparagraphs (A) or (B); or
(D) knowingly provides support or services
for the purpose of circumventing sanctions
or restrictions on the Cuban military or security forces, or to benefit senior members
thereof.
(4) EXCEPTIONS.—The restrictions of paragraph (3) shall not apply to—
(A) the sale of agricultural commodities,
medicine, or medical devices to Cuba consistent with the Trade Sanctions Reform and
Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (22 U.S.C.
7201 et seq.);
(B) payments in furtherance of the lease,
maintenance, or improvements of the United
States military base at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba;
(C) assistance in support of democracybuilding and civil society programs for Cuba

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H787

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

consistent with section 109 of the LIBERTAD
Act;
(D) payments necessary for the operations,
maintenance, or outreach of the United
States diplomatic mission or embassy in Havana, Cuba; and
(E) sending, processing, or receiving authorized remittances.
(e) CUBAN DOCTORS.—
(1) REPORT.—Not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a report to the
appropriate congressional committees listing the countries and international organizations for which the Secretary has credible information are directly paying the Government of Cuba for coerced and trafficked
labor of Cuban medical professionals: Provided, That such report shall be submitted in
unclassified form but may include a classified annex: Provided further, That the Secretary of State shall inform each government or international organization of its inclusion in such report not later than 30 days
after the date of the submission of such report to such committees.
(2) DESIGNATION.—The Secretary of State
shall apply the requirements of section
7031(c) of this Act to officials from countries
and organizations identified in the report required pursuant to the previous paragraph.
(3) LIMITATION.—
(A) None of the funds appropriated by this
Act under titles III and IV may be made
available for assistance for the central government of a country or international organization that is listed for 2 consecutive years
in the report required by paragraph (1).
(B) The Secretary may resume assistance
to the government of a country or international organization listed in the report for
2 consecutive years required by paragraph (1)
if the Secretary determines and reports to
the appropriate congressional committees
that such government or international organization no longer pays the Government of
Cuba for coerced and trafficked labor of
Cuban medical professionals.
(f) FACILITATING IRRESPONSIBLE MIGRATION.—None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act may be
used to encourage, mobilize, publicize, or
manage mass-migration caravans toward the
United States southwest border: Provided,
That not later than 180 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
State shall report to the appropriate congressional committees with analysis on the
organization and funding of mass-migration
caravans in the Western Hemisphere: Provided further, That the prohibition contained
in this subsection shall not be construed to
preclude the provision of humanitarian assistance.
(g) HAITI.—
(1) ASSISTANCE.—Funds appropriated under
titles III and IV of this Act shall be made
available for assistance for Haiti for programs to—
(A) improve security and counter gang violence, including through the Gang Suppression Force in Haiti, and support for the Haitian National Police and administration of
justice;
(B) coordinate programs and facilitate information sharing between and among Federal agencies and other international entities, particularly in the security and electoral sectors;
(C) address humanitarian needs, including
nutrition and programs addressing violence
against women and children;
(D) continue basic education, public
health, and economic development programs;
and
(E) establish humanitarian corridors for
the provision of assistance to the people of
Haiti, as the initial step in implementing an

PO 00000

Frm 00067

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

integrated security and humanitarian response that respects Haitian self-determination and sovereignty.
(2) HAITIAN ARMED FORCES.—Of the funds
appropriated by this Act under the headings
‘‘Peacekeeping Operations’’ and ‘‘Foreign
Military
Financing
Program’’,
up
to
$5,000,000 may be made available for non-lethal assistance and operational support for
the Haitian Armed Forces, following consultation with the appropriate congressional
committees.
(3) HAITIAN COAST GUARD.—The Government of Haiti shall be eligible to purchase
defense articles and services under the Arms
Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.) for
the Coast Guard.
(h) MEXICO.—
(1) WATER DELIVERIES.—None of the funds
appropriated or otherwise made available by
this Act may be made available for assistance for the Government of Mexico until the
Secretary of State certifies and reports to
the Committees on Appropriations that such
Government is delivering water owed to the
United States by Mexico, as prescribed by
Article 4, Section B of the Treaty Between
the United States of America and Mexico Relating to the Utilization of Waters of the
Colorado and Tijuana Rivers and of the Rio
Grande, February 3, 1944 (59 Stat. 1219): Provided, That such certification shall include
an assessment of whether Mexico is delivering water in accordance with all terms established across bilateral agreements addressing delivery shortfalls: Provided further,
That the limitation of this paragraph shall
not apply to funds made available to counter
the flow of fentanyl, fentanyl precursors, and
other synthetic drugs into the United States.
(2) COUNTERNARCOTICS.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under title IV that are
made available for assistance for Mexico, 30
percent may only be obligated after the Secretary of State certifies and reports to the
Committees on Appropriations that in the
previous 12 months the Government of Mexico has taken steps to—
(A) reduce the amount of fentanyl arriving
at the United States-Mexico border;
(B) dismantle and hold accountable
transnational criminal organizations;
(C) support joint counternarcotics operations and intelligence sharing with United
States counterparts;
(D) respect extradition requests for criminals sought by the United States; and
(E) increase counternarcotics engagement
at both Federal and state levels.
(i) NICARAGUA.—Of the funds appropriated
by this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, not less than
$15,000,000 shall be made available for democracy and religious freedom programs for
Nicaragua.
(j) ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES.—
(1) The Secretary of State shall instruct
the United States Permanent Representative
to the Organization of American States
(OAS) to use the voice and vote of the United
States to:
(A) implement budgetary reforms and efficiencies within the Organization;
(B) eliminate arrears, increase other donor
contributions, and impose penalties for successive late payment of assessments;
(C) prevent programmatic and organizational redundancies and consolidate duplicative activities and functions;
(D) prioritize areas in which the OAS has
expertise, such as strengthening democracy,
monitoring electoral processes, and protecting human rights; and
(E) implement reforms within the Office of
the Inspector General (OIG) to ensure the
OIG has the necessary leadership, integrity,
professionalism, independence, policies, and

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H788

procedures to properly carry out its responsibilities in a manner that meets or exceeds
best practices in the United States.
(2) Prior to the obligation of funds appropriated by this Act and made available for an
assessed contribution to the Organization of
American States, but not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Secretary of State shall submit a report to
the appropriate congressional committees on
actions taken or planned to be taken pursuant to paragraph (1) that are in addition to
actions taken during the preceding fiscal
year, and the results of such actions.
(k) THE CARIBBEAN.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under titles III and IV,
not less than $90,000,000 shall be made available for the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative: Provided, That funds made available
above the fiscal year 2025 level shall be
prioritized for countries within the transit
zones of illicit drug shipments toward the
United States that have increased interdiction of illicit drugs and are most directly impacted by the crisis in Haiti.
(l) VENEZUELA.—Of the funds appropriated
by this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, $50,000,000
should be made available for democracy programs for Venezuela.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

EUROPE AND EURASIA

SEC. 7046. (a) SECTION 907 OF THE FREEDOM
SUPPORT ACT.—Section 907 of the FREEDOM
Support Act (22 U.S.C. 5812 note) shall not
apply to—
(1) activities to support democracy or assistance under title V of the FREEDOM Support Act (22 U.S.C. 5851 et seq.) and section
1424 of the Defense Against Weapons of Mass
Destruction Act of 1996 (50 U.S.C. 2333) or
non-proliferation assistance;
(2) any assistance provided by the Trade
and Development Agency under section 661
of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961;
(3) any activity carried out by a member of
the United States and Foreign Commercial
Service while acting within his or her official capacity;
(4) any insurance, reinsurance, guarantee,
or other assistance provided by the United
States International Development Finance
Corporation as authorized by the BUILD Act
of 2018 (division F of Public Law 115–254);
(5) any financing provided under the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945 (Public Law 79–
173); or
(6) humanitarian assistance.
(b) TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY.—None of the
funds appropriated by this Act may be made
available for assistance for a government of
an Independent State of the former Soviet
Union if such government directs any action
in violation of the territorial integrity or national sovereignty of any other Independent
State of the former Soviet Union, such as
those violations included in the Helsinki
Final Act: Provided, That except as otherwise
provided in section 7047(a) of this Act, funds
may be made available without regard to the
restriction in this subsection if the President
determines that to do so is in the national
security interest of the United States: Provided further, That prior to executing the authority contained in the previous proviso,
the Secretary of State shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations on how such
assistance supports the national security interest of the United States.
(c) TURKEY.—The limitations and other
provisions of section 7046(c) of the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2024 (division F of Public Law 118–47) shall continue
in effect during fiscal year 2026 and apply to
funds appropriated by this Act.
(d) REQUIREMENTS.—The limitations and
other provisions of section 7046(d) of the De-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

partment of State, Foreign Operations, and
Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2024
(division F of Public Law 118–47) shall continue in effect during fiscal year 2026 and
apply to funds appropriated by this Act.
(e) OTHER MATTERS.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, not
less than $500,000,000 shall be made available,
notwithstanding any other provision of law,
except section 7047 of this Act, for assistance
and related programs for countries identified
in section 3 of the FREEDOM Support Act
(22 U.S.C. 5801) and section 3(c) of the SEED
Act of 1989 (22 U.S.C. 5402), in addition to
funds otherwise available for such purposes:
Provided, That funds appropriated by this
Act under the headings ‘‘National Security
Investment Programs’’ and ‘‘International
Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’
may be made available for contributions to
multilateral initiatives to counter hybrid
threats.
COUNTERING RUSSIAN INFLUENCE AND
AGGRESSION

SEC. 7047. (a) PROHIBITION.—None of the
funds appropriated by this Act may be made
available for assistance for the central Government of the Russian Federation.
(b) ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY.—
(1) PROHIBITION.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act may be made available
for assistance for the central government of
a country that the Secretary of State determines and reports to the Committees on Appropriations has taken affirmative steps intended to support or be supportive of the
Russian Federation annexation of Crimea or
other territory in Ukraine: Provided, That
except as otherwise provided in subsection
(a), the Secretary may waive the restriction
on assistance required by this paragraph if
the Secretary determines and reports to such
Committees that to do so is in the national
interest of the United States, and includes a
justification for such interest.
(2) LIMITATION.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act may be made available
for—
(A) the implementation of any action or
policy that recognizes the sovereignty of the
Russian Federation over Crimea or other territory in Ukraine;
(B) the facilitation, financing, or guarantee of United States Government investments in Crimea or other territory in
Ukraine under the control of the Russian
Federation or Russian-backed forces, if such
activity includes the participation of Russian Government officials, or other Russian
owned or controlled financial entities; or
(C) assistance for Crimea or other territory
in Ukraine under the control of the Russian
Federation or Russian-backed forces, if such
assistance includes the participation of Russian Government officials, or other Russian
owned or controlled financial entities.
(3) INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.—The Secretary of the Treasury shall
instruct the United States executive director
of each international financial institution to
use the voice and vote of the United States
to oppose any assistance by such institution
(including any loan, credit, grant, or guarantee) for any program that violates the sovereignty or territorial integrity of Ukraine.
(4) DURATION.—The requirements and limitations of this subsection shall cease to be in
effect if the Secretary of State determines
and reports to the Committees on Appropriations that the Government of Ukraine has
reestablished sovereignty over Crimea and
other territory in Ukraine under the control
of the Russian Federation or Russian-backed
forces.
(c) OCCUPATION OF THE GEORGIAN TERRITORIES OF ABKHAZIA AND TSKHINVALI REGION/
SOUTH OSSETIA.—

PO 00000

Frm 00068

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(1) PROHIBITION.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act may be made available
for assistance for the central government of
a country that the Secretary of State determines and reports to the Committees on Appropriations has recognized the independence of, or has established diplomatic relations with, the Russian Federation occupied
Georgian territories of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali Region/South Ossetia: Provided,
That the Secretary shall publish on the Department of State website a list of any such
central governments in a timely manner:
Provided further, That the Secretary may
waive the restriction on assistance required
by this paragraph if the Secretary determines and reports to the Committees on Appropriations that to do so is in the national
interest of the United States, and includes a
justification for such interest.
(2) LIMITATION.—None of the funds appropriated by this Act may be made available to
support the Russian Federation occupation
of the Georgian territories of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali Region/South Ossetia.
(3) INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.—The Secretary of the Treasury shall
instruct the United States executive director
of each international financial institution to
use the voice and vote of the United States
to oppose any assistance by such institution
(including any loan, credit, grant, or guarantee) for any program that violates the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia.
RUSSIAN
INFLUENCE
(d)
COUNTERING
FUND.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act
and prior Acts making appropriations for the
Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs under the headings ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’,
‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law
Enforcement’’, ‘‘International Military Education and Training’’, and ‘‘Foreign Military
Financing
Program’’,
not
less
than
$300,000,000 shall be made available to carry
out the purposes of the Countering Russian
Influence Fund, as authorized by section 254
of the Countering Russian Influence in Europe and Eurasia Act of 2017 (Public Law 115–
44; 22 U.S.C. 9543) and notwithstanding the
country limitation in subsection (b) of such
section, and programs to enhance the capacity of law enforcement and security forces in
countries in Europe, Eurasia, and Central
Asia and strengthen security cooperation between such countries and the United States
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
as appropriate: Provided, That funds made
available pursuant to this paragraph under
the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing
Program’’ may remain available until September 30, 2027.
UNITED NATIONS AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS

SEC. 7048. (a) UNITED NATIONS VOTING PRACTICES.—
(1) In considering bilateral assistance for a
foreign government, the Secretary of State
should review, among other factors, the voting practices of such government in the
United Nations in relation to United States
strategic interests and whether such government supports the participation of Taiwan as
an observer in meetings and activities of
multilateral agencies, bodies, or commissions.
(2) The Secretary of State shall consult
with the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations on the voting practices of foreign governments prior to
the submission of the report required under
section 653(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act
of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2413(a)).
(b) TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY.—
Of the funds appropriated under title I and
under the heading ‘‘International Organizations and Programs’’ in title V of this Act

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

that are available for contributions to the
United Nations (including the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations) or any United Nations agency, 10 percent may not be obligated for such organization, department, or
agency until the Secretary of State determines and reports to the appropriate congressional committees that the organization,
department, or agency is—
(1) posting on a publicly available website,
consistent with privacy regulations and due
process, regular financial and programmatic
audits of such organization, department, or
agency, and providing the United States
Government with necessary access to such
financial and performance audits;
(2) effectively implementing and enforcing
policies and procedures which meet or exceed
best practices in the United States for the
protection of whistleblowers from retaliation, including—
(A) protection against retaliation for internal and lawful public disclosures;
(B) legal burdens of proof;
(C) statutes of limitation for reporting retaliation;
(D) access to binding independent adjudicative bodies, including shared cost and selection of external arbitration; and
(E) results that eliminate the effects of
proven retaliation, including provision for
the restoration of prior employment;
(3) effectively implementing and enforcing
policies and procedures on the appropriate
use of travel funds, including restrictions on
first-class and business-class travel;
(4) taking credible steps to combat antiIsrael bias;
(5) developing and implementing mechanisms to inform donors of instances in which
funds have been diverted or destroyed and an
explanation of the response by the respective
international organization; and
(6) implementing policies and procedures
to effectively vet staff for any affiliation
with a terrorist organization.
(c) RESTRICTIONS ON UNITED NATIONS DELEGATIONS AND ORGANIZATIONS.—
(1) None of the funds made available by
this Act may be used to pay expenses for any
United States delegation to any specialized
agency, body, or commission of the United
Nations if such agency, body, or commission
is chaired or presided over by a country, the
government of which the Secretary of State
has determined, for purposes of section
1754(c) of the Export Control Reform Act of
2018 (50 U.S.C. 4813(c)), supports international terrorism.
(2) None of the funds made available by
this Act may be used by the Secretary of
State as a contribution to any organization,
agency, commission, or program within the
United Nations system if such organization,
agency, commission, or program is chaired
or presided over by a country the government of which the Secretary of State has determined, for purposes of section 620A of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, section 40 of
the Arms Export Control Act, section 1754(c)
of the Export Control Reform Act of 2018 (50
U.S.C. 4813(c)), or any other provision of law,
is a government that has repeatedly provided
support for acts of international terrorism.
(3) The Secretary of State may waive the
restriction in this subsection if the Secretary determines and reports to the Committees on Appropriations that to do so is
important to the national interest of the
United States, including a description of the
national interest served.
(d) UNITED NATIONS HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL.—
(1) None of the funds appropriated by this
Act may be made available in support of the
United Nations Human Rights Council unless
the Secretary of State determines and reports to the appropriate congressional com-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H789

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

mittees that participation in the Council is
important to the national interest of the
United States and that such Council is taking significant steps to remove Israel as a
permanent agenda item and ensure integrity
in the election of members to such Council:
Provided, That such report shall include a description of the national interest served and
provide a detailed reform agenda, including a
timeline to remove Israel as a permanent
agenda item and ensure integrity in the election of members to such Council: Provided
further, That the Secretary of State shall
withhold, from funds appropriated by this
Act under the heading ‘‘Contributions to
International Organizations’’ for a contribution to the United Nations Regular Budget,
the United States proportionate share of the
total annual amount of the United Nations
Regular Budget funding for the United Nations Human Rights Council until such determination and report is made: Provided further, That if the Secretary is unable to make
such
determination
and
report,
such
amounts may be reprogrammed for purposes
other than the United Nations Regular Budget, subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations:
Provided further, That the Secretary shall report to the Committees on Appropriations
not later than September 30, 2026, on the resolutions considered in the United Nations
Human Rights Council during the previous 12
months, and on steps taken to remove Israel
as a permanent agenda item and to improve
the quality of membership through competitive elections.
(2) None of the funds appropriated by this
Act may be made available for the United
Nations International Commission of Inquiry
on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel.
(e) PROHIBITION OF PAYMENTS TO UNITED
NATIONS MEMBERS.—None of the funds appropriated or made available pursuant to titles
III through VI of this Act for carrying out
the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, may be
used to pay in whole or in part any assessments, arrearages, or dues of any member of
the United Nations or, from funds appropriated by this Act to carry out chapter 1 of
part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,
the costs for participation of another country’s delegation at international conferences
held under the auspices of multilateral or
international organizations.
(f) REPORT AND BRIEFING.—
(1) Not later than 45 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
State shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing the amount
of funds available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026 for contributions to
any organization, department, agency, or
program within the United Nations system
or any international program that are withheld from obligation or expenditure due to
any provision of law: Provided, That the Secretary shall update such report each time additional funds are withheld by operation of
any provision of law: Provided further, That
the reprogramming of any withheld funds
identified in such report, including updates
thereof, shall be subject to prior consultation with, and the regular notification procedures of, the Committees on Appropriations.
(2) Not later than 30 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
State shall brief the appropriate congressional committees on the processes and recommendations for United States participation in each international organization included in the 2025 review of such matters.
(g) SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE IN
PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS.—The Secretary
of State shall, to the maximum extent practicable, withhold assistance to any unit of
the security forces of a foreign country if the

PO 00000

Frm 00069

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Secretary has credible information that such
unit has engaged in sexual exploitation or
abuse while serving in a United Nations
peacekeeping operation until the Secretary
determines that the government of such
country is taking effective steps to hold the
responsible members of such unit accountable and to prevent future incidents: Provided, That the Secretary shall promptly notify the government of each country subject
to any withholding of assistance pursuant to
this paragraph, and shall notify the appropriate congressional committees of such
withholding not later than 10 days after a determination to withhold such assistance is
made: Provided further, That the Secretary
shall, to the maximum extent practicable,
assist such government in bringing the responsible members of such unit to justice.
(h) ADDITIONAL AVAILABILITY.—Subject to
the regular notification procedures of the
Committees on Appropriations, funds appropriated by this Act which are returned or not
made available due to the second proviso
under the heading ‘‘Contributions for International Peacekeeping Activities’’ in title I
of this Act or section 307(a) of the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2227(a)),
shall remain available for obligation until
September 30, 2027: Provided, That the requirement to withhold funds for programs in
Burma under section 307(a) of the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961 shall not apply to
funds appropriated by this Act.
(i) ACCOUNTABILITY REQUIREMENT.—
(1) The Secretary of State shall seek to
enter into written agreements with each
international organization that receives
funds appropriated by this Act and prior
Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs to provide timely access to
the Inspector General of the Department of
State and the Comptroller General of the
United States to such organization’s financial data and other information relevant to
United States contributions to such organization, as determined by the Inspector General and the Comptroller General.
(2) Not later than 180 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
State shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees detailing
whether each international organization
funded by this Act has entered into such
agreements: Provided, That such report shall
include, for each applicable organization, the
status of any negotiations undertaken by the
Department of State to secure such agreements, including any obstacles encountered
and a description of the Department’s plans
to address them.
(j) STRENGTHENING AMERICAN PRESENCE AT
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS.—
(1) Of the funds made available by this Act
under the heading ‘‘International Organizations and Programs’’, not less than $5,000,000
shall be made available for the placement of
United States citizens in the Junior Professional Officer Programme.
(2) Of the funds made available by this Act
under the heading ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’,
not less than $750,000 shall be made available
to enhance the competitiveness of United
States citizens for leadership positions in the
United Nations system, including pursuant
to section 9701 of the Department of State
Authorization Act of 2022 (title XCVII of division I of Public Law 117–263).
(k) TRANSFER AUTHORITY.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the heading
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’,
up to $466,514,000 may be transferred to, and
merged with, funds available under the headings ‘‘Contributions to International Organizations’’ and ‘‘Contributions for International Peacekeeping Activities’’ if the
Secretary of State determines and reports to

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H790

the Committees on Appropriations that such
funds support reform efforts and are in the
national interest: Provided, That such transfer authority is in addition to any other
transfer authority provided by this Act or
any other Act and is subject to prior consultation with, and the regular notification
procedures of, the Committees on Appropriations.
WAR CRIMES TRIBUNAL

SEC. 7049. If the President determines that
doing so will contribute to a just resolution
of charges regarding genocide or other violations of international humanitarian law, the
President may direct a drawdown pursuant
to section 552(c) of the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961 of up to $30,000,000 of commodities
and services for the United Nations War
Crimes Tribunal established with regard to
the former Yugoslavia by the United Nations
Security Council or such other tribunals or
commissions as the Council may establish or
authorize to deal with such violations, without regard to the ceiling limitation contained in paragraph (2) thereof: Provided,
That the determination required under this
section shall be in lieu of any determinations
otherwise required under section 552(c): Provided further, That funds made available pursuant to this section shall be made available
subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
INTERNET FREEDOM

SEC. 7050. Of the funds appropriated by this
Act, not less than $78,375,000 shall be made
available for programs to promote Internet
freedom globally, consistent with section
9707 of the Department of State Authorization Act of 2022 (title XCVII of division I of
Public Law 117–263).
TORTURE AND OTHER CRUEL, INHUMAN, OR

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

DEGRADING TREATMENT OR PUNISHMENT

SEC. 7051. (a) PROHIBITION.—None of the
funds made available by this Act may be
used to support or justify the use of torture
and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment by any official or
contract employee of the United States Government.
(b) ASSISTANCE.—Funds appropriated under
titles III and IV of this Act shall be made
available, notwithstanding section 660 of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, for assistance
to eliminate torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment
by foreign police, military, or other security
forces in countries receiving assistance from
funds appropriated by this Act.
AIRCRAFT TRANSFER, COORDINATION, AND USE
SEC. 7052. (a) TRANSFER AUTHORITY.—Notwithstanding any other provision of law or
regulation, aircraft procured with funds appropriated by this Act and prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of
State, foreign operations, and related programs under the headings ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’, ‘‘International Narcotics Control
and
Law
Enforcement’’,
‘‘Andean
Counterdrug
Initiative’’,
and
‘‘Andean
Counterdrug Programs’’ may be used for any
other program and in any region.
(b) PROPERTY DISPOSAL.—The authority
provided in subsection (a) shall apply only
after the Secretary of State determines and
reports to the Committees on Appropriations
that the equipment is no longer required to
meet programmatic purposes in the designated country or region: Provided, That
any such transfer shall be subject to prior
consultation with, and the regular notification procedures of, the Committees on Appropriations.
(c) AIRCRAFT COORDINATION.—
(1) AUTHORITY.—The uses of aircraft purchased or leased by the Department of State
with funds made available in this Act or

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs shall be coordinated under
the authority of the appropriate Chief of
Mission: Provided, That such aircraft may be
used to transport, on a reimbursable or nonreimbursable basis, Federal and non-Federal
personnel supporting Department of State
programs and activities: Provided further,
That official travel for other agencies for
other purposes may be supported on a reimbursable basis, or without reimbursement
when traveling on a space available basis:
Provided further, That funds received by the
Department of State in connection with the
use of aircraft owned, leased, or chartered by
the Department of State may be credited to
the Working Capital Fund of the Department
and shall be available for expenses related to
the purchase, lease, maintenance, chartering, or operation of such aircraft.
(2) SCOPE.—The requirement and authorities of this subsection shall only apply to
aircraft, the primary purpose of which is the
transportation of personnel.
(d) AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE.—To the maximum extent practicable,
the costs of operations and maintenance, including fuel, of aircraft funded by this Act
shall be borne by the recipient country.
PARKING FINES AND REAL PROPERTY TAXES
OWED BY FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS

SEC. 7053. The terms and conditions of section 7055 of the Department of State, Foreign
Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2010 (division F of Public Law
111–117) shall apply to this Act: Provided,
That subsection (f)(2)(B) of such section shall
be applied by substituting ‘‘September 30,
2025’’ for ‘‘September 30, 2009’’.
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

SEC. 7054. (a) EXTENSIONS.—The terms and
conditions of sections 7086(b)(1) and (2) and
7090(a) of the Department of State, Foreign
Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2010 (division F of Public Law
111–117) shall apply to this Act.
(b) REPAYMENT.—The Secretary of the
Treasury shall instruct the United States
Executive Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to seek to ensure that any
loan will be repaid to the IMF before other
private or multilateral creditors.
EXTRADITION

SEC. 7055. (a) LIMITATION.—None of the
funds appropriated in this Act may be used
to provide assistance (other than funds provided under the headings ‘‘National Security
Investment Programs’’, ‘‘International Humanitarian Assistance’’, ‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’,
‘‘United States Emergency Refugee and Migration Assistance Fund’’, and ‘‘Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism, Demining and
Related Assistance’’) for the central government of a country which has notified the Department of State of its refusal to extradite
to the United States any individual indicted
for a criminal offense for which the maximum penalty is life imprisonment without
the possibility of parole or for killing a law
enforcement officer, as specified in a United
States extradition request.
(b) CLARIFICATION.—Subsection (a) shall
only apply to the central government of a
country with which the United States maintains diplomatic relations and with which
the United States has an extradition treaty
and the government of that country is in
violation of the terms and conditions of the
treaty.
(c) WAIVER.—The Secretary of State may
waive the restriction in subsection (a) on a
case-by-case basis if the Secretary certifies
to the Committees on Appropriations that
such waiver is important to the national interest of the United States.

PO 00000

Frm 00070

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ENTERPRISE FUNDS

SEC. 7056. (a) NOTIFICATION.—None of the
funds made available under titles III through
VI of this Act may be made available for Enterprise Funds unless the appropriate congressional committees are notified at least
15 days in advance, in accordance with the
requirements enumerated under this section
in the joint explanatory statement described
in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act).
(b) DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS PLAN.—Prior
to the distribution of any assets resulting
from any liquidation, dissolution, or winding
up of an Enterprise Fund, in whole or in
part, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a plan
for the distribution of the assets of the Enterprise Fund.
(c) TRANSITION OR OPERATING PLAN.—Prior
to a transition to and operation of any private equity fund or other parallel investment fund under an existing Enterprise
Fund, the President shall submit such transition or operating plan to the appropriate
congressional committees.
UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND

SEC. 7057. (a) CONTRIBUTION.—Of the funds
made available under the heading ‘‘International Organizations and Programs’’ in
this Act for fiscal year 2026, $32,500,000 shall
be made available for the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA).
(b) AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS.—Funds appropriated by this Act for UNFPA, that are not
made available for UNFPA because of the operation of any provision of law, shall be
transferred to the ‘‘Global Health Programs’’
account and shall be made available for family planning, maternal, and reproductive
health activities, subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on
Appropriations.
(c) PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS IN
CHINA.—None of the funds made available by
this Act may be used by UNFPA for a country program in the People’s Republic of
China.
ON
AVAILABILITY
OF
(d)
CONDITIONS
FUNDS.—Funds made available by this Act
for UNFPA may not be made available unless—
(1) UNFPA maintains funds made available
by this Act in an account separate from
other accounts of UNFPA and does not commingle such funds with other sums; and
(2) UNFPA does not fund abortions.
(e) REPORT TO CONGRESS AND DOLLAR-FORDOLLAR WITHHOLDING OF FUNDS.—
(1) Not later than 4 months after the date
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
State shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations indicating the
amount of funds that UNFPA is budgeting
for the year in which the report is submitted
for a country program in the People’s Republic of China.
(2) If a report under paragraph (1) indicates
that UNFPA plans to spend funds for a country program in the People’s Republic of
China in the year covered by the report, then
the amount of such funds UNFPA plans to
spend in the People’s Republic of China shall
be deducted from the funds made available
to UNFPA after March 1 for obligation for
the remainder of the fiscal year in which the
report is submitted.
GLOBAL HEALTH ACTIVITIES

SEC. 7058. (a) IN GENERAL.—Funds appropriated by titles III and IV of this Act that
are made available for bilateral assistance
for child survival activities or disease programs including activities relating to research on, and the prevention, treatment and
control of, HIV/AIDS may be made available
notwithstanding any other provision of law

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

except for provisions under the heading
‘‘Global Health Programs’’ and the United
States Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Act of 2003 (117 Stat. 711;
22 U.S.C. 7601 et seq.), as amended: Provided,
That of the funds appropriated under title III
of this Act, not less than $575,000,000 should
be made available for family planning/reproductive health, including in areas where population growth threatens biodiversity or endangered species.
(b) PANDEMICS AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASE OUTBREAKS.—
(1) GLOBAL HEALTH SECURITY.—Funds appropriated by this Act under the heading
‘‘Global Health Programs’’ shall be made
available for global health security programs
to accelerate the capacity of countries to
prevent, detect, and respond to infectious
disease outbreaks, including by strengthening public health capacity where there is a
high risk of emerging zoonotic infectious
diseases: Provided, That not later than 60
days after the date of enactment of this Act,
the Secretary of State shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations on the
planned uses of such funds.
(2) EXTRAORDINARY MEASURES.—If the Secretary of State determines and reports to the
Committees on Appropriations that an international infectious disease outbreak is sustained, severe, and is spreading internationally, or that it is in the national interest to
respond to a Public Health Emergency of
International Concern, not to exceed an aggregate total of $200,000,000 of the funds appropriated by this Act under the headings
‘‘Global Health Programs’’, ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, ‘‘International
Humanitarian
Assistance’’,
‘‘Democracy
Fund’’, and ‘‘Millennium Challenge Corporation’’, may be made available to combat such
infectious disease or public health emergency, and may be transferred to, and
merged with, funds appropriated under such
headings for the purposes of this paragraph.
(3) EMERGENCY RESERVE FUND.—Up to
$20,000,000 of the funds made available under
the heading ‘‘Global Health Programs’’ may
be made available for the Emergency Reserve Fund established pursuant to section
7058(c)(1) of the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2017 (division J of Public
Law 115–31): Provided, That such funds shall
be made available under the same terms and
conditions of such section, except that such
section shall be applied by substituting
‘‘International Humanitarian Assistance’’
for ‘‘International Disaster Assistance’’ and
substituting ‘‘Secretary of State’’ for ‘‘Administrator of the United States Agency for
International Development’’.
(4) CONSULTATION AND NOTIFICATION.—
Funds made available by this subsection, except paragraph (3), shall be subject to prior
consultation with the appropriate congressional committees and the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
any
(c)
LIMITATION.—Notwithstanding
other provision of law, none of the funds
made available by this Act may be made
available to the Wuhan Institute of Virology
located in the City of Wuhan in the People’s
Republic of China.
(d) TRANSITION STRATEGY.—Not later than
90 days after the date of enactment of this
Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a
strategy to the appropriate congressional
committees on a multi-year structured transition of programs supported by the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief to
country-led ownership resulting in reductions of United States assistance consistent
with the requirements described under this
section in the explanatory statement de-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H791

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

scribed in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act).
(e) INITIATIVE.—Of the funds appropriated
by this Act under the heading ‘‘Global
Health Programs’’, not less than $50,000,000
shall be made available for a Prevention,
Treatment, and Response Initiative for the
prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other infectious diseases as described under this section in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided, That such funds shall be
awarded to eligible public and private entities, including product development partnerships and in coordination with other donors,
and shall support the September 2025 America First Global Health Strategy: Provided
further, That funds made available by this
subsection may only be made available following consultation with the Committees on
Appropriations: Provided further, That such
funds are in addition to funds otherwise
made available by this Act for such purposes.
WOMEN’S EQUALITY AND EMPOWERMENT
SEC. 7059. (a) IN GENERAL.—Funds appropriated by this Act shall be made available
to promote the equality and empowerment of
women and girls in United States Government diplomatic and development efforts by
raising the status, increasing the economic
participation and opportunities for political
leadership, and protecting the rights of
women and girls worldwide.
(b) WOMEN’S ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT.—Of
the funds appropriated under title III of this
Act, $150,000,000 shall be made available to
expand economic opportunities for women by
increasing the number and capacity of
women-owned enterprises, improving property rights for women, increasing women’s
access to financial services and capital, enhancing the role of women in economic decision-making at the local, national, and
international levels, and improving women’s
ability to participate in the global economy,
including through implementation of the
Women’s Entrepreneurship and Economic
Empowerment Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–
428): Provided, That the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the uses of funds made available
pursuant to this subsection.
(c) MADELEINE K. ALBRIGHT WOMEN’S LEADERSHIP PROGRAM.—Of the funds appropriated
under title III of this Act, not less than
$37,500,000 shall be made available for the
Madeleine K. Albright Women’s Leadership
Program, as established by section 7059(b) of
the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2023 (division K of Public Law 117–
328).
(d) GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE.—
(1) Of the funds appropriated under titles
III and IV of this Act, not less than
$187,500,000 shall be made available to implement a multi-year strategy to prevent and
respond to gender-based violence in countries where it is common in conflict and nonconflict settings.
(2) Funds appropriated under titles III and
IV of this Act that are available to train foreign police, judicial, and military personnel,
including for international peacekeeping operations, shall address, where appropriate,
prevention and response to gender-based violence and trafficking in persons, and shall
promote the integration of women into the
police and other security forces.
(3) Funds made available pursuant to this
subsection should include efforts to combat a
variety of forms of violence against women
and girls, including child marriage, rape, and
female genital cutting and mutilation.
(e) WOMEN, PEACE, AND SECURITY.—Of the
funds appropriated by this Act under the

PO 00000

Frm 00071

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

headings ‘‘National Security Investment
Programs’’ and ‘‘International Narcotics
Control and Law Enforcement’’, $112,500,000
should be made available to support a multiyear strategy to expand, and improve coordination of, United States Government efforts
to empower women as equal partners in conflict prevention, peace building, transitional
processes, and reconstruction efforts in
countries affected by conflict or in political
transition, and to ensure the equal provision
of relief and recovery assistance to women
and girls.
SECTOR ALLOCATIONS

SEC. 7060. (a) BASIC EDUCATION AND HIGHER
EDUCATION.—
(1) BASIC EDUCATION.—
(A) Of the funds appropriated under title
III of this Act, not less than $691,500,000 shall
be made available for the Nita M. Lowey
Basic Education Fund, and such funds may
be made available notwithstanding any other
provision of law that restricts assistance to
foreign countries: Provided, That such funds
shall also be used for secondary education
activities.
(B) Of the funds appropriated under title
III of this Act for assistance for basic education programs, $152,000,000 shall be made
available for contributions to multilateral
partnerships that support education.
(2) HIGHER EDUCATION.—Of the funds appropriated by title III of this Act, not less than
$203,250,000 shall be made available for assistance for higher education: Provided, That
such funds may be made available notwithstanding any other provision of law that restricts assistance to foreign countries, and
shall be subject to the regular notification
procedures of the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That of such amount,
not less than $50,000,000 shall be made available for higher education programs pursuant
to section 7060(a)(3) of the Department of
State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2021 (division K of
Public Law 116–260).
(b) CONSERVATION PROGRAMS.—
(1) Funds appropriated by this Act to carry
out the provisions of sections 103 through
106, and chapter 4 of part II, of the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961 may be used, notwithstanding any other provision of law, except
for the provisions of this subsection, to support programs funded pursuant to this subsection: Provided, That funds made available
pursuant to this subsection shall be subject
to the regular notification procedures of the
Committees on Appropriations.
(2)(A) Of the funds appropriated under title
III of this Act, not less than $274,313,000 shall
be made available for biodiversity conservation programs, including for marine conservation programs following consultation
with the Committees on Appropriations: Provided, That no such funds may be made available to support the expansion of industrial
scale logging, agriculture, livestock production, mining, or any other industrial scale
extractive activity into areas that were primary/intact tropical forests as of December
30, 2013, and the Secretary of the Treasury
shall instruct the United States executive directors of each international financial institution to use the voice and vote of the
United States to oppose any financing of any
such activity.
(B)(i) Of the funds appropriated under titles III and IV of this Act, not less than
$89,063,000 shall be made available to combat
the transnational threat of wildlife poaching
and trafficking.
(ii) None of the funds appropriated under
title IV of this Act may be made available
for training or other assistance for any military unit or personnel that the Secretary of
State determines has been credibly alleged

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H792

to have participated in wildlife poaching or
trafficking, unless the Secretary reports to
the appropriate congressional committees
that to do so is in the national security interest of the United States.
(C) Of the funds appropriated under titles
III and IV of this Act, not less than
$12,500,000 shall be made available for the
prevention of illegal logging practices consistent with the Lacey Act (16 U.S.C. 3371 et
seq./section 8204 of Public Law 110–246), and
not less than $12,500,000 shall be made available to reduce deforestation: Provided, That
such funds shall be allocated consistent with
the requirements included under this heading in the explanatory statement described
in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act).
(3) Of the funds appropriated under titles
III and IV of this Act, not less than
$131,813,000 shall be made available for land
use, management, and protection programs.
(c) DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.—Of the funds
appropriated by this Act under the heading
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’,
not less than $13,875,000 shall be made available for cooperative development programs.
(d) DISABILITY PROGRAMS.—Funds appropriated by this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ shall
be made available for programs and activities to address the needs of, and protect and
promote the rights of, people with disabilities in developing countries: Provided, That
funds shall be made available to support disability rights advocacy organizations in developing countries: Provided further, That of
the funds made available pursuant to this
subsection, 5 percent may be used for management, oversight, and technical support.
(e) FOOD SECURITY AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT.—
(1) USES OF FUNDS.—Of the funds appropriated by title III of this Act, not less than
$720,000,000 shall be made available for food
security and agricultural development programs to carry out the purposes of the Global Food Security Act of 2016 (Public Law 114–
195), including not less than $175,000,000 for
international agricultural research, of which
not less than $72,000,000 shall be made available for the Feed the Future Innovation
Labs, including for the purposes enumerated
under this section in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided, That funds may be made
available for a contribution as authorized by
section 3202 of the Food, Conservation, and
Energy Act of 2008 (Public Law 110–246), as
amended by section 3310 of the Agriculture
Improvement Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–
334).
(2) FEED THE FUTURE PRIVATE SECTOR ENGAGEMENT.—Of the funds made available pursuant to this subsection, not less than
$20,000,000 shall be made available to support
private sector investment in food security,
including as catalytic capital.
(f) PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP.—Of the
funds appropriated by title III of this Act
and prior Acts making appropriations for the
Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs, not less than $100,000,000
shall be made available for a public-private
partnership foundation for food security, if
legislation establishing such a foundation is
enacted into law by December 31, 2026.
(g) PROGRAMS TO COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN
PERSONS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Of the funds appropriated
by this Act under the headings ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ and ‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’, not less than $105,625,000 shall be
made available for activities to combat trafficking in persons internationally, including
for the Program to End Modern Slavery, of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

which not less than $89,500,000 shall be from
funds made available under the heading
‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law
Enforcement’’: Provided, That funds made
available by this Act under the heading ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’ that
are made available for activities to combat
trafficking in persons should be obligated
and programmed consistent with the country-specific recommendations included in
the annual Trafficking in Persons Report,
and shall be coordinated with the Office to
Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons,
Department of State: Provided further, That
such funds are in addition to funds made
available by this Act under the heading
‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’ for the Office to
Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons:
Provided further, That funds made available
by this Act shall be made available to further develop, standardize, and update training for all United States Government personnel under Chief of Mission authority posted at United States embassies and consulates
abroad on recognizing signs of human trafficking and protocols for reporting such
cases.
(2) REPORT.—Not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall report to the appropriate congressional committees on how all
grants and contracts awarded in the prior
fiscal year by the Department of State are
compliant with applicable requirements
within section 106(g) of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 (22 U.S.C.
7104(g)).
(h) WATER AND SANITATION.—Of the funds
appropriated by this Act, not less than
$338,250,000 shall be made available for water
supply and sanitation projects pursuant to
section 136 of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961, of which not less than $169,125,000 shall
be for programs in sub-Saharan Africa.
(i) DEVIATION.—Unless otherwise provided
for by this Act, the Secretary of State may
deviate below the minimum funding requirements designated in sections 7030, 7059, and
7060 of this Act by up to 10 percent, notwithstanding such designation: Provided, That
such deviations shall only be exercised to address unforeseen or exigent circumstances:
Provided further, That concurrent with the
submission of the report required by section
653(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,
the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations in writing any proposed deviations utilizing such authority
that are planned at the time of submission of
such report: Provided further, That any deviations proposed subsequent to the submission of such report shall be subject to prior
consultation with such Committees: Provided
further, That not later than November 1, 2027,
the Secretary of State shall submit a report
to the Committees on Appropriations on the
use of the authority of this subsection.
DEBT-FOR-DEVELOPMENT
SEC. 7061. In order to enhance the continued participation of nongovernmental organizations in debt-for-development and debtfor-nature exchanges, a nongovernmental organization which is a grantee or contractor
of the Department of State may place in interest bearing accounts local currencies
which accrue to that organization as a result
of economic assistance provided under title
III of this Act and, subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on
Appropriations, any interest earned on such
investment shall be used for the purpose for
which the assistance was provided to that organization.
BUDGET DOCUMENTS

SEC. 7062. (a) OPERATING PLANS.—Not later
than 45 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, each department, agency, or orga-

PO 00000

Frm 00072

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

nization funded in titles I, II, and VI of this
Act, and the Department of the Treasury and
Independent Agencies funded in title III of
this Act, shall submit to the Committees on
Appropriations an operating plan for funds
appropriated to such department, agency, or
organization in such titles of this Act, or
funds otherwise available for obligation in
fiscal year 2026, that provides details of the
uses of such funds at the program, project,
and activity level: Provided, That such plans
shall include, as applicable, a comparison between the congressional budget justification
funding levels, the most recent congressional
directives or approved funding levels, and
the funding levels proposed by the department or agency; and a clear, concise, and informative description/justification: Provided
further, That operating plans that include
changes in levels of funding for programs,
projects, and activities specified in the congressional budget justification, in this Act,
or amounts designated in the tables in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act), as applicable, shall be
subject to the notification and reprogramming requirements of section 7015 of this
Act.
(b) SPEND PLANS.—
(1) Not later than 180 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
State shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a spend plan for funds made
available by this Act for—
(A) assistance for Pacific Islands countries
and for Colombia;
(B) assistance for the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative, Central America Regional
Security Initiative, Middle East Partnership
Initiative, Indo-Pacific Strategy and the
Countering PRC Influence Fund, and Power
Africa;
(C) assistance made available pursuant to
the following sections in this Act: section
7030; section 7032; section 7033; section 7036;
section 7047(d) (on a country-by-country
basis); section 7059; and subsections (a), (e),
(g), and (h) of section 7060;
(D) funds provided under the heading
‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law
Enforcement’’ for demand reduction, which
shall include bilateral and global programs;
and
(E) implementation of the Global Fragility
Act of 2019.
(2) Not later than 90 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the
Treasury shall submit to the Committees on
Appropriations a detailed spend plan for
funds made available by this Act under the
headings ‘‘Department of the Treasury,
International Affairs Technical Assistance’’
in title III.
(c) CLARIFICATION.—The spend plans referenced in subsection (b) shall not be considered as meeting the notification requirements in this Act or under section 634A of
the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961.
(d) CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET JUSTIFICATION.—The congressional budget justification
for Department of State operations and foreign operations shall be provided to the Committees on Appropriations concurrent with
the date of submission of the President’s
budget for fiscal year 2027: Provided, That the
appendices for such justification shall be
provided to the Committees on Appropriations not later than 10 calendar days thereafter.
REORGANIZATION

SEC. 7063. (a) PRIOR CONSULTATION AND NOTIFICATION.—Funds appropriated by this Act,
prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs, or any other Act may not
be used to implement a reorganization, redesign, or other plan described in subsection

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

(b) by the Department of State or any other
Federal department, agency, or organization
funded by this Act without prior consultation by the head of such department, agency,
or organization with the appropriate congressional committees: Provided, That such
funds shall be subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations: Provided further, That any such notification submitted to such Committees
shall include a detailed justification for any
proposed action: Provided further, That congressional notifications submitted in prior
fiscal years pursuant to similar provisions of
law in prior Acts making appropriations for
the Department of State, foreign operations,
and related programs may be deemed to
meet the notification requirements of this
section.
(b) DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITIES.—Pursuant
to subsection (a), a reorganization, redesign,
or other plan shall include any action to—
(1) expand, eliminate, consolidate, or
downsize covered departments, agencies, or
organizations, including bureaus and offices
within or between such departments, agencies, or organizations, including the transfer
to other agencies of the authorities and responsibilities of such bureaus and offices;
(2) expand, eliminate, consolidate, or
downsize the United States official presence
overseas, including at bilateral, regional,
and multilateral diplomatic facilities and
other platforms; or
(3) expand or reduce the size of the permanent Civil Service, Foreign Service, eligible
family member, and locally employed staff
workforce of the Department of State from
the staffing levels previously justified to the
Committees on Appropriations for fiscal
year 2026.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

DEPARTMENT OF STATE MATTERS

SEC. 7064. (a) WORKING CAPITAL FUND.—
Funds appropriated by this Act or otherwise
made available to the Department of State
for payments to the Working Capital Fund
that are made available for new service centers, shall be subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
(b) CERTIFICATION.—
(1) COMPLIANCE.—Not later than 45 days
after the initial obligation of funds appropriated under titles III and IV of this Act
that are made available to a Department of
State bureau or office with responsibility for
the management and oversight of such funds,
the Secretary of State shall certify and report to the Committees on Appropriations,
on an individual bureau or office basis, that
such bureau or office is in compliance with
Department and Federal financial and grants
management policies, procedures, and regulations, as applicable.
(2) CONSIDERATIONS.—When making a certification required by paragraph (1), the Secretary of State shall consider the capacity of
a bureau or office to—
(A) account for the obligated funds at the
country and program level, as appropriate;
(B) identify risks and develop mitigation
and monitoring plans;
(C) establish performance measures and indicators;
(D) review activities and performance; and
(E) assess final results and reconcile finances.
(3) PLAN.—If the Secretary of State is unable to make a certification required by
paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit a
plan and timeline detailing the steps to be
taken to bring such bureau or office into
compliance.
(c) OTHER MATTERS.—
(1) In addition to amounts appropriated or
otherwise made available by this Act under
the heading ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H793

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(A) as authorized by section 810 of the
United States Information and Educational
Exchange Act, not to exceed $5,000,000, to remain available until expended, may be credited to this appropriation from fees or other
payments received from English teaching, library, motion pictures, and publication programs and from fees from educational advising and counseling and exchange visitor programs; and
(B) not to exceed $15,000, which shall be derived from reimbursements, surcharges, and
fees for use of Blair House facilities.
(2) Funds appropriated or otherwise made
available by this Act under the heading
‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’ are available for acquisition by exchange or purchase of passenger motor vehicles as authorized by law
and, pursuant to section 1108(g) of title 31,
United States Code, for the field examination of programs and activities in the United
States funded from any account contained in
title I of this Act.
(3) Consistent with section 204 of the Admiral James W. Nance and Meg Donovan Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal
Years 2000 and 2001 (22 U.S.C. 2452b), up to
$25,000,000 of the amounts made available
under the heading ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’ in
this Act may be obligated and expended for
United States participation in international
fairs and expositions abroad, including for
construction and operation of a United
States pavilion.
(4)(A) The notification requirement of
paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (j) of the
State Department Basic Authorities Act of
1956 (22 U.S.C. 2651a(j)) shall also apply to the
Committees on Appropriations.
(B) The justification requirement of paragraph (4) of subsection (j) of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22
U.S.C. 2651a(j)) shall also apply to the Committees on Appropriations.
(C) Not later than 90 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report detailing the
criteria used to certify that a position established in accordance with paragraph (2) of
subsection (j) of the State Department Basic
Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 2651a(j))
does not require the exercise of significant
authority pursuant to the laws of the United
States: Provided, That such report shall also
include a listing of each special appointment
authorized by such section, the number of
positions for the applicable office, and the
salary and other support costs of such office,
and such report shall be updated and submitted to the such committees every 180
days thereafter until September 30, 2027.
(5) Funds appropriated by this Act under
the headings ‘‘Diplomatic Programs’’ and
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’
shall be made available for the purposes and
in the manner described under this subsection in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act).
FOREIGN ASSISTANCE MANAGEMENT

SEC. 7065. (a) AUTHORITY.—Up to $170,000,000
of the funds made available in title III of this
Act pursuant to or to carry out the provisions of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act
of 1961 may be used to hire and employ individuals in the United States and overseas on
a limited appointment basis pursuant to the
authority of sections 308 and 309 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 3948 and
3949).
(b) RESTRICTION.—The authority to hire individuals contained in subsection (a) shall
expire on September 30, 2027.
(c) PROGRAM ACCOUNT CHARGED.—The account charged for the cost of an individual
hired and employed under the authority of

PO 00000

Frm 00073

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

this section shall be the account to which
the responsibilities of such individual primarily relate: Provided, That funds made
available to carry out this section may be
transferred to, and merged with, funds appropriated by this Act under the relevant
headings in title I.
(d) DISASTER SURGE CAPACITY.—Funds appropriated under title III of this Act to carry
out part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961, may be used, in addition to funds otherwise available for such purposes, for the cost
(including the support costs) of individuals
whose primary responsibility is to carry out
programs in response to natural disasters or
man-made disasters, subject to the regular
notification procedures of the Committees
on Appropriations.
(e) SMALL BUSINESS.—In entering into multiple award indefinite-quantity contracts
with funds appropriated by this Act, the Department of State may provide an exception
to the fair opportunity process for placing
task orders under such contracts when the
order is placed with any category of small or
small disadvantaged business.
(f) PERSONAL SERVICE AGREEMENTS.—Funds
appropriated by this Act under title III may
be made available for the Secretary of State
to exercise the authorities of section 2669(c)
of title 22, United States Code.
STABILIZATION AND DEVELOPMENT

SEC. 7066. (a) Of the funds appropriated by
this Act under the headings ‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’, ‘‘International
Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’,
‘‘Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism, Demining
and Related Programs’’, ‘‘Peacekeeping Operations’’, and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing
Program’’, not less than $108,000,000 shall be
made available for the Prevention and Stabilization Fund for the purposes enumerated
in section 509(a) of the Global Fragility Act
of 2019 (title V of division J of Public Law
116–94): Provided, That funds made available
pursuant to this subsection under the heading ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’
may remain available until September 30,
2027.
(b) Of the funds appropriated under title III
of this Act, not less than $192,375,000 shall be
made available for natural disaster preparation and mitigation efforts, including in Pacific Islands countries and other high-risk
areas, notwithstanding any other provision
of law.
EXTENSION OF CONSULAR FEES AND RELATED
AUTHORITIES

SEC. 7067. (a) Section 1(b)(1) of the Passport
Act of June 4, 1920 (22 U.S.C. 214(b)(1)) shall
be applied through fiscal year 2026 by substituting ‘‘the costs of providing consular
services’’ for ‘‘such costs’’.
(b) Section 21009 of the Emergency Appropriations for Coronavirus Health Response
and Agency Operations (division B of Public
Law 116–136; 134 Stat. 592) shall be applied
during fiscal year 2026 by substituting ‘‘2020
through 2026’’ for ‘‘2020 and 2021’’.
(c) Discretionary amounts made available
to the Department of State under the heading ‘‘Administration of Foreign Affairs’’ of
this Act, and discretionary unobligated balances under such heading from prior Acts
making appropriations for the Department
of State, foreign operations, and related programs, may be transferred to the Consular
and Border Security Programs account if the
Secretary of State determines and reports to
the Committees on Appropriations that to do
so is necessary to sustain consular operations, following consultation with such
Committees: Provided, That such transfer authority is in addition to any transfer authority otherwise available in this Act and under
any other provision of law: Provided further,
That no amounts may be transferred from

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

H794

amounts designated as an emergency requirement pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the budget or the Balanced Budget
and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
(d) In addition to the uses permitted pursuant to section 286(v)(2)(A) of the Immigration
and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1356(v)(2)(A)),
for fiscal year 2026, the Secretary of State
may also use fees deposited into the Fraud
Prevention and Detection Account for the
costs of providing consular services.
(e) Amounts provided pursuant to subsection (b) are designated by the Congress as
being for an emergency requirement pursuant to section 251(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Balanced
Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
of 1985.
PROHIBITION ON CENSORSHIP

SEC. 7068. Funds appropriated or otherwise
made available by this Act for programs to
counter
foreign
propaganda
and
disinformation, and for related purposes,
may only be made available for the purpose
of countering such efforts by foreign state
and non-state actors abroad.
OTHER MATTERS

SEC. 7069. (a) None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this
Act may be obligated or expended to fly or
display a flag over a facility of the United
States Department of State other than the—
(1) United States flag;
(2) Foreign Service flag pursuant to 2 FAM
154.2–1;
(3) POW/MIA flag;
(4) Hostage and Wrongful Detainee flag,
pursuant to section 904 of title 36, United
States Code;
(5) flag of a State, insular area, or the District of Columbia at domestic locations;
(6) flag of an Indian Tribal government;
(7) official branded flag of a United States
agency; or
(8) sovereign flag of other countries.
(b) Funds may be transferred to the United
States Section of the International Boundary and Water Commission, United States
and Mexico, from Federal or non-Federal entities, to study, design, construct, operate,
and maintain treatment and flood control
works and related structures, consistent
with the functions of the United States Section: Provided, That such funds shall be deposited in an account under the heading
‘‘International Boundary and Water Commission, United States and Mexico’’, to remain
available until expended.
MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS

SEC. 7070. (a) ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIPTION TO
SHARES OF THE CAPITAL STOCK OF THE INTERAMERICAN INVESTMENT CORPORATION.—The
Secretary of the Treasury may subscribe on
behalf of the United States to up to an additional 25,128 shares of the capital stock of
the Inter-American Investment Corporation:
Provided, That any subscription to such additional shares shall be effective only to such
extent or in such amounts as are provided in
this or any other appropriations Act.
(b) WORLD BANK.—
(1) INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TWENTY-FIRST
REPLENISHMENT.—The
International Development Association Act
(22 U.S.C. 284 et seq.) is amended by adding
at the end the following:
‘‘SEC. 33. TWENTY-FIRST REPLENISHMENT.
‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—The United States GovDMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

ernor of the International Development Association may contribute on behalf of the
United States $3,198,552,000 to the twentyfirst replenishment of the resources of the
Association, subject to obtaining the necessary appropriations.
‘‘(b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
In order to pay for the United States contribution provided for in subsection (a),

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

there are authorized to be appropriated,
without fiscal year limitation, $3,198,552,000
for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury.’’.
(2) MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANK SUPPORT FOR NUCLEAR ENERGY.—Title XV of the
International Financial Institutions Act (22
U.S.C. 262o et seq.) is amended by adding at
the end the following:
‘‘SEC. 1506. MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANK
SUPPORT FOR NUCLEAR ENERGY.

‘‘The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director
at the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, and, as
the Secretary finds appropriate, any other
multilateral development bank (as defined in
section 1307(g)) to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States to advocate
for—
‘‘(1) the removal of prohibitions at the respective bank against financial and technical assistance for the generation, transmission, and distribution of nuclear energy,
to the extent that the prohibitions apply to
nuclear technologies, including small modular reactors, that meet or exceed the quality and safety standards of technologies produced by the United States or a member
country of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development; and
‘‘(2) increased internal capacity-building at
the respective bank for the purpose of assessing—
‘‘(A) the potential role of nuclear energy,
including small modular reactors, in the energy systems of client countries; and
‘‘(B) the delivery of financial and technical
assistance described in paragraph (1) to the
countries.’’.
(3) ESTABLISHMENT OF NUCLEAR ENERGY ASSISTANCE TRUST FUNDS.—Title XV of the
International Financial Institutions Act (22
U.S.C. 262o et seq.) is further amended by
adding at the end the following:
‘‘SEC. 1507. ESTABLISHMENT OF NUCLEAR ENERGY ASSISTANCE TRUST FUNDS.
‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of the

Treasury shall instruct the United States
Governors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and, as the
Secretary deems appropriate, of other international financial institutions (as defined in
section 1701(c)(2)) to use the voice, vote, and
influence of the United States to establish at
each such institution a trust fund to be
known as the ‘Nuclear Energy Assistance
Trust Fund’ that meets the requirements of
subsections (b) and (c) of this section.
‘‘(b) PURPOSES.—The purposes of such a
trust fund shall be the following:
‘‘(1) To provide financial and technical assistance to support the generation, transmission, and distribution of nuclear energy
in borrowing countries.
‘‘(2) To ensure that the international financial institution makes financing available on competitive terms, including for the
purpose of countering credit extended by the
government of a country that is not a member of the OECD Arrangement on Officially
Supported Export Credits.
‘‘(3) To exclusively support the adoption of
nuclear energy technologies, including small
modular reactors, that meet or exceed the
quality and safety standards of technologies
produced by the United States or a member
country of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
‘‘(4) To strengthen the capacity of the
international financial institution to assess,
implement, and evaluate nuclear energy
projects.
‘‘(c) USE OF TRUST FUND REVENUES.—The
revenues of such a trust fund may be made
available for activities for the purposes de-

PO 00000

Frm 00074

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

scribed in subsection (b), or the United
States share of the revenues may be remitted to the general fund of the Treasury, as
the Secretary finds appropriate.
‘‘(d) RULE OF INTERPRETATION.—This section shall not be interpreted to affect the
ability of the United States Governor of, or
the United States Executive Director at, an
international financial institution (as so defined) to encourage the provision of financial
or technical assistance from non-trust fund
resources of the institution to support the
generation or distribution of nuclear energy.’’.
(4) INCLUSION IN ANNUAL REPORT.—During
the 7-year period that begins with the date of
enactment of this Act, the Chairman of the
National Advisory Council on International
Monetary and Financial Policies shall include in the annual report required by section 1701 of the International Financial Institutions Act a description of any progress
made—
(A) to promote multilateral development
bank (as defined in such section) assistance
for nuclear energy; and
(B) to establish a trust fund pursuant to
section 1507 of such Act or, as the case may
be, a summary of the activities of any such
trust fund.
(5) SUNSET.—The preceding provisions of
this subsection and the amendments made
by the preceding provisions of this subsection shall have no force or effect beginning 10 years after the date of the enactment
of this Act.
(6) CONTINUATION OF PAUSE ON WORLD BANK
DISBURSEMENTS
AND
COMMITMENTS
TO
BURMA.—The Secretary of the Treasury shall

direct the United States Executive Director
at the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to use the voice and
vote of the United States to continue the
pause by the Bank on disbursements and the
making of new financing commitments to
Burma, that was initiated after a military
coup overthrew the democratically elected
government of Burma in 2021, unless the Secretary of the Treasury determines that it is
not in the national interest of the United
States to do so.
(7) EXEMPTION FROM SECURITIES LAWS; REPORTS TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION.—Any securities issued by the International Development Association (including
any guaranty by the Association, whether or
not limited in scope) and any securities
guaranteed by the Association as to both
principal and interest shall be deemed to be
exempted securities within the meaning of
section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933
(15 U.S.C. 77c(a)(2)) and section 3(a)(12) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C.
78c(a)(12)): Provided, That the Association
shall file with the Securities and Exchange
Commission such annual and other reports
with regard to such securities as the Commission shall determine to be appropriate in
view of the special character of the Association and its operations, and necessary in the
public interest or for the protection of investors.
(8) AUTHORITY OF SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION TO SUSPEND EXEMPTION; REPORTS
TO CONGRESS.—The Securities and Exchange
Commission, acting in consultation with the
National Advisory Council on International
Monetary and Financial Policies, may suspend the provisions of paragraph (7) at any
time as to any or all securities issued or
guaranteed by the International Development Association during the period of such
suspension: Provided, That the Commission
shall include in its annual reports to the
Congress such information as it shall deem
advisable with regard to the operations and
effect of this paragraph.
(9) EFFECTIVE DATE.—

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

(A) IN GENERAL.—Paragraph (7) shall take
effect 30 days after the date of the enactment
of this Act.
(B) EXCEPTION.—Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), paragraph (7) shall not take effect
if, before the effective date described in subparagraph (A), the Secretary of the Treasury
reports to the Committee on Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the
Committees on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs and Foreign Relations of the Senate
that the International Development Association is providing financial assistance to any
country the government of which the Secretary of State has determined, for purposes
of section 1754 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019, section
620A of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, or
section 40 of the Arms Export Control Act, to
be a government that has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism.
(c) ASIAN DEVELOPMENT FUND THIRTEENTH
REPLENISHMENT.—The Asian Development
Bank Act (22 U.S.C. 285 et seq.) is amended
by adding at the end the following:
‘‘SEC.

38.

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT FUND
TEENTH REPLENISHMENT.

THIR-

‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—The United States Governor of the Fund may contribute on behalf
of the United States $174,440,000 to the thirteenth replenishment of the resources of the
Fund, subject to obtaining the necessary appropriations.
‘‘(b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
In order to pay for the United States contribution provided for in subsection (a),
there are authorized to be appropriated,
without fiscal year limitation, $174,440,000
for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury.’’.
(d) AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GENERAL
CALLABLE CAPITAL INCREASE.—The African
Development Bank Act (22 U.S.C. 290i et seq.)
is amended by inserting at the end the following:
‘‘SEC. 1346. GENERAL CALLABLE CAPITAL INCREASE.
‘‘(a) SUBSCRIPTION AUTHORIZED.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—The United States Gov-

ernor of the Bank may subscribe on behalf of
the United States to 800,000 additional shares
of the capital stock of the Bank.
‘‘(2) LIMITATION.—Any subscription by the
United States to the capital stock of the
Bank shall be effective only to such extent
and in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
‘‘(b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
For the increase in the United States subscription to the Bank under subsection (a),
there is authorized to be appropriated, without fiscal year limitation, $7,800,000,000, for
payment by the Secretary of the Treasury
for callable shares of the Bank.’’.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

AMERICA FIRST OPPORTUNITY FUND

SEC. 7071. (a) IN GENERAL.—Of the funds appropriated by this Act under the headings
‘‘National Security Investment Programs’’,
‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law
Enforcement’’, ‘‘Peacekeeping Operations’’,
and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’,
up to $850,000,000 may be made available for
the America First Opportunity Fund to furnish assistance that makes America safer,
stronger, and more prosperous by responding
to crises, engaging proactively with strategic partners, and countering threats from
adversaries.
(b) TRANSFER AUTHORITY.—Funds appropriated by this Act under the headings
‘‘International Narcotics Control and Law
Enforcement’’, ‘‘Peacekeeping Operations’’,
and ‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’
and made available for such Fund may be
transferred to, and merged with, funds appropriated under such headings: Provided,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H795

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

That such transfer authority is in addition
to any other transfer authority provided by
this Act or any other Act, and is subject to
the regular notification procedures of the
Committees on Appropriations.
(c) AVAILABILITY.—Funds made available
pursuant to this section under the heading
‘‘Foreign Military Financing Program’’ may
remain available until September 30, 2027.
(d) CONSULTATION.—The Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the allocation of funds made
available pursuant to this section not later
than 30 days prior to the initial obligation of
funds.

priated or otherwise made available by division B of this Act or other Acts making appropriations for the Department of State,
foreign operations, and related programs, including provisions of Acts providing supplemental appropriations for the Department of
State, foreign operations, and related programs, may not be used for a contribution,
grant, or other payment to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, notwithstanding any other provision of law—
(1) for any amounts provided in prior fiscal
years or in fiscal year 2026; or
(2) for amounts provided in fiscal year 2027,
until March 25, 2027.

RESCISSIONS

The Acting CHAIR. All points of
order against provisions in the bill are
waived.
No amendment in the bill shall be in
order except those printed in House Report 119–445.
Each amendment printed in House
Report 119–445 may be offered only in
the order printed in the report, by the
Member designated in the report, shall
be considered as read, shall be debatable for the time specified in the report
equally divided and controlled by the
proponent and an opponent, shall not
be subject to amendment, and shall not
be subject to a demand for division of
the question.

(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 7072. (a) CONSULAR AND BORDER SECURITY PROGRAMS.—Of the unobligated balances from amounts made available under
the heading ‘‘Consular and Border Security
Programs’’ from prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs,
$900,000,000 are permanently rescinded.
(b) EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL EXCHANGE
PROGRAMS.—Of the unobligated balances
from amounts made available under the
heading ‘‘Educational and Cultural Exchange
Programs’’ from prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs,
$25,000,000 are permanently rescinded.
(c) DEBT RESTRUCTURING.—Of the unobligated balances from amounts made available
under the heading ‘‘Debt Restructuring’’
from prior Acts making appropriations for
the Department of State, foreign operations,
and related programs, $63,975,000 are permanently rescinded.
(d) DEMOCRACY FUND.—Of the unobligated
balances from amounts made available under
the heading ‘‘Democracy Fund’’ for the Bureau for Democracy, Human Rights, and
Governance, United States Agency for International Development, from prior Acts making appropriations for the Department of
State, foreign operations, and related programs, $57,000,000 are permanently rescinded.
(e) MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION.—
Of the unobligated balances from amounts
made available under the heading ‘‘Millennium Challenge Corporation’’ from prior
Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs, $661,250,000 are permanently
rescinded.
(f) INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL AND
LAW ENFORCEMENT.—Of the unobligated and
unexpended balances from amounts made
available under the heading ‘‘International
Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement’’
from prior Acts making appropriations for
the Department of State, foreign operations,
and related programs, $179,306,000 are permanently rescinded.
(g) PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS.—Of the unobligated and unexpended balances from
amounts made available under the heading
‘‘Peacekeeping Operations’’ from prior Acts
making appropriations for the Department
of State, foreign operations, and related programs, $50,000,000 are permanently rescinded.
(h) RESTRICTION.—No amounts may be rescinded from amounts that were previously
designated by the Congress as an emergency
requirement pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the budget or section 251(b)(2)(A)(i)
of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
This division may be cited as the ‘‘National Security, Department of State, and
Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
DIVISION C—OTHER MATTERS
SEC. 101. FUNDING LIMITATION.

Notwithstanding any other provision of
any other division of this Act, funds appro-

PO 00000

Frm 00075

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

AMENDMENT NO. 1 OFFERED BY MR. ROY

The Acting CHAIR. It is now in order
to consider amendment No. 1 printed in
House Report 119–445.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Chair, I have an
amendment at the desk.
The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will
designate the amendment.
The text of the amendment is as follows:
At the end of division A (before the short
title), insert the following:
SEC. ll. Not more than $46,241,924 of the
amounts made available to the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
in this division may be obligated or expended
in fiscal year 2026. Not more than $46,241,924
of the amounts made available to the U.S.
District Court for the District of Columbia
in this division may be obligated or expended
in fiscal year 2026.
SEC. ll. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be obligated or expended for
the salary and expenses for the staff of Judge
James E. Boasberg of the United States District Court of the District of Columbia or
Judge Deborah L. Boardman of the United
States District Court for the District of
Maryland.

The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
House Resolution 992, the gentleman
from Texas (Mr. ROY) and a Member
opposed each will control 5 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Texas.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Chair, I thank the
Chairman and the ranking member for
getting these bills to the floor in a
semblance of regular order, as I described in the Rules Committee yesterday.
Mr. Chair, Republicans rise to offer
two amendments today, one of which is
the amendment that I am bringing forward right now. That amendment is
dealing with what we call general government. It is that portion of funding
that deals with a number of areas including our judges and how judges are
funded.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.002

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H796

One of the issues we have been addressing is the extent to which the
President, who is elected to fulfill a
mandate, has been carrying out policies that he believes fulfills the mandate the American people gave the
President and that Members, my colleagues on this side of the aisle, believe
should be fulfilled.
Yet, there have been judges who have
been putting their personal preferences
and their activist tendencies in front of
the will of the people and in front of
the policies the President is putting
forward in such a way that raises questions about whether they are carrying
out their jobs responsibly and in accordance with normal judicial ethics
and procedures.
Therefore, I offer this amendment
that would reduce the budget of the
district court, the D.C. District Court
and D.C. Circuit Court, by 20 percent
and would take away the staff funding
for Judges Boardman and Boasberg.
These two individuals have been particularly egregious in their contempt
of the President and have been putting
their personal views in front of their
duty as judges to carry out the jobs
they hold
Mr. Chair, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Chair, I claim the
time in opposition to the amendment.
The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman
from Maryland is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Chair, I thank the
gentleman for recognizing me.
Mr. Chair, I presume this is a message amendment. I presume that because I know that the gentleman who
offered it is bright, knowledgeable, and
knows this amendment is clearly unconstitutional.
I am sure he has read the Constitution. He talks about it from time to
time. Of course, the language of the
Constitution is very clear for exactly
the reason that the Founders did not
want us to be able to monetarily penalize them for judgments with which we
disagreed.
They wanted an independent judiciary. They wanted a Nation of laws and
not of men. They wanted a nation of
laws that are not compromised by
threats of cutting salaries and changing lifestyles so that the judiciary
would be, unlike England, who had a
king who made the laws. It would be
the parliament and the courts.
Mr. Chair, I suggest we withdraw this
amendment, with all due respect to my
friend from Texas, because surely he
would not want to go against the Constitution of the United States of America.
Mr. Chair, I also want to say that I
am honored to serve as the ranking
member. I would rather be chairman. I
am honored to serve as the ranking
member with the distinguished Member of this body, Mr. JOYCE.
If he would like me to yield to him
now, I will. If not, I want to thank him
for his leadership of our committee,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

which has been collegial and positive. I
think it has led to this resolution
today.
Mr. Chair, I urge strenuously and by
the way, let me mention to the gentleman from Texas he is protected by
the Constitution of the United States
from having exactly the same thing
done to him.
The Acting CHAIR. Members are reminded to direct their remarks to the
Chair.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Chair, I thank the
Chairman, Mr. SESSIONS, from the
great State of Texas for his remarks. I
want to tell the gentleman from Texas
(Mr. ROY) that the gentleman who offered this amendment is protected by
that same Constitution of the United
States from having this done to him.
Surely he would want to do unto others
as he would want done unto him.
Mr. Chair, I urge strenuously the defeat of this amendment, and I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Chair, I thank my
friend from Maryland for his comments. I wish him well on his retirement. I look forward to regaling that
retirement often over the next 10
months.
Mr. Chair, I would just note that I
am reminded of the line in ‘‘A Few
Good Men’’ when they say ‘‘strenuously object.’’
The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman
will direct his remarks to the Chair.
The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Chair, I am reminded
of that line in a ‘‘Few Good Men’’ when
they talk about strenuously objecting
and somehow that that makes a more
emphatic statement.
I would also remind my colleague the
way we have drafted this bill is to reduce the budget by 20 percent. Nowhere
in the Constitution does it stipulate
the amount of money that should be
put——
The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman
will direct his remarks to the Chair. If
I need to remind the gentleman of the
rules, please let me know.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Chair, at some point
we might be able to get an argument
out in some sort of fashion where the
American people can see it. I would appreciate being able to engage somebody
on the House floor.
Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is,
if I can keep my train of thought, Mr.
Chairman, what I would say is that
this has been drafted specifically—
drafted specifically—to avoid the constitutional question the gentleman
from Maryland (Mr. HOYER) raises.
It was directed at the budget. Nowhere in the Constitution does it talk
about the budget. It was directed at
the staffs. It was not directed at the
judges.
Mr. Chair, I yield 11⁄2 minutes to the
gentleman from Arizona (Mr. BIGGS).
Mr. BIGGS of Arizona. Mr. Chairman,
nationwide injunctions are highly
disfavored. There was a time that people across both sides of the aisle here
recognized that.

PO 00000

Frm 00076

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

A certain judge named Boasberg continually exercises those nationwide injunctions, and that wouldn’t necessarily be a problem, except he has repeatedly displayed bias and partisanship.
For instance, without substance or
evidence, he complained to Chief Justice Roberts that he didn’t think President Trump would comply with judicial
orders. That displayed his bias, Mr.
Chairman. That displayed his partisanship.
Without legal authority and without
precedent, Judge Boasberg ordered the
government to turn around planes that
were in international airspace, conducting a military operation. That is
what he insisted upon.
The appellate court rejected Judge
Boasberg’s theories regarding that incident. Do you know what Judge
Boasberg did? He didn’t care what the
appellate court said because he is biased. He is prejudiced. Judge Boasberg
ordered the Trump administration to
come in and explain further why they
violated what he felt was his authority,
which the appellate court said was not
rational.
b 1520
Judge Boasberg is the one who issued
surveillance subpoenas against Members of this body and the United States
Senate, against Federal law, Mr. Chair.
It was against Federal law.
Judge Boasberg issued nondisclosure
orders.
The Acting CHAIR. The time of the
gentleman has expired.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Chair, I yield an additional 15 seconds to the gentleman
from Arizona.
Mr. BIGGS of Arizona. Mr. Chair,
when we see this pattern and we know
that he has displayed and said that he
has bias against President Trump, he
no longer is a fair arbiter, and he must
be reckoned with.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Chairman, I yield
myself 1 minute.
Mr. Chairman, the gentleman has
raised a point. He has carefully drafted
this amendment.
Mr. Chairman, his rhetoric, however,
and the other gentleman who spoke has
been about an individual, about a
judge. Their effort is to indirectly do
what the Constitution says they cannot do directly.
This Congress ought to recognize
that the Constitution clearly had in
mind that you cannot do this, directly
or indirectly, when the expressed intent of the outcome of the adoption of
this amendment is to cut the salaries
of judges with whom they disagree.
That would not be a nation of laws. It
would be a nation of men. That, we
should hold askew, Mr. Chairman, and
I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30
seconds to the gentleman from Georgia
(Mr. CLYDE).
Mr. CLYDE. Mr. Chairman, in January, just days into the President’s first
term, Judge Deborah Boardman issued

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.046

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

a nationwide injunction using deeply
flawed legal grounds against the administration’s birthright citizenship
order.
Months later, Judge James Boasberg
attempted to halt the lawful deportation of violent Tren de Aragua gang
members, even ordering a removal
flight to turn around in midair. These
are not isolated incidences. The D.C.
Federal courts have become ground
zero for lawfare.
This amendment sends a clear message: Unelected judges are not policymakers, and taxpayers should not be
forced to fund judicial activism.
Mr. Chair, I urge adoption of the
amendment.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Chair, I reserve the
balance of my time.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Chair, may I inquire as
to how much time is remaining.
The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman
from Texas has 30 seconds remaining.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Chairman, we created
this court. We can dissolve this court.
We can determine the funding for this
court. The fact of the matter is that we
have a situation right now where
judges abuse their power, plain and
simple.
The D.C. Circuit Court and the D.C.
District Court are the locus of that
abuse. In particular, they have harassed staff members because people
raised the question about why you zero
out staff.
Mr. Chairman, ask Dan Scavino. Ask
Mark Meadows. Ask a number of the
people who have been targeted and
were harassed by these judges and January 6ers. We should make amends, and
we should not fund this court to continue its lawlessness.
Mr. Chair, I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Chairman, I again
urge the rejection of this amendment.
It is clearly designed to alter opinions
based upon the threat of being reduced
in monetary ability to proceed.
They disagree with the judge. There
is a way to go about that. It is to appeal, not to threaten financial retribution.
Mr. Chair, for the sake of our democracy and the sanctity of something
that makes America special, which is a
justice system that works unrelated to
threats of retribution, I urge the defeat
of this amendment.
Mr. Chair, I yield back the balance of
my time.
The Acting CHAIR. The question is
on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Texas (Mr. ROY).
The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Chair, I demand a
recorded vote.
The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by
the gentleman from Texas will be postponed.
AMENDMENT NO. 2 OFFERED BY MR. CRANE

The Acting CHAIR. It is now in order
to consider amendment No. 2 printed in
House Report 119–445.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H797

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mr. CRANE. Mr. Chair, I have an
amendment at the desk.
The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will
designate the amendment.
The text of the amendment is as follows:
Page 205, strike line 20 and all that follows
through line 7 on page 206.
Page 318, strike line 11 and all that follows
through line 21 on page 320.

The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
House Resolution 992, the gentleman
from Arizona (Mr. CRANE) and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Arizona.
Mr. CRANE. Mr. Chairman, I rise
today in support of my amendment to
defund the National Endowment for
Democracy.
Although its name suggests a force
for good, its mission has drifted far
from its Cold War origins. This is a
classic tactic of the swamp where bad
policy and corruption hide behind a
noble title.
I thank Mr. Mike Benz and other patriots. We have learned that this organization has engaged in global censorship, domestic propaganda, and regimechange politics. It has worked to crush
populous movements, fuel color revolutions, and run off-the-books operations
with plausible deniability.
The
Trump
administration
attempted to defund it earlier this year,
but that was reversed because Congress
had previously approved it. Now is our
chance to change that.
Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues
to prevent taxpayer resources from
funding this rogue organization that
works against our Nation’s interests.
Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance
of my time.
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida. Mr.
Chair, I rise in opposition to the
amendment.
The Acting CHAIR. The gentlewoman
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida. Mr.
Chairman, I speak again today as a
mother of a son, a United States Marines veteran, who came home from
two wars.
One lesson I carry with me is this:
The conflicts that put our sons and our
daughters in harm’s way almost always
arise in places where democracy has
failed or never taken root. This amendment will strike funding for the National Endowment for Democracy and
core democracy provisions in the bill,
and this would be a serious mistake
and a dangerous retreat from American
values.
For decades, these programs have
supported free and fair elections, independent journalism, civic participation, and access to truthful information—tools that help societies resolve
disputes without violence.
In Ukraine, democracy programs help
document Russian war crimes against
women and children. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, they fight corruption and strengthen the rule of law.

PO 00000

Frm 00077

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

In Pakistan, they promote religious
tolerance and protect minority communities. Around the world, they expand women’s participation in political
life, one of the strongest predictors of
long-term stability.
These investments are not charity.
They are prevention. They save American lives, taxpayer dollars, and future
troop deployments by reducing the
likelihood of conflict, extremism, and
mass displacement that ultimately demand United States’ intervention.
From the streets of Iran to fragile democracies under pressure, brave people
are risking everything for dignity, freedom, and a voice in their future.
b 1530
These are the people that these programs support. I urge my colleagues to
reject this amendment and stand up for
democracy and for American leadership around the world.
Mr. Chair, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. CRANE. Mr. Chair, I thank my
colleague for those remarks and also
thank her son for serving in the Armed
Forces. I too served in the Armed
Forces, went on three wartime deployments, and I can tell you I didn’t fight
for any of this: global censorship, domestic propaganda, regime change politics, and many other things that this
organization is doing.
Mr. Chair, I yield 45 seconds to the
gentleman
from
Missouri
(Mr.
BURLISON).
Mr. BURLISON. Mr. Chairman, I rise
today in support of this amendment
that ends Federal funding for the National Endowment for Democracy, a
program that Elon Musk, while leading
DOGE, publicly said was a scam, that
it was rife with corruption and an evil
organization that should be dissolved.
President Trump and his administration attempted to do that, and yet here
we are trying to fund it.
This program was sold to the American people as a force for advancing
freedom, but instead it has become a
foreign slush fund.
Let me be clear: Americans should
not be forced to finance political outcomes in countries where they have no
voice, no vote, or no oversight. This is
not America First but a scam under
the disguise of foreign policy. Under no
circumstances should Congress put foreign governments ahead of those that
we were elected to serve.
The United States must lead by example. This means not managing the
political affairs of the rest of the world
on the backs of the American taxpayer.
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida. Mr.
Chair, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Florida (Mr. DIAZBALART).
Mr. DIAZ-BALART. Mr. Chairman,
before anything else, I will tell you
what I have told Mr. CRANE privately.
I will say it publicly. I revere his service to the country. We must always
thank those who served, and he served
honorably.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.048

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H798

On this amendment, the bill that we
are debating right now substantially
reduces spending, while strengthening
our national security.
Part of the strategy is to ensure that
the most effective tools to achieve this
objective are strong and ready to deliver, including the National Endowment for Democracy. Now, remember,
NED was a brilliant initiative from
President Ronald Reagan to fight communism and enemies abroad, and it
succeeded, strengthening democracy
forces from within and helping to get
rid of the Berlin Wall.
Today, the adversaries of the United
States are still there, and they threaten democracy and freedom all over the
world. NED, just as envisioned by
President Reagan, is needed once again
on the forefront of fighting the enemies
of the United States.
NED and democracy programs have
been supporting those struggling for
freedom in the most repressive places
in the world. In Iran, China, Cuba, and
Venezuela, the people are hitting the
streets, and NED is there with them.
Those who are anti-American tyrannies are where NED is effective, and
that is where we need them now the
most.
At this critical time, America cannot
turn its back to those who are courageously fighting, advocating for freedom around the world. There is nothing better for our long-term national
security than democratic transitions
within those anti-American dangerous
regimes around the globe, and NED is a
pivotal part of that, which is why, with
great admiration and respect to the
sponsor of this amendment, I must ask
for a ‘‘no’’ vote.
Mr. CRANE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 45
seconds to the gentleman from Arizona
(Mr. BIGGS).
Mr. BIGGS of Arizona. Mr. Chairman,
I rise in strong support of my friend,
Representative CRANE’s, amendment.
I take umbrage with the last comments made. If this was such a doggone
great program, then why has it been
unauthorized by this body for more
than 20 years? The reason is it has lost
its moorings. It is wandering around. It
hasn’t complied with transparency requirements. It more closely resembles
covert political operations designed to
entangle the United States in foreign
disputes and undermine diplomatic efforts than support them.
Their board and staff overwhelmingly
donate to Democratic candidates. They
even demanded the removal of Congresswoman ELISE STEFANIK from the
board for defending President Trump, a
clear sign of ideological capture, and
that is the biggest problem. They have
lost their way. They cannot be trusted.
We should not give them another dime.
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida. Mr.
Chair, I yield 1 minute to the gentlewoman
from
Connecticut
(Ms.
DELAURO), the ranking member of the
Appropriations Committee.
Ms. DELAURO. Chairman, I oppose
this amendment. The National Endow-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

ment for Democracy supports initiatives for which many of my Republican
colleagues proudly proclaimed their
support. Advocates in Iran supported
by NED have been instrumental in documenting the brutality of the Ayatollah’s regime.
Over the last several days, we have
seen some of the most egregious acts of
violent repression in decades as thousands of Iranian protestors take to the
streets. The work of groups backed by
the National Endowment for Democracy is more important now than ever.
The only people who benefit when we
pull back our support for democracy
advocates around the world are the dictators and the despots who oppress
them.
Mr. Chair, I encourage my colleagues
on both sides of the aisle to oppose this
amendment and hold firm on the agreement that we negotiated.
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida. Mr.
Chair, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. CRANE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 45
seconds to the gentlewoman from Florida (Mrs. LUNA).
Mrs. LUNA. The National Endowment for Democracy needs to change
its name to the National Endowment
for Censorship.
I hear if we defund programs in Pakistan, Congo, and the Ukraine, all of
which—Pakistan has election fraud,
Congo has 40,000 child slaves in cobalt
mines, and Ukraine is jailing Christians—then we are simply despots and
part of the problem, but I disagree. In
fact, we have proof that NED actually
was a part of deplatforming President
Trump, which I don’t think the President would take kindly to Republicans
supporting its efforts, not to mention
their head makes close to $500,000 a
year.
Mr. Chair, I encourage my colleagues
to not vote for this. It is a farce, it is
nonsense, and our tax dollars should
not be going toward it.
Mr. CRANE. Mr. Chair, I yield such
time as he may consume to the gentleman
from
Pennsylvania
(Mr.
PERRY).
Mr. PERRY. Mr. Chairman, I thank
the gentleman from Arizona and the
chairman of the committee for his hard
work on this bill.
Mr. Chairman, I support this amendment because you think about the National Endowment for Democracy, you
think the United States is working
productively in places like Iran, Cuba,
and Venezuela. If we are, let’s face it,
we have been an abject failure.
Let me tell you where your taxpayer
dollars are really going. Where they
had been going is to pressure advertisers to demonetize and suppress
American political speech by naming
the ten riskiest cites to include the
New York Post, the Federalist,
Newsmax, The Blaze, The Daily Wire,
RealClearPolitics, Reason, One America News Network, The American Spectator, and The American Conservative.
Mr. Chair, 98 percent of the political
donations coming from the National

PO 00000

Frm 00078

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Endowment for Democracy go to the
Democrat Party. This is your taxpayer
dollars paying for socialists and communists to subvert the American system, and it ought to be stopped.
Mr. CRANE. Mr. Chairman, may I inquire how much time I have remaining.
The Acting CHAIR (Mr. WILLIAMS of
Texas). The gentleman from Arizona
has 5 seconds remaining.
Mr. CRANE. Mr. Chairman, a vote
against this amendment is a vote to
preserve the status quo, censorship, unrest, and erosion of our values.
The American people may be busy,
but they are not stupid. With this vote,
they will see clearly who is fighting for
them and who is not.
Mr. Chair, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘yes,’’ and I yield back the balance of my time.
The Acting CHAIR. The question is
on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Arizona (Mr. CRANE).
The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the ayes appeared to have it.
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida. Mr.
Chair, I demand a recorded vote.
The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by
the gentleman from Arizona will be
postponed.
b 1540
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I move that the
Committee do now rise.
The motion was agreed to.
Accordingly, the Committee rose;
and the Speaker pro tempore (Mr.
JOYCE of Ohio) having assumed the
chair, Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas, Acting
Chair of the Committee of the Whole
House on the state of the Union, reported that that Committee, having
had under consideration the bill (H.R.
7006) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes, had come to no resolution thereon.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess subject to
the call of the Chair.
Accordingly (at 3 o’clock and 41 minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. CRANK) at 4 o’clock and
45 minutes p.m.
f

FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT AND NATIONAL SECURITY, DEPARTMENT
OF STATE, AND RELATED PROGRAMS APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 992 and rule

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.051

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

XVIII, the Chair declares the House in
the Committee of the Whole House on
the state of the Union for the further
consideration of the bill, H.R. 7006.
Will the gentleman from Texas (Mr.
WEBER) kindly take the chair.
b 1645
IN THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

Accordingly, the House resolved
itself into the Committee of the Whole
House on the state of the Union for the
further consideration of the bill (H.R.
7006) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes, with Mr. WEBER of Texas in the
chair.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The Acting CHAIR. When the Committee of the Whole rose earlier today,
amendment No. 2, printed in House Report 119–445, offered by the gentleman
from Arizona (Mr. CRANE) had been
postponed.
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE ACTING CHAIR

The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
clause 6 of rule XVIII, proceedings will
now resume on those amendments
printed in House Report 119–445, on
which further proceedings were postponed in the following order:
Amendment No. 1 by Mr. ROY of
Texas; and
Amendment No. 2 by Mr. CRANE of
Arizona.
The Chair will reduce to 2 minutes
the minimum time for any electronic
vote after the first vote in this series.
AMENDMENT NO. 1 OFFERED BY MR. ROY

The Acting CHAIR. The unfinished
business is the demand for a recorded
vote on amendment No. 1, printed in
House Report 119–445, offered by the
gentleman from Texas (Mr. ROY), on
which further proceedings were postponed and on which the ayes prevailed
by voice vote.
The Clerk will redesignate the
amendment.
The Clerk redesignated the amendment.
RECORDED VOTE

The Acting CHAIR. A recorded vote
has been demanded.
A recorded vote was ordered.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—ayes 163, noes 257,
answered ‘‘present’’ 1, not voting 16, as
follows:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 26]
AYES—163
Aderholt
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Burchett
Burlison
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H799

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Donalds
Downing
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fleischmann
Foxx

Jkt 069060

Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Gill (TX)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Jordan
Joyce (PA)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff

Langworthy
Latta
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Mann
Massie
Mast
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rose

Adams
Aguilar
Alford
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Bacon
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Case
Casten
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell

Doggett
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fitzpatrick
Fletcher
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Joyce (OH)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)

Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Smith (MO)
Smith (NJ)
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Tiffany
Timmons
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Yakym
Zinke

NOES—257

PO 00000

Frm 00079

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
King-Hinds
Krishnamoorthi
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McCaul
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McClintock
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Norcross
Norton
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar

Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky

Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Simpson
Smith (NE)
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib

Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Westerman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)
Wittman
Womack

ANSWERED ‘‘PRESENT’’—1
Griffith

NOT VOTING—16
Casar
Castor (FL)
Dunn (FL)
Hernández
Hunt
Moylan

Murphy
Nehls
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Plaskett
Radewagen

Smucker
Swalwell
Thompson (PA)
Van Orden

b 1715
Mr. BRESNAHAN, Ms. WILSON of
Florida, and Mr. WITTMAN changed
their vote from ‘‘aye’’ to ‘‘no.’’
Messrs. BERGMAN, LATTA, WILLIAMS of Texas, RUTHERFORD,
PATRONIS, CISCOMANI, BENTZ, and
SCOTT FRANKLIN of Florida changed
their vote from ‘‘no’’ to ‘‘aye.’’
So the amendment was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
AMENDMENT NO. 2 OFFERED BY MR. CRANE

The Acting CHAIR. The unfinished
business is the demand for a recorded
vote on amendment No. 2, printed in
House Report 119–445, offered by the
gentleman from Arizona (Mr. CRANE),
on which further proceedings were
postponed and on which the ayes prevailed by voice vote.
The Clerk will redesignate the
amendment.
The Clerk redesignated the amendment.
RECORDED VOTE

The Acting CHAIR. A recorded vote
has been demanded.
A recorded vote was ordered.
The Acting CHAIR. This will be a 2minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—ayes 127, noes 291,
not voting 18, as follows:
[Roll No. 27]
AYES—127
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bergman
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Burchett
Burlison
Cammack
Carter (GA)
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Collins
Comer

Crane
Crank
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Donalds
Downing
Emmer
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak

H800
Kelly (MS)
Kennedy (UT)
Knott
Kustoff
Langworthy
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mann
Massie
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (WV)
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer

Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Bacon
Baird
Balint
Barragán
Baumgartner
Beatty
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Beyer
Bice
Bilirakis
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Case
Casten
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crawford
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier

Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Escobar
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Fitzpatrick
Fletcher
Flood
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Guthrie
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Hayes
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Joyce (OH)
Kamlager-Dove

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Patronis
Perry
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Smith (MO)
Smith (NJ)
Spartz
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Stutzman
Tiffany
Timmons
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Weber (TX)
Wied
Williams (TX)
Yakym
Zinke

Norton
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pfluger
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Ross
Ruiz
Rutherford
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas

Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
King-Hinds
Krishnamoorthi
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lucas
Lynch
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mannion
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McCaul
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Menendez
Meng
Meuser
Mfume
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Norcross

Casar
Castor (FL)
Dunn (FL)
Gonzales, Tony
Hernández
Hunt

NOES—291

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fleischmann
Fong
Foxx
Fry
Fulcher
Gill (TX)
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Houchin
Hudson
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Jordan
Joyce (PA)

Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Simpson
Smith (NE)
Smith (WA)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stefanik
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)

Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Wagner
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack

NOT VOTING—18

Jkt 069060

Meeks
Moylan
Murphy
Nehls
Norman
Plaskett

Radewagen
Reschenthaler
Scalise
Swalwell
Thompson (PA)
Van Orden

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE ACTING CHAIR

The Acting CHAIR (during the vote).
There is 1 minute remaining.
b 1719
So the amendment was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The Acting CHAIR. Under the rule,
the Committee rises.
Accordingly, the Committee rose;
and the Speaker pro tempore (Mr.
MEUSER) having assumed the chair, Mr.
WEBER of Texas, Acting Chair of the
Committee of the Whole House on the
state of the Union, reported that that
Committee, having had under consideration the bill (H.R. 7006) making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes, and, pursuant to House Resolution 992, he reported the bill back to the House.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Under
the rule, the previous question is ordered.
The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on passage of the bill.
Under clause 10 of rule XX, the yeas
and nays are ordered.
This will be a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 341, nays 79,
not voting 11, as follows:
[Roll No. 28]
YEAS—341
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Allen

PO 00000

Frm 00080

Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barragán
Barrett

Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bishop
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Case
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Cloud
Clyburn
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Downing
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (TX)
Gillen

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.010

H14JAPT1

Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kaptur
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luttrell
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McCaul
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McClintock
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGuire
Meng
Messmer

Meuser
Mfume
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Norcross
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Olszewski
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pfluger
Pingree
Pou
Quigley
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross
Rouzer
Ruiz
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Spartz
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Suozzi
Sykes
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Tiffany
Timmons
Titus
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)

January 14, 2026
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Vargas
Vasquez

Veasey
Vindman
Wagner
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Weber (TX)
Westerman
Whitesides

Amo
Ansari
Balint
Beyer
Biggs (AZ)
Boebert
Brecheen
Burchett
Burlison
Cammack
Carson
Casten
Castro (TX)
Cohen
Crane
Davidson
Dexter
Doggett
Donalds
Escobar
Espaillat
Fletcher
Foushee
Friedman
Frost
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)

Gill (TX)
Goldman (NY)
Gosar
Grijalva
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Kamlager-Dove
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (UT)
Krishnamoorthi
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Lofgren
Luna
Lynch
Mace
Magaziner
Massie
McBride
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks

NAYS—79
Menendez
Mills
Moore (WI)
Moulton
Ocasio-Cortez
Ogles
Omar
Onder
Perry
Pocan
Pressley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Roy
Ryan
Self
Simon
Stansbury
Steube
Subramanyam
Takano
Tlaib
Velázquez
Watson Coleman

NOT VOTING—11
Casar
Castor (FL)
Dunn (FL)
Hunt

Murphy
Nehls
Norman
Swalwell

Thompson (PA)
Van Orden
Webster (FL)

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
WEBER of Texas) (during the vote).
There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1727
Ms. ANSARI changed her vote from
‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Speaker, had I been present, I would have
voted NO on Roll Call No. 26, NO on Roll Call
No. 27, and YEA on Roll Call No. 28.
f

b 1730

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

REMOVAL OF NAME OF MEMBER
AS COSPONSOR OF H. RES. 932
Mr. JACKSON of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
I hereby remove my name as cosponsor
of H. Res. 932.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman’s request is granted.

APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO
CANADA–UNITED STATES INTERPARLIAMENTARY GROUP
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
SHREVE). The Chair announces the
Speaker’s appointment, pursuant to 22
U.S.C. 276d, clause 10 of rule I, and the
order of the House of January 3, 2025, of
the following Members on the part of
the House to the Canada–United States
Interparliamentary Group:
Mr. LARSEN, Washington
Mr. MORELLE, New York
Ms. OMAR, Minnesota
Mr. THANEDAR, Michigan
Mr. KENNEDY, New York
f

APPOINTMENT OF INDIVIDUAL TO
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER IN
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair announces the Speaker’s appointment, pursuant to 20 U.S.C.
2103(b), and the order of the House of
January 3, 2025, of the following individual to the Board of Trustees of the
American Folklife Center in the Library of Congress on the part of the
House for a term of 6 years:
Mr. Robert Anacletus Underwood,
Tamueng, Guam
f

APPOINTMENT OF MEMBER TO
CONGRESSIONAL–EXECUTIVE
COMMISSION ON THE PEOPLE’S
REPUBLIC OF CHINA
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair announces the Speaker’s appointment, pursuant to 22 U.S.C. 6913,
and the order of the House of January
3, 2025, of the following Member on the
part of the House to the Congressional–
Executive Commission on the People’s
Republic of China:
Mr. WALKINSHAW, Virginia
f

APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO
UNITED STATES GROUP OF THE
NATO PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair announces the Speaker’s appointment, pursuant to 22 U.S.C. 1928a,
clause 10 of rule I, and the order of the
House of January 3, 2025, of the following Members on the part of the
House to the United States Group of
the NATO Parliamentary Assembly:
Ms. SÁNCHEZ, California
Mr. LARSEN, Washington
Mr. NORCROSS, New Jersey
Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE, California

f

f

HOUR OF MEETING ON TOMORROW
Mr. JACKSON of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
I ask unanimous consent that when the
House adjourns today, it adjourn to
meet at 9 a.m. tomorrow.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Texas?
There was no objection.

RECOGNIZING JOSIE PETHAN AND
BRENDA DAWES
(Mr. WIED asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. WIED. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize an extraordinary young
woman from northeastern Wisconsin

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H801

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)
Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00081

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

who recently saved her mother’s life by
performing CPR.
While at home sick from school, 11year-old Josie Pethan was confronted
with a nightmare scenario that no
child should have to experience. Josie
had been reading on the couch next to
her mother when her mother had a sudden medical emergency. Josie quickly
realized something was very wrong.
Without hesitation, Josie jumped
into action, calling nearby family
members for help and then contacting
911. She soon spoke with dispatcher
Brenda Dawes, who started guiding her
on how to perform CPR.
Brenda was able to walk Josie
through the proper CPR technique
while they waited for EMTs to arrive.
When asked about who was in her mind
during this traumatic experience, she
responded: Jesus.
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to
join me in honoring this remarkable
young woman. Because of her decisive
actions, her mother is alive today and
doing much better.
I also want to recognize and thank
Brenda Dawes for her service to our
community. Because of her calm guidance and sound advice, a tragedy was
prevented. Northeast Wisconsin is
blessed to have such compassionate
and dedicated 911 dispatchers just like
her.
Josie’s quick thinking and faith in
God will carry her very far in life. On
behalf of everyone in Wisconsin’s
Eighth District, I want her to know
how proud we are of her and how happy
we are that her mother is doing okay.
f

CONGRATULATING WPIAL
CHAMPIONS
(Mr. DELUZIO asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DELUZIO. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to celebrate and congratulate
the many high school teams in Pennsylvania’s 17th Congressional District
that won their WPIAL championships
this fall season. Those champions are
as follows:
In football, they are Aliquippa,
Avonworth, and Seton LaSalle.
In boys’ soccer, they are Fox Chapel,
West Allegheny, and Deer Lakes.
In girls’ soccer, they are North Allegheny and Fox Chapel.
In girls’ tennis, they are Shady Side
Academy and Quaker Valley.
In girls’ volleyball, they are Beaver,
Avonworth, and Eden Christian.
In boys’ golf, they are South Fayette
and Shady Side Academy.
In field hockey, they are Pine-Richland, Fox Chapel, and Shady Side
Academy.
In boys’ cross-country, they are
Quaker Valley.
In girls’ cross-country, they are
Shady Side Academy.
Mr. Speaker, I say it a lot: We make
champions in western Pennsylvania.
I congratulate all the winners. They
make us proud at home.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.013

H14JAPT1

H802
b 1740

HONORING THE LIFE OF FRANK W.
ZARDECKI
(Mr. BRESNAHAN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. BRESNAHAN. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to honor the life of Frank
Zardecki, a devoted public servant and
proud Pennsylvanian who passed away
on January 11, 2026, at the age of 84.
Frank dedicated more than six decades of his life to serving our Nation.
After proudly serving in the United
States Air Force, he spent over 50
years at the Tobyhanna Army Depot,
where he rose to the role of deputy
commander and helped to lead one of
the region’s most important defense facilities.
Frank’s leadership and commitment
to excellence at Tobyhanna and his life
was exceptional, earning him some of
the highest civilian honors in Federal
service, including the Department of
Defense Medal of Distinguished Civilian Service, the highest DOD civilian
service award.
Following his retirement in 2022, he
was inducted into both the Army Materiel Command Hall of Fame and the
U.S.
Army
Communications-Electronics Command Hall of Fame.
Above all, Frank was a devoted husband, father, and grandfather who
cherished time with his family and his
community in northeastern Pennsylvania.
I extend my deepest condolences to
his loved ones and thank them for
sharing Frank with our Nation. His
legacy of service will not be forgotten.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING THE LIFE OF JOY
ATKINSON
(Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend her remarks.)
Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE. Mr. Speaker, I rise with a heavy heart to honor
the remarkable life of civil rights activist and community leader, Joy Atkinson.
Joy dedicated her life to mentoring
thousands of Black women to become
the next generation of changemakers
in Los Angeles, and I was one of them.
Joy was the first person to introduce
me to public policy work. Without her,
I would not be standing here today as a
Member of Congress. Whether advising
local elected officials or leading the
Los Angeles African-American Women’s Public Policy Institute, her integrity, courage, and commitment to
building coalitions and creating change
never wavered.
In my city, Joy touched the lives of
anybody who was anybody. With her
unexpected passing, we have not only
lost a giant in the fight for justice but
also a beloved mother, friend, and confidant. Her legacy will endure as we
continue working toward the more eq-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

uitable and inclusive society in which
she so deeply believed.
May she rest in peace.
f

TRUST VERSUS WASTE
(Mr. SHREVE asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. SHREVE. Mr. Speaker, across
my home State of Indiana, I hear the
same thing time and again. People
work hard. They pay their taxes, and
they expect Washington to treat their
dollars with respect.
Hoosier hospitality means that we
help neighbors who truly need it, but
fraud turns this virtue into a target,
and hardworking Hoosiers foot the bill.
This is not left versus right. It is
honesty versus the dishonest, trust
versus waste. For every dollar stolen
by fraud, it is a dollar we cannot spend
on public safety, on our national security, or on helping working families get
ahead.
We owe taxpayers accountability,
stronger oversight, and closed loopholes that invite abuse.
Protect the taxpayers. Protect the
programs, and punish the scammers.
f

SCRIMPING ON VETERANS’
MEDICAL CARE IS UN-AMERICAN
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, this
past December, the Department of Veterans Affairs released a proposal to cut
25,000 openings nationwide for muchneeded nurses and medical staff.
In the New York City area, this
would mean a loss of approximately 380
positions. While the VA claims these
are unneeded openings left from the
pandemic, its own inspector general reported last August that 94 percent of
VA facilities reported severe staffing
shortages for medical officer occupations, and 79 percent of facilities reported severe shortages for nurses.
It is baffling, but 250 years on, this
Nation still struggles to reconcile the
way that it treats the men and women
who fought for our country after they
have traded their swords for plowshares. The same can be said for the
caregivers who tend to their wounds,
both physical and psychological, in the
years after their service.
Scrimping on veterans’ medical care
or diverting its availability is unAmerican, and it sends the message to
our citizens that this government will
not keep its part of the bargain.
I demand that this government invest in the VA system rather than seek
its demise. The brave men and women
who sacrificed to defend our country
deserve better.
f

HONORING BOB WILLIS ON HIS
101ST BIRTHDAY
(Ms. HAGEMAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1

PO 00000

Frm 00082

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. HAGEMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor one of Wyoming’s remaining World War II veterans, Mr.
Bob Willis of Laramie, who recently
turned 101 years old.
Mr. Willis served his country as an
infantryman during some of the fiercest fighting of the war, including the
Battle of the Bulge. While under enemy
fire, a German tank round exploded beneath him, and shrapnel struck his
side, stopped only by the Book of Mormon, which he carried in his pocket.
Mr. Willis is a true hero. He earned
the Purple Heart, helped to liberate
Europe from Nazi tyranny, and later
protected Holocaust survivors in the
aftermath of the war.
When Mr. Willis returned home, he
devoted four decades to serving the
Laramie community as a dentist and
raised a family with his wife, Kaye.
Bob Willis exemplifies duty, faith,
humility, and service. Please join me
in honoring his extraordinary life and
service to Wyoming and our Nation.
f

RECOGNIZING ERIC SIROTA
(Mrs. RAMIREZ asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Mrs. RAMIREZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
to honor Eric Sirota for his work to expand tenants’ rights and reshape the
housing landscape.
As director of housing justice at the
Shriver Center on Poverty Law and
now as the director of a tenant advocacy clinic, Eric uses litigation advocacy to advance housing equity in Illinois and beyond. His work with the Illinois Fair Housing Coalition led to the
passage of a State law prohibiting discrimination against housing choice
voucher holders.
Eric co-led the Partnership of Just
Housing, a national coalition that improved housing access for people with
arrest and conviction histories. As a
trusted counsel to countless tenant associations, Eric has maintained his
commitment to housing for all.
On behalf of Illinois’ Third Congressional District, it is my honor to commend Eric Sirota for his work to ensure safe, just, and affordable housing
as a fundamental human right.
I thank and congratulate Eric.
f

SHARIA FREE AMERICA CAUCUS
(Mr. GILL of Texas asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. GILL of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today in recognition of the Sharia
Free America Caucus, which I am
proud to have joined.
Across the world, ideologically driven Islamic movements have destabilized entire regions; displaced tens of
millions of people; and fueled terrorism, repression, and violence.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.063

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

Where civil law is subordinated to Islamic authority, freedom, prosperity,
and security collapse. Sharia law is not
a personal creed. It is a political and
legal system and one that rejects
equality before the law, suppresses dissent, and fuses radical religious doctrine with state power. History shows
that where Sharia gains influence, constitutional government gives way to
coercion.
In Texas, my constituents are increasingly alarmed by the consequences of mass migration and the
importation of ideologies that are fundamentally incompatible with our
Western civilization.
The purpose of this caucus is clear:
to ensure that Sharia never gains a
foothold in America—not now, and not
ever.
f

WHERE IS THE OUTRAGE
(Ms. BALINT asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. BALINT. Mr. Speaker, I need to
level set here.
The President cannot take money
from the proceeds of seized Venezuelan
oil and control it himself via means of
a highly illegal and improper offshore
slush fund. The President has no constitutional authority to do this.
He doesn’t get to create his own secret, overseas slush fund, which is outside of our purview and oversight. This
is absolutely insane. We take Venezuelan oil at gunpoint, engage in regime change and nation building, and
then the President personally controls
the proceeds?
What has happened here? Why do my
colleagues give up their power?
Mr. Speaker, where is the Republican
opposition to this lawless, half-baked,
absurd plan? You know that if any
Democratic President claimed this
kind of maniacal power, you would be
enraged.
So I ask you, Mr. Speaker: Where is
the outrage now? Where is the
pushback? Do not give this President
any more power.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1750
2025 ECONOMIC REPORT AND
MANUFACTURING JOBS
(Mr. MAGAZINER asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. MAGAZINER. Mr. Speaker, 2025
was one of the worst years for job
growth in decades. In fact, if you don’t
count COVID, the United States created fewer jobs last year than any year
since 2009. You don’t need data. Just
ask anyone who has been looking for a
job. They will tell you no one is hiring.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H803

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

This weak economy is a direct result
of President Trump’s policies: the
crazy tariffs that are raising costs for
businesses and consumers, massive
cuts to healthcare, and the political attacks on clean energy that are driving
up energy costs.
The President claimed that his tariffs would help American manufacturing, but instead we have lost 72,000
manufacturing jobs since Liberation
Day, after years of gains.
What is the President focused on as
working people struggle? He is focused
on building himself a new ballroom,
naming the Kennedy Center after himself, trying to take over Greenland, and
selling cryptocurrency out of the White
House to enrich himself. None of this
creates jobs or lower costs for you or
the millions of Americans who are
struggling. It is time for the President
to focus on the real needs of the American people.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are again reminded to refrain from
engaging in personalities toward the
President.
f

MANUFACTURING JOBS LOST DUE
TO TRUMP TARIFFS
(Ms. KAPTUR asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to draw attention to the 68,000
manufacturing jobs lost across our
country in 2025 as a direct result of
President Trump’s reckless tariffs and
DOGE cuts.
Why did he visit Detroit yesterday
when his insistence on continuing
these tariffs actually cuts investment
in American manufacturing? It is all
backward, and it puts America backward and America’s workers backward.
In December, manufacturing jobs
continued an 8-month decline that
began after President Trump falsely
promised these new tariffs would lead
to an economic resurgence for American workers.
Instead, his broad across-the-board
tariffs have driven prices up for everyday goods and all supply chains. Tariffs
create uncertainty in the job market,
leaving hardworking families worse off.
When manufacturing jobs disappear
as costs rise, Ohio families feel it. Lost
jobs and rising costs are not an abstract economic theory for us. They
are a harsh reality. Thousands of families I represent have been touched. Another company just closed in Fulton
County.
Mr. Speaker, let’s make manufacturing more competitive, not less.
Let’s create jobs in the USA.
f

VENEZUELA
(Ms. STANSBURY asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
her remarks.)
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, do
you recall just a week and a half ago

PO 00000

Frm 00083

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

when the President of the United
States stood in front of the American
people and said that he conducted an
unauthorized military invasion of Venezuela to save American lives from
drugs, but then a few days later told us
it was actually about the oil?
Well, if we needed any confirmation
that it was not about the drugs and not
about saving American lives, look no
further than the fact that last night
the White House announced that they
would cut millions of dollars from substance abuse and addiction recovery
programs that save lives in America
every single day.
In Donald Trump’s America, down is
up and up is down, and they will lie to
your face every single day if they think
it will get them what they want. That
is why we are in the fight to stop unauthorized wars, to stop the daily assault
on our communities, and to restore the
America that we know and to save
American lives.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are again reminded to refrain from
engaging in personalities toward the
President.
f

HOW REPUBLICANS HAVE
DELIVERED FOR AMERICANS
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. MOORE of
Utah was recognized for 60 minutes as
the designee of the majority leader.)
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on the subject of my Special Order.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Utah?
There was no objection.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
am glad to be joined by my colleagues
for this Conference Special Order to
talk about ways we have delivered for
all Americans through our legislative
action, committee work, and much
more.
Mr. Speaker, to start off, I yield to
the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
BUDDY CARTER.
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding
and for hosting this Special Order
Hour.
Mr. Speaker, America is back and,
like the President says, hotter than
ever.
Throughout 2025, Republicans worked
to undo the damage of the Biden-Harris
administration, resulting in less red
tape, bigger paychecks, a blue-collar
boom, and a stronger, more resilient
workplace.
The United States will always be the
land of opportunity, but the previous
administration shuttered small businesses, choked economic growth, and
enacted countless regulatory measures
that hurt families and businesses alike.
I believe in America First. That
means a Federal Government that gets

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.064

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H804

out of the way and allows hardworking
people to succeed.
Republicans put America first when
we passed the largest tax cut in American history. We delivered no tax on
tips, no tax on overtime, and tax relief
for seniors by lowering taxes on Social
Security benefits, because the key to
affordability is bigger paychecks, not
bigger government.
People are going to be feeling the effects of these tax savings in their pocketbooks this tax season, where Georgia
families can expect up to $5,000 in savings. By unleashing American energy,
we are bringing relief to families right
now.
The national average of gasoline is
now under $3 a gallon. That matters to
everyone, from the large-scale shipping
to the blue-collar worker driving their
daily commute.
Mr. Speaker, what we have done in
2025 is just the beginning. As we move
to 2026, Republicans are focused on expanding opportunity even further,
bringing jobs back home, growing domestic manufacturing, and ensuring
the American Dream is within reach
for every person willing to work hard,
especially our young people.
The key to Republicans’ success is
that we govern by a simple concept,
common sense. It is common sense to
use our vast natural resources and unleash American energy dominance because affordable energy means affordable living, just like it is common
sense that trillions spent on so-called
Green New Deal projects caused runaway inflation at over 9 percent.
President Trump and Republicans are
reviving the American Dream by advancing progrowth, proworker, America First policies that help young people build a future, provide relief for our
elderly, and strengthen the middle
class and everyone in between.
I thank the President for his work on
our economy.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman from Georgia for
his
comments.
I
appreciate
his
thoughts and for articulating much of
that.
Mr. Speaker, last year House Republicans passed the working families tax
cuts. This was a reconciliation bill that
included monumental progrowth and
profamily legislation that lowers costs
for American families.
A lot has been said about this. I want
to share just a few aspects of this as we
are within 6 months in the rear view of
when we accomplished this. Again, the
largest tax increases on American history would have happened on January 1
of this year had we not completed that,
and we got it done 6 months prior to
that crisis. I don’t know the last time
I looked at Congress and found something done that far ahead of schedule.
It is usually the last minute.
That matters because that was a reality. That is what we knew was coming, and we worked hard to accomplish
a lot of really key important
progrowth elements: no tax on tips or

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

overtime, an increased child tax credit,
tax relief for seniors, an increased
standard deduction targeted entirely at
the middle- and lower-income Americans, investment in rural America.
These are just a few of the reasons
Americans will see significant increases in their upcoming tax returns.
Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t even include the provisions that strengthen
small business and encourage investment in American industry.
b 1800
This year, House Republicans are
keeping more hard-earned dollars in
working families’ pockets, not with the
Washington bureaucracy. The tax filing season begins next week, and
Americans can expect to see some of
the biggest tax refunds in history.
After 4 years of painful inflation, we
are cleaning up the economic mess.
Real wages and benefits fell 3.9 percent
during the Biden-Harris administration, and through the Working Families Tax Cuts Act, real wages are growing faster than prices.
We saw 4.3 percent real GDP growth
in the third quarter of 2025. That is
substantial. The average since World
War II is 3.1 percent. After 3.8 percent
in Q2, we continued to exceed expectations there. Economic growth is an important economic indicator with a substantial impact on our annual deficits,
and I am confident it will only continue to grow.
Mr. Speaker, 2026 will be about bigger
paychecks and lower costs on everything from healthcare to housing to
household goods. We are moving forward with housing affordability legislation to lower costs and update financing options. We are streamlining and
simplifying permitting processes to
create more jobs, reduce costs, and increase wages. We are also lowering
healthcare costs. In December, the
House passed legislation to cut premiums, expand Choice accounts, provide more affordable rates to small
businesses, and expand PBM transparency to lower costs of prescription
drugs.
Mr. Speaker, 2025 was a big year for
my team and for House Republicans.
We passed landmark legislation, and
people are going to see the difference
because of it.
I am looking forward to 2026 and continuing to work hard for Utah’s First
District.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

EXPIRATION OF NEW START
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. FOSTER of Illinois was recognized for 60 minutes as
the designee of the minority leader.)
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. FOSTER. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days in which to
revise and extend their remarks and
submit extraneous material to the
RECORD.

PO 00000

Frm 00084

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Illinois?
There was no objection.
Mr. FOSTER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to open the Special Order hour
to discuss the expiration of the New
START treaty, the importance of arms
control, and the urgent need to
strengthen global nuclear security.
I thank the Members who will be
joining me this evening for their leadership and their willingness to engage
on issues that carry existential consequences for our country and for the
world.
As many of my colleagues know, I
am the only Ph.D. physicist currently
serving in the United States Congress.
Before coming to Congress, I spent
more than two decades as a high-energy particle physicist and particle accelerator designer at Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory, where we were
smashing
together
protons
and
antiprotons to make particles that
have not been around since the big
bang, designing and building the big
particle accelerators and detectors, and
analyzing the data. I was on the team
that discovered the top quark, the
heaviest known form of matter.
Because of that background, I feel a
special responsibility to engage deeply
on issues of nuclear weapons, arms control, and strategic stability, not as abstract policy debates but as matters
grounded in technical reality.
Arms control is not about unilateral
disarmament, wishful thinking, fantasies of dominance, or trusting adversaries. Arms control is about verifiable
limits, predictability, and reducing the
risk of miscalculation between nuclear-armed states.
For decades, arms control agreements have helped prevent a catastrophic nuclear exchange, not by
eliminating deterrence but by stabilizing it.
The New START treaty, which
stands for Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty, was signed in 2010 and extended
in 2021. It is the last remaining bilateral nuclear arms control agreement
between the United States and the
Russian Federation.
New START places verifiable limits
on deployed strategic nuclear weapons
and delivery systems and provides for
data exchanges, notifications, and onsite inspections that give us direct insight into Russia’s nuclear forces.
New START followed a long line of
arms control agreements, from SALT
to START I to SORT, that helped reduce the global nuclear arsenal from
the Cold War highs of more than 70,000
weapons to fewer than 13,000 today.
These agreements were supported by
Democratic and Republican administrations alike because they made the
United States safer.
Under New START, the United
States does not rely on guesswork, on
satellite imagery alone, or on worstcase assumptions. We rely on legally
binding limits and on verification

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.066

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

measures backed by some of the most
sophisticated scientific and intelligence capabilities of the world.
Today, that system is fraying. Russia
has suspended its participation in New
START. Onsite inspections remain
paused. The treaty itself is set to expire in less than 1 month.
Anyone who remembers past arms
control negotiations understands the
gravity of this moment. Negotiating a
successor agreement will take years,
not months, and we are already past
the danger zone.
If New START expires without a replacement, there will be no legally
binding limits on the world’s two largest nuclear arsenals for the first time
in more than half a century. The consequences of that outcome would be serious and immediate.
The United States would lose treatymandated insight into Russia’s deployed nuclear forces. Both countries
would be free to increase the number of
deployed warheads on existing missiles.
Strategic planning would increasingly
be driven by worst-case assumptions
rather than verified facts. At the same
time, we would face a far more complex
nuclear environment than during the
Cold War.
China is rapidly expanding its nuclear forces. Russia continues to engage in irresponsible nuclear saber-rattling during its illegal war in Ukraine,
and Iran and North Korea continue to
change the global nonproliferation regime.
In this environment, allowing arms
control to collapse is not a show of
strength. It is an abdication of leadership that increases the risk of miscalculation of arms races and, ultimately, nuclear use by design or by accident.
Verification will be at the heart of
any future arms control effort, and this
is where America’s scientific enterprise
plays a critical role. Our national laboratories provide the technical backbone for verification, monitoring, and
treaty compliance, and they are essential to maintaining U.S. leadership in
this area.
As co-chair of the Bipartisan National Labs Caucus, I have seen firsthand how investments in science and
scientific talent directly translate into
national security.
If you are a Member of Congress, you
have the opportunity, if you ask, to go
into the room where you see our nuclear weapons taken apart. You talk to
the experts about why the design
choices were made, what the design
margins are, and why they have to be
built the way they are. If you walk
into that room and see those weapons
and think about what they are capable
of, if that doesn’t make you take your
job seriously, you are not thinking
clearly.
Verification is not a diplomatic
afterthought. It is a scientific challenge that demands sustained investment and expertise.
The choice before us is not between
arms control and national security be-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H805

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

cause arms control is national security. It remains one of the most effective tools we have to reduce nuclear
risk while maintaining a credible deterrent.
The expiration of New START without a successor would mark a dangerous turning point, signaling that restraint and verification no longer matter.
This Special Order hour is about
sounding the alarm, but it is also about
reaffirming that Congress has a responsibility to engage. Congress has a role
in oversight, a role in funding verification and nonproliferation, and a role in
insisting that arms control remains a
core pillar of the U.S. national security
policy.
The next few years will be decisive,
and decisions that we make or fail to
make will shape whether the world
moves toward stability or toward, once
again, unconstrained nuclear arms
races.
I look forward to the discussion this
evening.
I am now proud to introduce my colleague, JOHN GARAMENDI of California,
a longtime advocate for arms control,
with whom I have had the honor of
spending a weekend underneath the
north polar ice cap in a nuclear submarine.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from California (Mr. GARAMENDI).
Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Mr. FOSTER for bringing us together to talk about this profoundly
important situation.
We stand here today on a precipice.
In less than a month, the New START
treaty, the last remaining major arms
control agreement between the Soviet
Union, or Russia, and the United
States, is set to expire.
b 1810
If we allow this treaty to lapse without a replacement, then we will be entering a world we haven’t seen in decades, a world without limits on the nuclear arsenals of the two largest nuclear powers: Russia and the United
States. We will be stripping away the
last guardrail preventing a catastrophic return to the unchecked nuclear buildup of the Cold War.
In 1985, President Ronald Reagan and
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev declared a profound truth: A nuclear war
cannot be won and must never be
fought. That principle has been the
bedrock of global security for nearly 40
years. It led us and Russia to eliminate
nuclear testing, to shrink bloated
stockpiles, and to prioritize communication over conflict.
Yet today we are close to forgetting
that profound blessing. Instead of
prioritizing deescalation, we see a resurgence of the same Cold War mindset
that once pushed us to the brink of annihilation. We see hawkish perspectives pushing the U.S., Russia, and now
China to a new, three-way nuclear
arms race.
Proponents tell us that this buildup
will make us more safe and that more

PO 00000

Frm 00085

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

is better. They tell us that pouring
trillions of dollars into a nuclear modernization is the only way to be safe,
but nothing—nothing—could be further
from the truth.
Without nuclear arms control agreements like the New START, every new
weapon we build only fuels an
unwinnable arms race as our adversaries respond in kind. We build. They
build. We build. They build. And the
cost of this race is staggering.
Let me give you one example, Mr.
Speaker: The Sentinel program aims to
replace the Minuteman III ICBMs. This
single program has already ballooned
to cost over $200 billion, an 81 percent
cost overrun. We are spending blindly.
We are on remote control: more bombs,
more, more, and we will be safe.
That is nonsense, just nonsense. We
will not be safer.
Instead of doing the hard work of diplomacy, we are being asked to plow
billions of taxpayer dollars into a dangerous fantasy: the so-called Golden
Dome, a missile defense system. We
will be safe. We will build more bombs,
and we will stop their bombs.
We are told the system would cost
only $175 billion and it will provide the
perfect shield. However, a recent working paper showed that this system that
actually attempts to defend against
the full range of Russia and China will
cost as much as $3.6 trillion, a multitrillion-dollar gap between rhetoric
and reality.
So what do we get for that price?
The same report concludes that with
this unlimited spending, such a system
will still fail to be 100 percent effective.
Are we prepared to spend trillions of
dollars on a shield that cannot be 100
percent effective?
Oh, well, only if one or two bombs
get through, forget about New York
and forget about Washington, D.C.
After all, who needs Washington, D.C.?
We have to be prepared to think differently. We cannot spend trillions of
dollars on a shield that cannot protect
us all the while that we are building
more and more bombs so that our adversary will build more and more
bombs and find a way to evade the
shield.
They will. We cannot engineer a
technological fix for a political problem. Decades ago we realized the only
true shield against nuclear annihilation is not a Golden Dome. It is the
hard, unglamorous work of a verifiable
arms control treaty.
When we forget the lessons of the
past, then we are doomed to make the
same mistakes. Luckily, we still have
time, a very short time, to do the hard
work of diplomacy instead of resting
the fate of our Nation, in fact, humanity, on the fantasies of fool’s gold.
We still have a choice. We can choose
to continue down the path of unconstrained spending and escalation and
drift toward a future where security is
based upon a perpetual threat of annihilation, or we can choose to modernize
our thinking rather than just our

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.068

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H806

weapons. We can prioritize diplomacy
over escalation and arms control over
an arms race. In short, we can learn
from history.
That is why I am a proud cosponsor
of H. Res. 100, authored by our leader
today and support arms control agreements and negotiated constraints.
This resolution is not just about a
treaty. It is about sanity. It is about
reaffirming our commitment to arms
control, to oversight, and to policy
based on reason and restraint, not on
fear and reflex.
Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman
from Illinois for organizing this
evening. We have 1 month in which to
extend the New START treaty or we
can fall into an arms race. We have
choices. We have time, and we have the
power to change.
Mr. FOSTER. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman for his remarks.
Mr. Speaker, I have to say the gentleman is absolutely right about the
messaging that is surrounding the
Golden Dome effort. This is a system
that has never been tested against
countermeasures that we know our adversaries have. For 40 years physicists
have been patiently explaining to
Members of Congress and members of
the administrations that systems like
this will never work at the reliability
level that they need. For 40 years we
have been howling at the wind, I guess,
because we don’t have hundreds of billions of dollars to waste on a system
that you can calculate from elementary principles that doesn’t have a
chance of working and has failed the
majority of times it has been tried.
For those who have not, please take
the time to see a recently produced
movie called ‘‘A House of Dynamite.’’
It is a recent one that actually talks
about what a modern nuclear war
would look like from the point of view
of the participants who have to make
those decisions and the equipment and
provisions they have to aid those decisions.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from Virginia (Mr. BEYER).
Mr. BEYER. Mr. Speaker, I want to
thank Dr. FOSTER for gathering us here
to help shine a light on what remains
the most serious existential threat facing our country and our planet. It is
too easy to forget in these days of
polycrisis that we are on the brink of a
new nuclear arms race.
Very soon, one of the last remaining
pillars of the nuclear arms control regime, the New START treaty, is due to
expire. This treaty restricted the U.S.
and Russian nuclear arsenals and provide some measure of stability in our
bilateral relationship.
Sadly, the Trump administration has
failed to do anything to get ahead of
the expiration of New START and has
done a lot to raise nuclear tensions.
The President has made threats, endorsed insanely expensive plans to expand our arsenal, pushed for the resumption of explosive testing, and advocated for an impractical missile de-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

fense system that will only encourage
our adversaries to accelerate their own
weapons program.
I am particularly horrified that the
President may choose to ignore the
comprehensive test ban treaty which
has given comfort and safety to the
world for two generations.
Meanwhile, Russia has expressed an
interest in maintaining New START
restrictions on its stockpile for another year while the terms of a new
treaty can be hashed out, but, unfortunately, the White House has not responded to their offer, and it has shown
no interest in engaging with China either on nuclear arms reduction, this
despite the danger China is dramatically trying to build up its nuclear arsenal. If ever there were a time to talk
to China, it would be right now.
It is not hard to guess what happens
next if nothing changes. Each side will
be adding now weapons to their arsenal
for the first time in decades. We would
come back to 10,000 nuclear weapons
aimed at the Soviet Union, 10,000 aimed
at us, to 1,500 to 1,800 each.
Now we are going back to that feedback loop that was reminiscent of the
first days of the Cold War. Not only
will this cost a tremendous amount of
money and put us on an even more dire
fiscal trajectory, it will ratchet up the
very real danger of a nuclear exchange.
b 1820
Mr. Speaker, we can already destroy
the planet many, many times over with
our own existing nuclear stockpiles.
Why on Earth do we need to spend
more of our scarce resources on these
incredibly expensive weapons? We have
gone through this cycle before. We
were very lucky, but I am terrified we
will not make it through again.
This shouldn’t be a partisan issue. It
has never been partisan. Republican
Presidents from Dwight Eisenhower to
Ronald Reagan to George W. Bush have
all led on arms control agreements.
I have been critical of my own party’s approach to nuclear weapons. The
Biden administration, despite campaign promises, refused to adopt a
first-use or no-sole-use nuclear policy.
Currently, the U.S. President can
order the launch of hundreds of nuclear
warheads within 15 minutes, with no
oversight or even conversations with
the Speaker of the House, the Secretary of Defense, the chief of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and including Congress.
Vesting this much power in one person,
particularly this President, is irresponsible, dangerous, and unnecessary.
Given our massive conventional military advantages over our adversaries—
think of Venezuela—there is no plausible circumstance that could justify
the use of nuclear weapons to deal with
a nonnuclear threat.
Removing the specter of the U.S.
using nuclear weapons first in a conflict would go a long way toward slowing down this renewed global arms
race. I am so glad to see my colleagues
here share my concerns. I hope we can

PO 00000

Frm 00086

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

make a dent in the common sense here
in this Congress.
While I have you here, today I voted
against a funding measure that would
enshrine the Trump administration’s
illegal destruction of the United States
Agency for International Development,
USAID.
Among the litany of illegal, immoral,
and illegitimate acts committed by
this administration, what President
Trump and Elon Musk did to USAID
will echo in our history as one of the
most evil and pointless decisions made
by this country.
Hundreds of thousands of the most
vulnerable people in the world have
died already because of this decision so
far. Their premature and tragic deaths
are the direct moral responsibility of
Donald Trump, Elon Musk, and Marco
Rubio. They remind me of the comments of an unnamed French diplomat
speaking of the horrors of World War I:
The war I cannot find it to be so bad.
The death of one man, that is a catastrophe; 100,000 deaths, that is a statistic.
Our global reputation and soft power
around the world have suffered permanent damage. Our ability to fight future global pandemics and diseases has
been crippled, and U.S. farmers have
suffered needlessly on top of the hundreds of public servants who were harassed and thrown out of their jobs. Beyond the human cost, far from saving
the taxpayer any money, the State Department’s own assessments show that
shutting down the agency will cost
more than $6 billion.
The whole point of this misguided
crusade against starving and sick children overseas was to find waste, fraud,
and abuse that simply did not exist.
This was a case of the very worst of us
attacking the very best of us.
I have heard from hundreds of my
constituents, former USAID public
servants, who dedicated their lives to
making the world a better place. Their
overwhelming regret is not that they
lost their jobs but that the critical
work they did to help the poor, the
sick, and the starving has stopped.
I am sickened by what this administration has done to USAID and to the
world. I will do everything I can to reverse this awful decision.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Dr. FOSTER for
convening us together and for his leadership.
Mr. FOSTER. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman for the many excellent
points he made, one of which was how
foolish it would be for the United
States to resume testing of nuclear
weapons.
The fact is, the United States has the
best database of nuclear test results of
any country on Earth by far. If we resume nuclear testing, we will, as will
all the other nuclear-capable countries
on Earth, they will rub their hands
with glee, and soon they will have a
dataset of performance of their weapons that is as good as ours. We have a
tremendous advantage, and this would
be a foolish way to give it away.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.070

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

I now yield to the gentlewoman from
Oregon (Ms. HOYLE).
Ms. HOYLE of Oregon. Mr. Speaker,
at a time when global tensions are rising, the last thing we need is more
weapons. That is why it is so important
that the New START treaty, set to expire in 21 days, is renewed by the administration quickly and in good faith.
The New START treaty reduced the
number of nuclear warheads in the
United States and Russia to the lowest
level since 1950. This is not the time to
start going in the other direction.
Nuclear risks continue to rise, and
when we see countries like Russia testing their nuclear delivery systems, the
danger grows for everyone, including
many Oregonians.
In southern Oregon, the Federal Government rushed to mine uranium in
the 1950s to fuel the Cold War. Two
open-pit mines outside Lakeview in the
Fremont National Forest supplied the
material that went to the Hanford site
to produce plutonium for nuclear weapons.
When that rush ended, we were stuck
with that contamination. It took decades for the EPA to declare the mines
as Superfund sites, leaving the land
poisoned.
At the Albany Research Center, construction workers built, maintained,
and later tried to clean up the nuclear
weapons complex, often without being
told what they were exposed to. Decades later, workers are still fighting to
get screened for cancers and other lifethreatening illnesses caused by their
exposure to radiation. Taxpayers are
still paying the price from the arms
race.
The Federal Government has paid
out more than $27 million to more than
430 Oregonians who were uranium
workers exposed to fallout or downwind of testing. This is what happens
when we forget what nuclear proliferation cost us.
Yet, the Department of Defense and
the Department of Energy plan to
spend more than $900 billion over the
next decade to modernize our nuclear
arsenal.
The cost of the Sentinel ICBM missile program alone has exploded, pushing the cost per missile to $161 million,
an 81 percent increase from its original
projections. The cost of nuclear acquisition programs will be 11.8 percent of
the Department of Defense’s planned
acquisition costs over the next 10
years. Remember, this is an agency
that cannot pass an audit. This is out
of control.
We will always find the money for
war, but not to take care of our workers or Tribal partners or to compensate
the communities who paid the price for
that last generation of weapons, so we
must act in good faith to ensure an
open-ended arms race does not happen.
Nuclear nonproliferation has not
been and should not be a partisan
issue. We don’t need more weapons. We
need more affordable healthcare, upgrades to our transportation infra-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H807

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

structure, expansion of U.S. manufacturing capacity, and to focus our taxpayer dollars on things that benefit the
American people and that make our
communities safer.
Mr. Speaker, I am happy to work
with any of my colleagues to develop a
commonsense approach to limiting our
nuclear stockpiles and to keep this administration from taking us down a
costly and destabilizing path, which is
why I am proud to have cosponsored
H.R. 100, which, again, just reiterates
my position on nuclear proliferation. I
thank Dr. FOSTER for all his work.
Mr. FOSTER. Mr. Speaker, the gentlewoman is absolutely right about the
real costs of restarting the arms race.
As a physicist, I have some guilt,
frankly, collective guilt for physicists
about some of the irresponsible things
that were done during the arms race
when we said the only thing that was
important was to have better weapons
and more weapons than our adversaries, and forget about the damage
that it can inflict on our American soldiers, our American workers, and the
populations downwind.
Mr. Speaker, I now yield to the gentleman
from
Massachusetts
(Mr.
MCGOVERN).
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman from Illinois, Dr.
FOSTER, for yielding me the time and
for scheduling this hour on this most
important topic.
The threat of nuclear weapons challenges our conscience. It is a threat not
just for Americans, but for all humanity and all species of life on our planet.
The idea of nuclear conflict isn’t an
issue that families normally discuss
around the kitchen table, but it is real.
It is deadly serious. It demands our urgent attention. We cannot afford to
throw our hands up and say there is
nothing to be done.
The United States can take concrete
action today: Extend the New START
treaty. The arc of arms control is one
of success led by Presidents of both
parties.
b 1830
Forty years ago, there were 70,000 nuclear warheads in inventories around
the world. Today, there are 12,400—far
more than we should have, but it is
progress.
Arms control is hard work. It involves technical expertise, diplomatic
skill, and political will. Today, we need
all three. That is because the last control agreement remaining in force between the United States and Russia expires on February 5, in only 22 days.
The New START treaty limits the
number of deployed strategic nuclear
warheads for each party to 1,550, on no
more than 700 deployed long-range missiles and bombers. Extension is common sense for our security.
First, New START promotes stability. With the war in Ukraine, tensions between the U.S. and Russia are
high. Negotiating an extension offers
space within that relationship to lessen
tensions.

PO 00000

Frm 00087

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Second, if not renewed, we risk the
possibility that each side will go beyond the treaty’s limit in a misguided
pursuit of geopolitical advantage.
Third, there is no nuclear strategic
gain from deploying more warheads on
more delivery vehicles. Our massive,
largely invulnerable nuclear arsenal is
more than sufficient for deterrence.
Fourth, increasing our strategic
forces might incentivize China to accelerate its nuclear buildup.
Lastly, it would cause us to funnel
billions more taxpayer dollars into our
nuclear arsenal when we should be restoring funding to healthcare, medical
research, and food and nutrition programs here at home.
Why is it that we always have money
for bombs, but when it comes to helping improve the quality of life for our
people, we are told we can’t afford it?
It doesn’t have to be this way, and both
Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump
seem to agree. Both Presidents have
spoken favorably of extending New
START.
In September, Putin said: ‘‘Russia is
ready to continue to adhere to the central quantitative restrictions under the
START treaty for 1 year after February 5, 2026,’’ if the United States reciprocates. In response, Trump said:
‘‘Sounds like a good idea to me.’’
Here we are, 22 days from expiration.
The White House has yet to reply to
the Kremlin’s offer. The clock is ticking.
I ask the administration to respond
to the Russians today: announce we
will abide by the New START limits,
build confidence, and create time and
space for negotiation.
President Trump can be a leader for
peace. Last year, he said, from the Oval
Office: ‘‘There is no reason for us to be
building brand-new nuclear weapons.
We already have so many. You could
destroy the world 50 times over, 100
times over, and here we are, building
new nuclear weapons, and they are
building nuclear weapons.’’
President Trump, I have to say, you
are right. He can join Richard Nixon,
Gerald Ford, and Ronald Reagan
among the Presidents with major arms
control wins.
Mr. Speaker, as a Member of Congress, I have worked to reduce the
threat of nuclear weapons. With Representative JILL TOKUDA of Hawaii, I
introduced H. Res. 317, a resolution
that calls on the U.S. Government to
return to the negotiating table on nuclear disarmament and to lead a global
effort to reduce and eliminate nuclear
weapons.
I have also introduced, with Senator
Ed Markey from my State of Massachusetts, the Hastening Arms Limitation Talks Act of 2025, or the HALT
Act. Our bill outlines a vision for a 21st
century freeze on the testing, production, and deployment of nuclear weapons.
We never thought there would be a
need to revive the nuclear freeze movement, but here we are.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.072

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H808

Let me quote from Michael Klare, an
arms control expert at Hampshire College and a constituent of mine: ‘‘February 6 is likely to bring us into a new
era, not unlike the early years of the
Cold War, in which the major powers
will be poised to ramp up their nuclear
warfighting capabilities without any
formal restrictions whatsoever. That
comfortable feeling we once enjoyed of
relative freedom from an imminent nuclear holocaust will also then undoubtedly begin to dissipate. If there is any
hope in such a dark prognosis, it might
be that such a reality could, in turn,
ignite a worldwide anti-nuclear movement like the Ban the Bomb campaigns
of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.’’
We have a path out of this. Trump
can make good on his statement that
there is no need for new nuclear weapons. He can extend New START limits
on deployed warheads.
For our sanity and for the safety of
Americans and all of humanity, let’s
make the world less dangerous.
Mr. Speaker, I again thank the gentleman from Illinois for leading this effort.
Mr. FOSTER. Mr. Speaker, the gentleman from Massachusetts is absolutely right. Diplomacy is not a lost
cause. There have been some big wins
from diplomacy.
Back when I was younger, the number of countries possessing nuclear
weapons was higher and then decreased. We convinced, through diplomacy, South Africa to give up their nuclear weapons. At the time of the end
of the Soviet empire, Ukraine possessed the world’s third-largest nuclear
weapon inventory, which they voluntarily gave up in return for a guarantee
of territorial integrity—one, unfortunately, which we are not abiding by.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from California (Mr. TAKANO).
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, I thank
my esteemed colleague, Dr. FOSTER, for
yielding, for organizing and hosting
this Special Order hour, and for his
leadership on nuclear nonproliferation
issues.
In my many years as a Member of
Congress, I have watched many a fiery
floor speech filled with overstatement
and hyperbole, grandiose pronouncements laced with exaggeration and
puffery, but it is entirely right and
proper to say that the expiration of the
New START treaty will make the
world and every inhabitant blessed to
live on it less safe.
Formally, the New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty, otherwise known as
New START, caps U.S. and Russian
strategic nuclear arsenals and underpins onsite inspections.
It is the latest in a series of treaties
that have reduced the global nuclear
warhead stockpile from a high of 70,000
in the mid-1980s to roughly 12,000
today.
Now that is meaningful, serious
progress, but instead of building on
that progress, we are weeks away from
reversing those hard-earned gains.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

On February 5, New START is slated
to expire. That expiration will mean
the end to limits or verification of the
still-formidable nuclear arsenals of the
United States and Russia.
New START is by no means perfect,
but removing these safeguards will create a vacuum, and we all know nature
abhors a vacuum. Without these limitations, there are fewer constraints,
fewer eyes, and fewer brakes on how
Vladimir Putin expands and modernizes Russia’s nuclear forces. In this wilderness, we would see a broader breakdown of norms on nuclear weapons.
Both the United States and Russia
have openly mused about potentially
restarting nuclear weapons testing.
After we have worked so hard to bring
some clarity to nuclear weapons regimes, we risk the steady erosion of
the few safeguards against these terrible and awesome weapons, but the
U.S. is not without options or agency.
If this expiration comes to pass, it is
because we have allowed it to happen.
Russia has offered to voluntarily maintain the New START limits for 1 year.
We should take that deal not because
we trust Vladimir Putin but because
inspections and limits protect us, not
him.
Arms control is neither an act of
faith nor of naivety. It is an act of cold
logic and discipline, a process that reduces the risk of miscalculation, escalation, and catastrophic error. The
year will not only keep America and
the world safer, but it will also give
time to hammer out a new accord.
As the U.S. sits across the negotiation table, there should be no illusion.
We know that Putin and his cronies in
the Kremlin are adversaries of the
United States. They would like nothing
more for our Nation to falter, but they
are also self-interested.
Both the United States and Russia
benefit from a stable, controlled nuclear regime. That mutual self-interest
lies at the heart of why New START
was signed in the first place. To throw
it all away would be a mistake of immense proportions.
While time is short, we can step away
from the edge. I add my voice to a host
of others calling on, pleading for, demanding action from the Trump administration.
I know the threat of nuclear weapons
can often seem so large and abstract,
so unimaginable that it becomes easier
just to ignore it all, but to say nothing
is not an option, especially for someone
like me.
Many of my family, my distant family, were in Hiroshima on the day the
atom bomb fell. That memory is not
just historical. It is personal for me
and my family.
b 1840
Mr. Speaker, the atomic bombs of
1945 caused unimaginable horror. Some
died instantly, many over subsequent
days and months. Others suffered for
the rest of their lives, afflicted with
burns, radiation, and cancer.

PO 00000

Frm 00088

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The modern nuclear weapons of
today are orders of magnitude more
horrifying. It is incumbent on all of us
to ensure that these weapons are never
used again.
New START is a concrete step toward ensuring that future. It is one
where no person—no man, woman, or
child—lives under constant threat from
nuclear annihilation.
Mr. FOSTER. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Mr. TAKANO for reminding us of Hiroshima.
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity
for the first time in my life to visit,
and the things that stick in your mind
are hard to describe.
One of them is they have the steps
of—I think it was a bank. Someone was
sitting on the steps, having a meal,
when the nuclear weapon went off overhead. All that remained of that person
after his or her entire body was vaporized was a shadow of where they were
sitting on those steps.
The power of these weapons is not
easy to describe. I can calculate it. The
descriptions of the survivors are worth
spending a day just listening to and
trying to understand what is at risk
here.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Nevada (Ms. TITUS).
Ms. TITUS. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Representative FOSTER for having this
Special Hour on such an important
topic.
Mr. Speaker, I have seen the movie
‘‘A House of Dynamite’’ as well as
‘‘Oppenheimer’’ the previous year,
which introduced a lot of people in the
moviegoing world to the development
of our first atomic bomb at the Manhattan Project.
It is very important that we go from
popular culture to real history and
talk about this in terms of the destruction that will occur if we do not continue the New START treaty.
I am a former political science professor. I have taught and written about
the history of nuclear weaponry. I am
now a Member of Congress, representing southern Nevada. A lot of
testing is right in our own backyard.
Over the years, I have learned quite a
bit about our nuclear legacy, both good
and bad.
Nevada was the focal point of nuclear
development throughout the Cold War.
Over four decades, the Nevada test site,
which is located about 100 miles north
of downtown Las Vegas, hosted over 900
nuclear tests, more than any other
place in the country.
Throughout the 1950s, the visible
mushroom clouds often loomed in the
distance. They could be seen from the
strip, and they became part of a tourist
attraction there in southern Nevada.
These tests were conducted for a
number of reasons. They were to better
understand the power and effects of nuclear weapons, what were the consequences, how could we make them
bigger, and how could we make them
cleaner. All of these things were part of
that testing.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.074

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

The test site became a real player
and had a major role in shaping our
policies, both nationally and internationally, regarding testing and nonproliferation.
The radiation given off by more than
100 atmospheric tests had devastating
impacts, however. It wasn’t a tourist
attraction to those downwinders who
were exposed. That fallout caused cancer and premature deaths for thousands across the West.
That is what prompted me to introduce the PRESUME Act. It would ensure that radiation-exposed veterans,
who did war games there at the test
site, could receive their rightful benefits from the VA.
Furthermore, there were 800 underground tests that sometimes vented,
and radioactive contaminants came
out in the air or the water table. That
is a problem we are still dealing with
today. Some of you may know the
story of the Baneberry shot.
Last year, the Nevada Legislature
passed a resolution urging the Federal
Government to maintain the moratorium on nuclear weapons testing. That
has been in effect since 1992. They cited
risk of environmental damage and also
health hazards from what had been
caused by testing before.
My colleagues may remember that in
2020, the first Trump administration
called for a resumption of nuclear testing in the breach of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Back then, I
led the charge in the FY 2021 NDAA
process to ensure that that didn’t happen and that we couldn’t resume that
testing in the United States.
Pardon my bad French, but ‘‘the
more things change, the more they
stay the same’’; ‘‘plus ca change, plus
c’est la meme chose.’’
On October 29, 2025, just last year,
Trump announced that he was directing the Department of Defense to again
resume nuclear testing in a disastrous
policy reversal. It is really not surprising because it is in Project 2025,
which is the policy blueprint of this
disastrous administration.
Just look on page 399, and you will
see that Project 2025 calls for the rejection of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty once again. It would
allow testing here at home but would
also give a green light to other nuclear
powers around the world to start doing
the same.
This would put us on a disastrous collision course of catastrophic proportions with Russia and China. It would
allow the proliferation of these weapons to nonnuclear States that seek its
development. It would also put the
health of Nevadans once again in jeopardy.
By foolishly announcing his intention to resume nuclear explosives testing, Trump will trigger a dangerous nuclear arms race that could blow apart
our strategy for the last decades and
any kind of nuclear nonproliferation
treaty.
There is no technical national security or political reason for us to re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H809

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

sume nuclear testing. If a power resumes testing because the U.S. is abandoning the moratorium, those countries will develop new types of warheads, close the technical and scientific advantage that we have always
had, and be a detriment to our national
security.
Furthermore, scientists are already
doing groundbreaking experiments and
simulations, as our professor knows.
They test the existing stockpile to
make sure it is safe, secure, and reliable. These subcritical tests are done
without an explosion of any kind.
The last time a nuke was tested was
2017 by North Korea. That was a good
while ago, the longest period since 1945
that we have gone without a nuclear
test. Are we really the ones who want
to break that record and start testing
again?
For these reasons, I introduced the
RESTRAIN Act to prohibit the resumption of explosive nuclear testing
and prevent any funds from going toward Trump’s misguided policy.
Amidst all this nuclear saber-rattling, the New START treaty that we
are here to talk about tonight, which is
the last remaining arms control agreement between the U.S. and Russia, expires in just 21 days. That treaty caps
deployed strategic nuclear warheads at
1,550 each and limits deployed systems
for delivery to 700 per side.
Without this treaty in force, there
would be no legally binding limits on
the size or composition of the U.S. and
Russia strategic nuclear arsenals. This
would be the first time in over half a
century.
Without limits, both countries could
expand their nuclear forces without
constraint and potentially trigger a renewed arms race internationally just
like we had during the Cold War. Letting that treaty lapse without a successor closes the door on incremental
progress toward broader, multilateral
nuclear arms control.
If President Trump really wants to
be the President of peace and really
thinks he deserves the Nobel Peace
Prize, he would stop invading and
threatening to invade other countries,
he would drop the idea of resuming nuclear testing, and he would make tangible, necessary steps to prevent New
START from expiring, to make sure
the catastrophic consequences of a new
nuclear arms race are averted.
Unless there is dramatic action, the
world will be a much more dangerous
place after February 4. We cannot let
that happen.
Again, I thank Mr. FOSTER for his
time and for allowing me to join him
on this important topic.
Mr. FOSTER. Mr. Speaker, I have to
say Ms. TITUS is absolutely right about
the fact that there is no necessity to
resume nuclear testing.
We have a very extensive program. It
is called the Stockpile Stewardship
Program. Every year or so, the heads
of the weapons labs and the head of
NSA have to sign a document to the

PO 00000

Frm 00089

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

President that says: If you push the
button, these weapons will detonate at
their designed yields.
The reason they are confident to do
that is we have a lot of test data from
the nearly 1,000 tests—many of them
took place in Nevada—and the extensive data we have and the fact that we
can then put that data back into simulation programs to get the right answer.
Mr. Speaker, that tells us that these
will work and they will work with design margin. Even if small things go
wrong, the device will work. That is
what our opponents have to know. We
don’t need to test. If we decide to use
them, they will work.
b 1850
It is an important thing to bear in
mind, because our adversaries, many of
them, have weapons that they have not
tested, and they don’t really know how
well they will work. We do because we
have some of the most, I have to say,
beautifully designed weapons that I
could ever imagine that could have existed.
Mr. Speaker, as we conclude this Special Order hour, it is important to restate a fundamental reality that nuclear weapons remain one of the greatest existential threats facing humanity. For more than a half of a century,
the United States has worked across
administrations and across party lines
to reduce the risk that those weapons
will ever be used.
Arms control agreements like New
START have been central to that effort, providing real, enforceable, and
verifiable limits on the world’s most
destructive arsenals. The extension of
New START is set to expire, and with
it goes the last remaining treaty that
limits and monitors the world’s two
largest nuclear arsenals.
As New START expires without a
successor, we would lose onsite inspections, data exchanges, and mutual visibility into the Russian nuclear forces.
That loss does not make the United
States safer or stronger. It increases
uncertainty. It fuels worst-case assumptions and raises the risk of a dangerous miscalculation.
That is why I am proud to be leading
H. Res. 100, which calls on both Russia
and the United States to continue abiding by the numerical limits set under
New START, even in the absence of a
successor treaty.
I thank the 24 Members of the House,
several of whom spoke here tonight,
who have cosponsored that resolution.
Maintaining those limits are an essential step to preserve strategic stability
while we work on future arms control.
I thank the many organizations and
nonprofits who helped drive interest in
this Special Order hour and who work
every day to reduce nuclear risk. Those
organizations play a vital role in public
education, policy development, and
maintaining dialogue during times
when official channels are strained or
closed.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.076

H14JAPT1

H810

Finally, I thank all of my colleagues
who joined me tonight in this Special
Order hour. Preventing nuclear war has
never been a partisan goal, and history
shows that bipartisan cooperation is
not just possible, but it is necessary.
The choices that we make in the coming months will shape global security
for decades to come, so I urge all of my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle to
recommit to arms control, to verification, and to the hard work of reducing
nuclear risk.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

RESHAPING THE AMERICAN
FAMILY
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. GROTHMAN of
Wisconsin was recognized for 30 minutes.)
Mr. GROTHMAN. Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this building, we had a panel
put together to address the situation of
the lack of two-parent homes in America and the degree to which it is caused
by huge marriage penalties in our welfare system.
The
panel
consisted
of
Matt
Dickerson of the Economic Policy Innovation Center, Terry Schilling of the
American Principles Project, Jamie
Gillespie from the White House, Robert
Rector from The Heritage Foundation,
together with three Congressmen.
The purpose of the program was to
provide a framework to deal with the
antimarriage bias in American welfare
programs. The panel was put together
at the request of 16 organizations and
other concerned citizens who work
with nonprofits.
In addition to The Heritage Foundation and the American Principles
Project, Center for Urban Renewal and
Education, Advancing American Freedom, AdvanceUSA, Concerned Women
for American Legislative Action Committee, the Coalition for Jewish Values, the Commission of the Southern
Baptist Convention, Eagle Forum,
Family Watch International, Faith and
Family Foundation, Independent Women’s Forum, Students for Life Action,
the Family Policy Alliance, and the
Faith and Liberty in the Nation’s Capital organization all were present.
I, quite frankly, since I have been
here, haven’t seen such a groundswell
of so many conservative nonprofit
groups to come together to address
such a problem. Yet, this isn’t surprising. The number of children born
into families without a mother or father at home, missing one, is very
high. When I was a child, that number
was around 4 percent to 5 percent. It is
now around 42 percent.
These groups have gotten together to
call on President Trump, Speaker
JOHNSON, and Majority Leader THUNE
to do something about this. It is not

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

unusual that a single woman, if she
marries the father of her child, would
lose over $25,000 in benefits.
By the way, when I talk about going
from 4 percent without a mother and
father at home to over 40 percent, at
the time it was 4 percent, we didn’t
even have abortions. Think about that.
Then, in the interim, we had abortions,
and still the number of children born
into homes without a father at home
went up by a factor of more than 10.
There are over 70 government programs available to a single parent with
low income, but you lose the benefits
of these programs if you marry the
other parent who has a decent income
of, let’s say, $50,000 a year.
I realize that there are great American families of all backgrounds. I, like
all of us, know single parents who have
done a fantastic job of raising their
children. I commend them for that, but
I think, also, everyone would agree
that it is easier on both the parents
and the children if you have two parents there. In essence, bribing a young
couple not to get married is not the
way to go about doing things.
Programs like food stamps; low-income housing; earned income tax credit; Women, Infants, and Children; Medicaid; Pell grants; and government
daycare all are generous programs. You
would lose those benefits if you had another parent in the house with an income.
Of course, this changes behavior, as
well. I remember talking about this
topic about 15 years ago at a Tea Party
event in Wisconsin. I talked about Pell
grants, which is a program of free college tuition or free scholarships for
low-income kids. I was addressing, like
I said, a Tea Party group, and like
most Tea Party groups, it is usually
older men who agreed with me.
Yet, there was a young gal who was
tending bar where we had the meeting,
and I asked her what she thought about
the speech and what she thought about
Pell grants, which were, like I said, a
grant conditioned upon having low income.
She said that her and her husband
got married before they had children,
but she told me none of her friends
were getting married. They got free
college.
I have heard that from other people.
That is just one of these programs, Pell
grants, which, intentionally or unintentionally, is designed to discourage
marriage. Like I said, I rattled off
about eight programs. There are about
70 programs that you could lose if you
worked your way out of poverty or
married somebody who wasn’t in poverty.
Usually, what you have to do is you
have to keep your income below $16,000
or $17,000, and if you talk to employers
who hire people who are making in the
$10 to $15-an-hour range, they will always give you anecdotes of their employees who don’t want to work extra
hours, or they will lose their benefits.

PO 00000

Frm 00090

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

b 1900
They don’t want a raise because they
will lose their benefits. This is because
in America right now we discourage
work, and we actually discourage savings as well, and we discourage marriage as well.
Just yesterday, I heard of another
couple. They just had their second
child, but they weren’t getting married. I didn’t dig into it, but I know
what is going on when you have people
like that not getting married. They realize they don’t want to lose their benefits.
Now, the fact that all of these government programs are set up to discourage marriage, is this an accident?
Believe it or not, no, I don’t think it is
entirely an accident, because there are
very powerful intellectuals on the left
who wanted to get rid of families.
We know Karl Marx himself felt that
in order to have a dream universe, you
had to get rid of the family.
A woman by the name of Kate
Millett, who was around in the 1960s
and I think could be described as the
mother of women’s studies classes, also
was adamant that we should try to get
men out of the household. I don’t think
it is a coincidence that she was at the
peak of her power in the 1960s when a
lot of these programs went into effect.
Now, this problem should have been
addressed years ago. It is kind of a
well-worn anecdote, but I will say it
again. Patrick Monahan, a Democrat
U.S. Senator, in the late 1960s put together a study, and he warned the degree to which we had these programs
contributing to the breakdown in marriage, but nobody paid attention Patrick Monahan.
Another man who did a lot of work in
this area was George Gilder who wrote
a couple of books, ‘‘Men in Marriage,’’
‘‘Visible Man,’’ ‘‘Wealth in Poverty.’’
He first looked into this problem, as
some people do, in a ghetto in Albany,
New York. He could remember the time
right before that when it was a considered real crisis if a woman got pregnant out of wedlock. However, to his
surprise, even in the 1970s, it was a
cause for enjoyment or a cause to celebrate for the young couple because
when the girlfriend got pregnant, she
was able to make the rounds and get a
free apartment, get free food, get free
medical care and, at the time, get free
cash from a program called Aid to
Families With Dependent Children.
Now we have cash from a program
called TANF.
In any event, Gilder was a little bit
surprised, but wrote books on the matter saying: Hey, wait a minute here. It
shouldn’t be a cause for celebration
when someone gets pregnant out of
wedlock. It should be a cause for a little bit of panic and what are we going
to do now; but it wasn’t in the late
1970s as George Gilder documented.
Here we are today. We did do a little
bit of looking at the welfare programs
in the 1990s under Bill Clinton, but we
didn’t go anywhere near far enough.

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.078

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

By the way, George Gilder made another observation. When we talk about
the welfare state, it obviously affects
the children, it obviously affects the
single women, and it affects the men.
But according to Gilder, of the three
groups, the one who is harmed the
most by our welfare system is the men.
Of course, the women are hurt a little
in that financially it can be a little bit
of a struggle. The statistics will show
again and again it harms the children,
but we have created a society in which
men have lost the purpose of raising
children and being involved in the raising of their children, being involved in
providing for their children. Therefore,
in areas in which the welfare culture is
widespread, we have a situation that
the men are doing drugs, committing
crimes because they have no purpose in
life.
Here in Washington and other big cities, like Chicago and Milwaukee, they
write articles about where is all this
crime coming from. And if they would
stop and look or talk to any policemen,
they will tell you where the crime is
coming from. The crime is coming
from children from these broken families. If we didn’t have these broken
families, a lot of the men who are committing the crimes, the men that are
just hanging out and doing drugs would
have a purpose in life and be more likely to be productive.
I should point out, by the way, that
this is a very important thing for the
men; but sometimes people say that we
need the welfare system because there
are no men with decent jobs, and that
is why we have to have the government
step in.
I have an Indian immigrant friend of
mine. It always amazes me how people
who come here from other countries
have observations that are not made by
the native-born who are just used to it.
As my Indian immigrant friend said: In
America, the woman marries the government. In any event, while the
woman is marrying the government,
the man has nothing to do, and that is
why we have many of these problems.
I, of course, have been in politics for
a while now. I have attended a lot of
committee hearings, and be it committee hearings on poverty, be it committee hearings on crime, be it committee hearings on drugs, be it committee hearings on depressants, be it
committee hearings on people not
doing well at school, they always look
for how does this happen; but they
never address the obvious reason why
kids do less well in school or why kids
end up committing crimes. They do it
because of the total breakdown in the
family.
In any event, both for the children
and the men and the single women, we
would be better off retracing our steps
back to the great society years of 1965
and 1966 when, in my opinion, the worst
President in our country’s history decided to institute these programs and
destroy the family. I am not sure that
was the motive. I think perhaps the
real motive was electoral.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H811

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Our forefathers, when they put together our founding documents, warned
us that there were going to be some
politicians who were going to try to
make people dependent on the government in exchange for votes. I think
that at the time was maybe the motivation for these horrible programs; but
in any event, it is something that we
have to address now.
Now, we are going to be doing a reconciliation bill, I hope, sometime in
the next 6 months. Almost all of these
programs are what are referred to as
‘‘mandatory spending,’’ so we can
change these programs and do what we
can to get rid of the perverse incentives.
I think some of the burden of these
folks will have to be put on private organizations because it is a problem no
doubt if people are able to get these
programs without being confronted
with moral choices or moral problems.
In a great book that I am reading,
‘‘The Tragedy of American Compassion,’’ the type of people who were involved in providing food for the poor
when our country was founded were
very keenly aware that programs
which indiscriminately gave things to
people were actually harmful to people,
that you had to weigh in with them on
their moral choices, on their work
choices. It was, in fact, a negative to
set up a program in which one did not
look at moral choices that people are
making.
In any event, after we have spent
about 60 years after the Great Society,
60 years after Patrick Monahan warned
us what would happen, it is time for
this Congress to address this problem,
get rid of the perverse incentives which
discourage marriage and get America
back to where we were before the Great
Society when we had much stronger
families, when crime was lower than it
is today—I think you would have to
say people came out of school better
than today, and I think you would have
to say the amount of antidepressants
consumed was a tiny fraction of what
we have today—and really Make America Great Again.
b 1910
I implore President Trump’s administration—we had a representative from
his administration here yesterday. I
implore them to put together a working group so that we can come up with
solutions to this problem over the next
few months.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

EXPLANATORY STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY MR. COLE, CHAIR OF
THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, REGARDING H.R.
7006, FINANCIAL SERVICES AND
GENERAL
GOVERNMENT
AND
NATIONAL SECURITY, DEPARTMENT OF STATE, AND RELATED
PROGRAMS
APPROPRIATIONS
ACT, 2026
The following is an explanation of the Financial Services and General Government

PO 00000

Frm 00091

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and National Security, Department of State,
and Related Programs Appropriations Act,
2026.
This Act includes 2 regular appropriations
bills for fiscal year 2026. The divisions contained in the Act are as follows:
∑ Division A—Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2026
∑ Division B—National Security, Department of State, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2026
∑ Division C—Other Matters
Section 1 of the Act is the short title of the
bill.
Section 2 of the Act displays a table of contents.
Section 3 of the Act states that, unless expressly provided otherwise, any reference to
‘‘this Act’’ contained in any division shall be
treated as referring only to the provisions of
that division.
Section 4 of the Act states that this explanatory statement shall have the same effect with respect to the allocation of funds
and implementation of this legislation as if
it were a joint explanatory statement of a
committee of conference.
Section 5 of the Act provides a statement
of appropriations.
Section 6 of the Act provides the customary payments to the widows or heirs of
recently deceased Members of Congress.
DIVISION A—FINANCIAL SERVICES AND
GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
The joint explanatory statement accompanying this division is approved and indicates Congressional intent. Unless otherwise
noted, the language set forth in House Report 119–236 carries the same weight as language included in this joint explanatory
statement and should be complied with unless specifically addressed to the contrary in
this joint explanatory statement. While
some language is repeated for emphasis, it is
not intended to negate the language referred
to above unless expressly provided herein.
References in the joint explanatory statement to ‘‘the Committees’’ or ‘‘the Committee’’ refer to the Committees on Appropriations of the House and Senate.
Quarterly Obligation Reports.—Section 633 of
this Act directs that no later than 45 days
after the last day of each quarter, each agency funded in this Act shall submit a report
to the Committees that includes total obligations of the agency for that quarter for
each appropriation.
Reports.—Each agency funded in this Act
shall submit with the baseline report required by Section 608 a list of the reporting
and briefing requirements contained in this
Act and in the House and Senate reports, including due dates and the office responsible
for preparing the report or providing the
briefing. The summary should include Inspector General and Government Accountability Office (GAO) reports.
Agencies may request to brief the Committees in lieu of a requested report subject to
the approval of the Committees. If both the
House and Senate requested a report or briefing on a similar subject, the report or briefing may be consolidated into one report or
briefing subject to the approval of the Committees.
Agencies funded by this Act should review
the reprogramming guidelines included in
Section 608 of this agreement and are reminded that baseline reports are due to the
Committees no later than 60 days after the
enactment of this Act and that Section 608
requires accurate and complete organizational charts that reflect the hierarchical
and reporting structure of their bureaus, divisions, services, and offices.
Agencies funded by this Act are directed to
provide the Committees with direct, unobstructed, and timely access to the budget offices and to provide the Committees with

E:\CR\FM\K14JA7.080

H14JAPT1

H812

prompt and complete responses to requests
for information, in particular, requests for
technical information.
Antideficiency Act Violations.—The agreement directs any agency funded by this Act
to concurrently transmit to the Committees
a copy of any Antideficiency Act violation
report submitted pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1351
or 31 U.S.C. 1517(b).
TITLE I
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
DEPARTMENTAL OFFICES
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $287,576,000 for departmental offices salaries and expenses.
Mitigation of the Online Scam Epidemic in the
United States.—The agreement directs the
Department of Treasury (the Department),
in consultation with all members of the Financial Stability Oversight Council and the
Federal Trade Commission, to submit a national strategy or plan to the Committees
within 180 days after the enactment of this
act that leverages and augments local,
State, and Federal resources within the financial sector to mitigate and prevent online scams.
Office of Tribal and Native Affairs.—The
agreement directs the Department to maintain the Office of Tribal and Native Affairs
(the Office), which enables the Federal Government to carry out its treaty and trust responsibility towards Indian Tribes and Native peoples. Given the tremendous workload
this Office has undertaken to implement and
deploy various Department programs’ funding in Indian Country, the agreement directs
the Department to support this office.
Reception and Representation Expenses.—The
agreement directs the Department to submit
to the Committees a quarterly report on expenditures related to hosting the Group of 20
(G20) Summit, including all the elements
specified in section 738(b)(3) of this act. The
first report is due not later than 30 days
after enactment of this act and shall include
expenditures incurred in fiscal year 2025 to
the date of enactment of this act.
Secondary Market for Housing Construction
Loans.—The agreement directs the Government Accountability Office to study and provide a briefing on preliminary observations
to the Committees no later than 180 days
after enactment of this act, with a report to
follow in an agreed upon timeframe, on the
feasibility of and any recommendations related to establishing a government-sponsored secondary market for acquisition, development, and construction (AD&C) loans,
including by directing the government-sponsored enterprises to purchase and securitize
a subset of such loans. The report should also
evaluate other proposals for the development
of nontraditional AD&C capital sources such
as potential securitization opportunities and
providing advances through the Federal
Home Loan Banks. The report should address
the feasibility and potential barriers associated with implementing such proposals, as
well as potential effects, such as on AD&C
loan interest rates, construction costs, access to capital for community-based financial institutions, quantity of affordable
housing units, and overall housing costs,
cost to taxpayers, or risks to the Federal
Government.
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THE
UNITED STATES FUND
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $21,000,000 for the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the
United States Fund (CFIUS).
CFIUS Engagement in Bankruptcy Proceedings.—The agreement directs the Department to work with member agencies to document in the interagency committee’s annual

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

report, with a classified annex as necessary,
data on CFIUS’ role and engagement in
bankruptcy proceedings. This will include, to
the extent possible, information about which
covered transactions were in the bankruptcy
process while before CFIUS as well as a documented committee-wide process for reviewing agreements and deciding enforcement actions.
State and Local Technical Assistance.—The
agreement directs the Department, in consultation with the Department of Commerce,
to continue to conduct outreach to state and
local governments with the aim of increasing
familiarity with the CFIUS process.
OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND FINANCIAL
INTELLIGENCE

DEPARTMENT-WIDE SYSTEMS AND CAPITAL
INVESTMENTS PROGRAMS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $11,007,000 for the
Department-Wide Systems and Capital Investments Programs.
Department-Wide Systems and Capital Investments Program.—The agreement directs the
Department, not less than 14 days prior to
the obligation of any funds appropriated
under this heading in this or any other Act,
to submit to the Committees a description of
each project supported by the Departmentwide Systems and Capital Investments Programs and how the project supports the Department’s capital investment strategy.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $237,662,000 for salaries and expenses of the Office of Terrorism
and Financial Intelligence.
Use of Technology.—The agreement directs
the Department within 270 days of enactment of this act to submit a report to the
Committees on the extent to which artificial
intelligence (Al) and machine learning (ML)
is incorporated into sanction, Anti-Money
Laundering, and intelligence gathering programs and how AI and ML can be incorporated further to strengthen those programs.
Econometrics.—The analysis of economic
data is a crucial component of our intelligence gathering activities. The agreement
directs the Department to strengthen its activities related to econometrics within the
Office of Intelligence and Analysis.
Cryptocurrency.—The agreement directs the
Department within 60 days of enactment of
this act to brief the Committees on the
usage of cryptocurrencies in evading sanctions, laundering money, and other illicit
purposes.
Economic Sanctions and Divestments.—The
agreement directs the Department to fully
implement all sanctions and divestment
measures, particularly those applicable to
Russia, China, North Korea, Iran, Burma
(Myanmar), Belarus, designated rebel groups
operating in and around the Democratic Republic of Congo, and those designated for
sanction under the Global Magnitsky Act.
The agreement directs the Department to
promptly notify the Committees of any resource constraints, as well as the use of
cryptocurrencies by sanctioned nations or
entities, that adversely impact the implementation of any sanctions program.
Financial Attachés.—The agreement encourages the Department to strongly consider
which nations and regions play a significant
role in sanctions evasion and in exporting
Russian petroleum products in contravention of the oil price cap in selecting the assignments and locations of Department financial attachés and focus attention of those
attachés on limiting illicit finance.
Levinson Act.—The agreement directs the
Department, in cooperation with the Department of State, to fully enact provisions
under the Robert A. Levinson Hostage Recovery and Hostage Taking Accountability
Act (part of the Consolidated Appropriations
Act of 2021, Public Law 116–260), including to
sanction foreign countries that wrongfully
detain or take U.S. nationals hostage.
CYBERSECURITY ENHANCEMENT ACCOUNT

The agreement provides $59,000,000 for the
Cybersecurity Enhancement Account (CEA).
CEA Reporting.—The agreement directs the
Department, not less than 14 days prior to
the obligation of any funds appropriated by
this heading in this or any other Act, to submit to the Committees a description of each
project supported by the CEA and how the
project supports the Department’s cybersecurity strategic plan.

PO 00000

Frm 00092

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $48,389,000 for salaries and expenses of the Office of Inspector
General (OIG).
TREASURY INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR TAX
ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $165,000,000 for salaries and expenses of the Treasury Inspector
General for Tax Administration (TIGTA).
Data Loss Prevention.—The agreement directs TIGTA, not later than 240 days after
enactment of this act, to provide a report to
the Committees on the maturity of the IRS’s
data inventory management, categorization,
availability, access, encryption, incidence
response, and governance, including for purposes to detect and prevent data exfiltration
by insider threats.
Refundable Tax Credit Abuse Prevention.—
The agreement directs TIGTA, not later
than 180 days after enactment of this act, to
provide a report to the Committees on the
number of individual taxpayers that were allowed refundable tax credits who used Individual Taxpayer Identification Numbers
(ITINs) as a means of verification for the primary and/or secondary taxpayer on tax returns filed with the IRS during the 2024 tax
filing season. The report should include additional information on the various types of
refundable tax credits allowed, the number
of each type of refundable tax credit allowed,
and the average dollar amount per each refundable tax credit for primary and/or secondary taxpayers who filed taxes using an
ITIN.
FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $185,193,000 for salaries and expenses for the Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network (FinCEN).
Anti-Money Laundering Requirements for Investment Advisors.—The agreement directs
FinCEN, within 90 days of the enactment of
this act, to provide a report to the Committees containing an illicit finance risk assessment justifying its plans: (1) to revisit the
scope of the rulemaking titled ‘‘Anti-Money
Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism Program and Suspicious Activity Report Filing Requirements for Registered Investment Advisers and Exempt Reporting
Advisers,’’ and (2) to delay the compliance
date of this rulemaking by two years.
FinCEN is directed to brief the Committees
not later than 30 days following submission
of the report.
Corporate Transparency Act Implementation.—The agreement directs FinCEN, within
90 days of the enactment of this act, to brief
the Committees on the interim final rule titled ‘‘Beneficial Ownership Information Reporting Requirement Revision and Deadline
Extension’’ and the status of implementing
the recommendation outlined in GAO–25–
107143. Further, FinCEN is directed to give
the Comptroller General of the United States

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.016

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

and Government Accountability Office
(GAO) staff access to data to carry out section 6403 of Title LXIV of Division F of Public Law 116–283 and section 6502 of Title LXV
of Division F of Public Law 116–283.
Countering the Financing of Online Child
Sexual Exploitation.—The agreement encourages FinCEN to ensure the U.S. financial
sector is adequately complying with existing
regulatory requirements mandated through
the ‘‘Anti-Money Laundering Program Requirement’’ of the USA PATRIOT Act to prevent the facilitation of online child exploitation and sex trafficking through the U.S.
financial sector.
Redundant Reporting.—The agreement directs FinCEN to continue to engage with
small businesses to understand the obstacles
that they encounter when collecting and reporting AML data and areas where the same
data are already reported to another Federal
agency.
Scams.—The agreement directs the Department, in consultation with the Department
of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security, the appropriate Federal banking
agencies, and Federal functional regulators,
to submit a report to the Committees on the
state of scams in the United States that estimates: (1) the number of financial fraud, pig
butchering, elder financial fraud, and scams
committed against American consumers
each year, including: (a) attempted scams,
including through social media, online dating services, email, phone, or text impersonation of financial institutions and non-bank
financial institutions; (b) successful scams,
including through social media, online dating services, email, phone, or text impersonation of financial institutions and non-bank
financial institutions; (2) the number of consumers each year who lose money to one or
more scams; (3) the dollar amount of consumer losses to scams each year; (4) the percentage of scams each year that can be attributed to: (a) overseas actors; and (b) organized crime; (5) the number of attempted
scams each year that involve the impersonation of phone numbers associated with financial institutions and non-bank financial
institutions; (6) an estimate of the number of
synthetic identities impersonating American
consumers each year; and (7) an overview of
the Federal civil and criminal enforcement
actions brought against the recipients of the
proceeds of financial fraud, pig butchering,
elder financial fraud, and scams in the period
covered by the report that includes: (a) the
number of such enforcement actions; (b) an
evaluation of the effectiveness of such enforcement actions; and (c) an identification
of the types of claims brought against the recipients, including the recipients of the proceeds of financial fraud, pig butchering, elder
financial fraud, and scams.
BUREAU OF THE FISCAL SERVICE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $391,109,000 for salaries and expenses of the Bureau of the Fiscal Service.
ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO TAX AND TRADE
BUREAU
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $157,795,000 for salaries and expenses of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.
UNITED STATES MINT

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

UNITED STATES MINT PUBLIC ENTERPRISE FUND

The agreement specifies that not more
than $50,000,000 in new liabilities and obligations may be incurred during fiscal year 2026
for circulating coinage and protective service capital investments of the U.S. Mint.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS FUND PROGRAM ACCOUNT
The agreement provides $324,000,000 for the
Community Development Financial Institu-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H813

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

tions (CDFI) Fund program. The agreement
limits the total loan principal for the Bond
Guarantee program to $500,000,000.
Program

($000)

Financial/Technical Assistance Grants.
..............................................................
Disability Fund ................................
Economic Mobility Corps ..................
Native Initiatives .................................
Bank Enterprise Award Program .........
Healthy Food Financing Initiative ......
Small Dollar Loan Program .................
Administrative Expenses .....................
Total, CDFI Fund Program Account ...........................................

$188,000
10,000
2,000
28,000
40,000
24,000
9,000
35,000
324,000

New Markets Tax Credit.—The agreement
encourages focus on areas in Appalachia affected by flooding in 2022 and 2025.
Persistent Poverty.—The agreement directs
the CDFI Fund, within 180 days of enactment
of this act, to submit a report to the Committees that includes the amount of funds
that were targeted to high-poverty areas in
the previous fiscal year; the percent change
from the year before in the amount of funds
that were targeted toward such areas; and,
to the extent practicable, an assessment of
the economic impact of the program on the
areas. Further, the CDFI Fund is directed to
place a priority on making additional funds
available to CDFIs that have provided no
less than 15 percent of their total lending to
recipients in persistent poverty counties.
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE
User Fee and Spending Reports.—The agreement directs the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) to submit a user fee spending plan to
the Committees within 60 days of enactment
of this act detailing planned spending of
funds derived from user fees for each of its
appropriations accounts. The plan shall include the specific programs, investments,
and initiatives funded through each appropriations account that are supported by user
fees. Additionally, the IRS is directed to submit on a quarterly basis Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) usage and obligations by account
and anticipated FTE usage and spending for
activities funded through user fees through
fiscal year 2026.
Federal Contractor Tax Check System
(FCTCS).—The agreement directs the IRS,
not later than 180 days after enactment of
this act, to provide a briefing to the Committees on the status of the FCTCS, the number
of certificates issued, the estimated timeline
for updating the Federal Acquisition Regulations to mandate use of the FCTCS, the IRS’
usage of the FCTCS for its own compliance
with section 744 of this act, and the tax revenue attributable to the FCTCS.
Government
Sponsored
Enterprises.—The
agreement directs the Department to identify any authorized administrative actions
that will clarify their tax status and to brief
the Committees on its findings within 60
days of enactment of this act.
Paid Leave Tax Credit Outreach and Awareness.—The agreement directs the IRS to provide a briefing to the Committees within 90
days after enactment of this act on the
progress of the outreach and awareness campaign on paid leave tax credits.
Tax Compliance.—Congress supports the
IRS’s efforts to improve tax compliance. No
later than 90 days after the enactment of
this act, the agreement directs the IRS to
provide the Committees with a briefing on
its tax enforcement priorities and corresponding taxpayer assistance.
TAXPAYER SERVICES

The agreement provides $3,036,606,000 for
Taxpayer Services. Within the overall
amount, not less than $12,000,000 is for the
Tax Counseling for the Elderly Program; not
less than $28,000,000 is for Low-Income Taxpayer Clinic Grants; not less than $46,000,000

PO 00000

Frm 00093

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

is for the Community Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance Matching Grants; and not less
than $271,200,000 is for operating expenses of
the IRS Taxpayer Advocate Service, of which
not less than $7,000,000 is for identity theft
casework.
Taxpayer Data.—The agreement includes
the House directive on Taxpayer Data and
requires the IRS to also include steps to improve compliance with record destruction
time frames.
Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN) Expansion.—In fiscal year 2024, the IRS identified
over $9.1 billion in tax fraud, including taxrelated identity theft. Tax-related identity
theft is most common during tax filing season, according to the Federal Trade Commission. Tax-related identity theft reports have
increased in recent years. Taxpayers who
have their refunds hijacked by fraudsters
often wait years to get the refunds to which
they are legally entitled. More than 10 million taxpayers are now protecting themselves against tax-related identity theft by
participating in the IP PIN program. The
agreement recognizes that the IP PIN pilot
program has been an important tool in saving taxpayer money and commends the IRS
for expanding the pilot program to include
all 50 States.
IRS Customer Service and Assistance.—The
agreement directs the IRS to process the remaining Employee Retention Credit claims
as accurately and expeditiously as possible.
Low-Income Taxpayer Clinics.—Congress appreciates that the IRS has funded Low-Income Taxpayer Clinics in States that previously lacked a clinic and encourages the
IRS to continue to conduct outreach in those
States where there are no successful grantees.
Taxpayer Services in Alaska and Hawaii.—
Due to Alaska and Hawaii’s remote distance
from the U.S. mainland, the unique geographic challenges that make it burdensome
to travel to the State’s Taxpayer Assistance
Center (TAC), and the difficulty experienced
by Alaska and Hawaii taxpayers in receiving
needed tax assistance by the National
tollfree line, it is imperative that the IRS
improve taxpayer services in these States.
The agreement directs the IRS to include
Hawaii and Alaska in any ongoing or future
studies of taxpayer needs and services. The
agreement continues to recommend that the
IRS open at least one additional TAC or establish co-location agreements to increase
access to taxpayer services in both Hawaii
and Alaska. The agreement further encourages the IRS to take all measures to ensure
adequate staffing of TACs in both States to
meet the needs of taxpayers.
Case Advocacy Management System.—The
Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) replaced
its case management system in 2025. The
agreement directs TAS to brief the Committees not later than 120 days after enactment
of this Act on the actual cost and timeline
for developing and deploying the new system, the estimated on-going annual operations and maintenance costs, and the estimated productive gains.
ENFORCEMENT

The agreement provides $4,999,000,000 for
Enforcement, of which up to $35,000,000 is for
investigative technology for the Criminal Investigation Division, to support their critical law enforcement mission, and not less
than $60,257,000 is for the Interagency Crime
and Drug Enforcement program.
Enforcement Efforts and Money Laundering
Investigations.—Congress recognizes that tax
crimes serve as predicate offences to money
laundering given that tax and money laundering violations are closely related. As
such, the agreement urges the IRS Criminal
Investigation to prioritize investigations of

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.018

H14JAPT1

H814

money laundering, violations of the Bank
Secrecy Act, and criminal violations of the
tax code, to bolster the work of the Department of Justice to combat money laundering
and ensure that offenders are prosecuted to
the fullest extent.
TECHNOLOGY AND OPERATIONS SUPPORT

The agreement provides $3,159,759,000 for
Technology and Operations Support.
Equipment and Facilities.—The agreement
directs the IRS to include in its fiscal year
2027 budget request a table and description of
the equipment acquired and the construction, repair, and renovation of facilities
made in the prior year and planned for the
current and budget years by project, location, and office.
Information Technology Reports.—The agreement requires the IRS to submit quarterly
reports on major information technology investments to the Committees, TIGTA, and
the GAO, no later than 30 days following the
end of each quarter. The agreement directs
the Department to conduct a semiannual review of the IRS’s major Information Technology (IT) investments to ensure that they
contribute to the IRS’s strategic mission and
complies with the Department’s enterprise
architecture and to report its findings not
less than 30 days after its review. The agreement further directs GAO to review and provide an annual report to the Committees
evaluating IRS’s information technology
portfolio, with particular focus on the cost
and schedule of the investments included in
quarterly reports submitted to the Committees. The agreement directs TIGTA to review
the reports and to advise the Committees
quarterly on the pace and quality of each investment’s development and maturity.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS INTERNAL
REVENUE SERVICE

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement includes the following provisions:
Section 101 provides transfer authority.
Section 102 requires the IRS to maintain
an employee training program on topics such
as taxpayers’ rights.
Section 103 requires the IRS to safeguard
taxpayer information and to protect taxpayers against identity theft.
Section 104 permits funding for 1–800 help
line services for taxpayers and directs the
Commissioner to make improving phone
service a priority and to enhance response
times.
Section 105 requires the IRS to issue notices to employers of any address change request and to give special consideration to offers-in-compromise for taxpayers who have
been victims of payroll tax preparer fraud.
Section 106 prohibits the use of funds by
the IRS to target United States citizens for
exercising any right guaranteed under the
First Amendment to the Constitution.
Section 107 prohibits the use of funds by
the IRS to target groups for regulatory scrutiny based on their ideological beliefs.
Section 108 requires the IRS to comply
with procedures and policies on conference
spending in accordance with IRS policies
issued as a result of TIGTA recommendations.
Section 109 prohibits funds for giving bonuses to employees or hiring former employees without considering conduct and compliance with Federal tax law.
Section 110 prohibits the IRS from using
funds made available by this Act to contravene a provision of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 related to the confidentiality
and disclosure of returns and return information.
Section 111 provides the IRS with direct
hiring authorities for positions to process

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

backlogged tax returns and return information.
Section 112 provides passenger carrier
transportation and protection between the
Commissioner of the IRS’s residence and
place of employment.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT
OF THE TREASURY
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

Section 113 allows Treasury to use funds
for certain specified expenses.
Section 114 allows for the transfer of up to
2 percent of funds among various Treasury
bureaus and offices.
Section 115 allows for the transfer of up to
2 percent from the IRS accounts to TIGTA.
Section 116 prohibits funding to redesign
the $1 note.
Section 117 allows for the transfer of funds
from the Bureau of the Fiscal Service-Salaries and Expenses to the Debt Collection
Fund conditional on future reimbursement.
Section 118 prohibits funds to build a
United States Mint museum without the approval of the Committees and the authorizing committees of jurisdiction.
Section 119 prohibits funding for consolidating the functions of the United States
Mint and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing without the approval of the Committees
and the authorizing committees of jurisdiction.
Section 120 specifies that funds for Treasury intelligence activities are deemed to be
specifically authorized until enactment of
the fiscal year 2026 Intelligence Authorization Act.
Section 121 permits the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to use up to $5,000 from the
Industrial Revolving Fund for reception and
representation expenses.
Section 122 requires the Secretary to submit a Capital Investment Plan.
Section 123 prohibits the Department from
finalizing any regulation related to the
standards used to determine the tax-exempt
status of a 501(c)(4) organization.
Section 124 requires a Franchise Fund report.
Section 125 requires the Office of Financial
Research to submit quarterly reports.
Section 126 establishes an Information
Technology Working Capital Fund.
Section 127 allows for the use of CARES
Act Funds to conduct oversight into the
Emergency Rental Assistance Program by
the Office of Inspector General.
Section 128 requires a report on the Strategic Bitcoin Reserve and U.S. Digital Asset
Stockpile.
Section 129 requires monthly reports on
the Treasury Forfeiture Fund.
TITLE II
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
AND FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE
PRESIDENT
THE WHITE HOUSE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $78,904,000 for the
salaries and expenses of the White House.
American Grown Flowers.—The agreement
strongly encourages the White House to
adopt an American-grown policy for cut
flowers and greens displayed at the White
House to support American farmers, retailers, wholesalers, florists, and their employees who bring America’s natural beauty into
homes and businesses across the Nation.
Domestic Seafood.—The agreement encourages the White House to source domestic seafood, including wild-caught Alaska seafood,
to serve at State Dinners and other White
House functions. Congress recognizes that it
has long been the policy of the White House
to serve only American-grown food and wine
at State Dinners to showcase high-quality

PO 00000

Frm 00094

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

domestic products. As such, the White House
is encouraged to also serve the best seafood
America has to offer.
EXECUTIVE RESIDENCE AT THE WHITE HOUSE
OPERATING EXPENSES

The agreement provides $15,453,000 for the
Executive Residence at the White House.
WHITE HOUSE REPAIR AND RESTORATION
The agreement provides $2,475,000 for repair, alteration, and improvement of the Executive Residence at the White House.
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $4,854,000 for salaries and expenses of the Council of Economic
Advisers.
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL AND HOMELAND
SECURITY COUNCIL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $19,000,000 for salaries and expenses of the National Security
Council and Homeland Security Council, of
which not to exceed $10,000 is available for
official reception and representation expenses.
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $124,308,000 for salaries and expenses of the Office of Administration, of which not more than $12,800,000 is
for information technology modernization,
and of which not more than $10,000,000 is for
security and continuity of operations improvements.
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $129,000,000 for salaries and expenses of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
AI-Ready Data.—Congress recognizes the
critical need for artificial intelligence (AI)ready data to enable the adoption of AI and
machine learning (ML) solutions across the
Federal government. To ensure agencies can
fully leverage AI capabilities, the agreement
encourages OMB to develop guidance requiring agencies to assess, structure, and modernize their datasets for AI applications. The
agreement directs OMB, not later than 180
days after the date of enactment of this act,
to brief the Committees on its progress toward issuing this guidance.
Made in America Office.—The agreement expresses support for the ‘‘Made in America Office’’ within OMB and supports providing additional resources for its work.
Persistent Poverty.—The agreement encourages OMB, in consultation with Federal
agencies, to implement guidance and measures to increase the share of Federal investments targeted at persistent poverty areas.
Secure Cloud Infrastructure.—The Federal
government’s current approach to cloud infrastructure does not promote a secure and
interoperable environment that enables Federal agencies to adapt to technological advances and save taxpayer dollars. To keep
pace with China as they move aggressively
to the use of multi-cloud and maximizing
computational resources, the U.S. Government must capitalize on the inherent features of multi-cloud solutions and their ability to provide the latest technologies at optimized performance and cost. To address
these concerns, the agreement directs OMB
within 180 days of enactment of this Act to
submit a report to the Committees on opportunities across the Federal government to
procure multi-cloud systems including an assessment of Federal procurement practices
and agency-specific policies that need to be
modified to encourage multi-vendor and secure, interoperable IT environments, and an
associated timeline.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.019

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

Indirect Costs.—The agreement recognizes
that indirect cost recovery has been essential for supporting research at universities,
nonprofit laboratories, medical centers and
other entities eligible for federal research
awards and is key to sustaining U.S. leadership in scientific research and technological
innovation. The agreement acknowledges
that there is room for improvement in the
system used to identify and recover indirect
cost rates under the Uniform Grant Guidance, particularly with respect to the need
for greater transparency into these costs.
Various models have been suggested to
achieve these improvements, including the
Financial Accountability in Research (FAIR)
model advanced by the Joint Associations
Group on Indirect Costs (JAG), which Congress believes merit further consideration.
Therefore, the agreement directs OMB to engage in discussions with the Committees on
proposals to achieve these improvements, including on the FAIR model. The agreement
further directs OMB to not finalize or implement any policy, guidance, or rule, or publish a notice of proposed rulemaking, that
would alter the manner in which negotiated
indirect cost rates have been implemented
and applied under the Uniform Grant Guidance, as that guidance was in effect during
fiscal year 2024. Research (FAIR) model advanced by the Joint Associations Group on
Indirect Costs (JAG), which Congress believes merit further consideration. Therefore, the agreement directs OMB to engage
in discussions with the Committees on proposals to achieve these improvements, including on the FAIR model. The agreement
further directs OMB to not finalize or implement any policy, guidance, or rule, or publish a notice of proposed rulemaking, that
would alter the manner in which negotiated
indirect cost rates have been implemented
and applied under the Uniform Grant Guidance, as that guidance was in effect during
fiscal year 2024.
OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $20,000,000 for the
Office of the National Cyber Director.
OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
The agreement provides $21,785,000 for salaries and expenses of the Office of National
Drug Control Policy (ONDCP).
Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act
(CARA).—The agreement directs ONDCP to
encourage community-led coalitions to raise
awareness on the rise of fentanyl contamination of illegal drugs and to prevent drug
overdose deaths caused by illicit fentanyl.
Non-Fatal Overdose Data.—The agreement
encourages ONDCP to continue to improve
the timeliness, accuracy, and accessibility of
fatal and non-fatal overdose data from law
enforcement, emergency medical services,
and public health sources through interagency coordination and by updating the
Drug Control Data Plan on an annual basis.
FEDERAL DRUG CONTROL PROGRAM
HIGH INTENSITY DRUG TRAFFICKING AREAS
PROGRAM
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $298,579,000 for the
High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas Program (HIDTA).
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H815

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Combatting Fentanyl Update.—The agreement directs ONDCP, within 45 days of enactment of this act, to within the HIDTA
baseline funding allocation plan, provide an
update on the number of regional HIDTAs
that have assessed their number one or number two drug threat to be fentanyl or
fentanyl-related substances with an explanation about how HIDTAs develop strategies
and align resources to address their priority
threats.
Fentanyl Trafficking and Interdiction.—The
HIDTA program’s work is critical as the
fentanyl epidemic continues to ravage communities throughout the country. Significantly, the vast majority of Customs and
Border Patrol’s (CBP’s) fentanyl interdictions, and approximately half of HIDTA’s
fentanyl interdictions, occur in the southwestern border region. Accordingly, the
agreement recognizes the importance of
HIDTA funding to support Federal, State,
local, and Tribal law enforcement agencies
operating in areas along the southwest border of the United States.
Gulf Coast HIDTA.—The agreement states
that of the funds provided, up to $1,000,000
shall be used to support efforts to combat illicit drug trafficking and crimes within the
Gulf Coast HIDTA region.
New Counties.—The agreement directs
ONDCP to prioritize States with the highest
overdose death rates per capita when deciding new designations. ONDCP is further directed to provide enhanced technical assistance to any applicants that have applied
that did not receive a designation at any
time during the past several award cycles.
OTHER FEDERAL DRUG CONTROL PROGRAMS

WADA Executive Committee receives timely
notification of any alleged contamination
cases involving multiple athletes in the future.
National Drug Control Strategy.—The agreement encourages ONDCP to promote the efforts of community-led coalitions to raise
awareness of the rise of fentanyl contamination in illegal drugs and to prevent drug
overdose deaths caused by illicit fentanyl in
the National Drug Control Strategy on an
annual basis.
National Community Anti-Drug Coalition
Training.—In fiscal years 2024 and 2025, Congress provided $2,500,000 for National Community Anti-Drug Coalition Training to provide technical assistance for the Drug Free
Communities (DFC) grantees. Congress is
concerned that the 2024 year-one DFC grantees have not received the yearlong required
training that provides them with the knowledge, skills and products needed to successfully organize, implement and evaluate their
work. Immediately upon enactment of this
Act, the agreement directs ONDCP to provide a briefing to the Committees on the status of the competitive grant award process
for fiscal year 2024 and 2025 funding.
UNANTICIPATED NEEDS
The agreement provides $990,000 for unanticipated needs of the President.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY OVERSIGHT AND
REFORM
The agreement provides $8,000,000 to remain available until expended for the information technology oversight and reform account and for the Office of the Chief Information Officer.

(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $136,150,000 for
Other Federal Drug Control Programs. The
agreement allocates funds among specific
programs as follows:
Program

($000)

Drug-Free Communities Program ..........................................
Training .........................................................................
Drug court training and technical assistance ......................
Anti-Doping activities ............................................................
World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) (U.S. membership dues
Model Acts Program ...............................................................
Community-based coalition enhancement grants (CARA
Grants) ...............................................................................

109,000
2,500
3,000
14,000
3,700
1,250
5,200

WADA Drug Testing Concerns.—In accordance with the agreement, ONDCP is directed,
not fewer than 30 days prior to obligating
funds for United States membership dues to
WADA, to submit to the Committees a
spending plan and explanation of the proposed uses of these funds, and that such plan
shall include the results of an audit of
WADA to be conducted by external antidoping experts and experienced independent
auditors that demonstrate the WADA’s Executive Committee and Foundation are operating consistent with their duties.
WADA
Governance.—Congress
expects
WADA to: (1) make detailed information
about the circumstances related to WADA’s
handling of the case regarding the 23 Chinese
swimmers available to the public; (2) identify and implement a process that will significantly improve how alleged contamination cases are handled both by WADA and by
national anti-doping organizations; and (3)
establish mechanisms to ensure that the

SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE PRESIDENT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $6,015,000 for salaries and expenses to enable the Vice President to provide special assistance to the
President.
OFFICIAL RESIDENCE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT
OPERATING EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $318,000 for operating expenses for the official residence of
the Vice President.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT AND FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement includes the following administrative provisions:
Section 201 provides transfer authority
among various Executive Office of the President accounts.
Section 202 requires the Director of the
OMB, during fiscal year 2026, to include a
statement of budgetary impact with any Executive order issued or revoked and for Presidential memoranda estimated to have a regulatory cost in excess of $100,000,000.
Section 203 requires the Director of the
OMB to issue a memorandum to all Federal
departments, agencies, and corporations directing compliance with title VII of this Act.
Section 204 provides funds for initiatives
related to drug prevention, to be awarded as
follows:
Amount
($)

Account

Project Name

Recipient

AK

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Prevention and Awareness Expansion

AK Fentanyl Response
Project

400,000

Murkowski

MN

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Rice County Youth Substance Use
Disorder Prevention

Community Action Center

140,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

MS

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Rural Youth Mental Health and Substance Abuse Prevention Program

The University of Mississippi

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00095

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.020

Requestor(s)

H14JAPT1

H816
State

Account

Recipient

Amount
($)

Requestor(s)

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Strategic Prevention Framework

San Juan County Partnership

375,000

Heinrich

NM

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Youth Substance Use Prevention
Education

Capacity Builders Inc.
(CBI)

200,000

Heinrich

RI

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Student Assistance Program: Addressing Youth Mental Health and
Substance Use in Rhode Island
Schools

Coastline EAP, d.b.a.
Rhode Island Student
Assistance Services

2,756,000

Reed

WA

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Safe Yakima Valley Youth Mentoring
Program

Safe Yakima Valley

200,000

Cantwell

WV

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

WV Coalition Support for Substance
Use and Suicide Prevention

West Virginia Hope in
Action Alliance, Inc.

400,000

Capito

WV

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Adverse Childhood Experiences
(ACEs) and Substance Use (SU)
Mitigation Project

Morgan County Partnership, Inc.

600,000

Justice

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $135,127,000 for salaries and expenses of the Supreme Court.
This is in addition to $28,000,000 in previously
provided fiscal year 2026 funds, for a total of
$163,127,000 in available resources, equivalent
to the budget request. In addition, the agreement provides mandatory costs as authorized by current law for the salaries of the
chief justice and justices of the court.
The agreement directs the Supreme Court
to provide the Committees with a written report and briefing semi-annually on the expenditure of the security funding and implementation of the strategic security plan, including a comparison of planned and actual
expenditures, personnel, and requirements.
All information discussed in such reports
shall be treated as confidential and law enforcement sensitive.
CARE OF THE BUILDING AND GROUNDS

The agreement provides $11,437,000 for the
care of the Supreme Court building and
grounds.
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE
FEDERAL CIRCUIT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $36,735,000 for salaries and expenses of the United States Court
of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. In addition, the agreement provides mandatory
costs as authorized by current law for the
salaries of the chief judge and judges of the
court.
UNITED STATES COURT OF INTERNATIONAL
TRADE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $22,437,000 for salaries and expenses of the United States Court
of International Trade. In addition, the
agreement provides mandatory costs as authorized by current law for the salaries of
the chief judge and judges of the court.
COURTS OF APPEALS, DISTRICT COURTS, AND
OTHER JUDICIAL SERVICES
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $6,127,055,000 for
salaries and expenses of the Courts of Appeals, District Courts, and Other Judicial
Services. In addition, the agreement provides mandatory costs as authorized by current law for the salaries of circuit and district judges (including judges of the territorial courts of the United States), bankruptcy judges, and justices and judges retired from office or from regular active service. The agreement also provides $12,109,000
from the Vaccine Injury Compensation Trust
Fund.
Early Termination of Supervised Release.—
The agreement directs the Administrative

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Project Name

NM

TITLE III
THE JUDICIARY
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

Office of the U.S. Courts (AO) to provide a
report to the Committees not later than 180
days after enactment of this Act detailing
any Federal statutes or Judicial Conference
policies requiring the AO to notify individuals of their eligibility to seek early termination, and Judicial Conference policies and
practices regarding the recommending of
early termination. Additionally, the report
shall include data on grants and imposition
of supervised release by jurisdiction.
Strengthening Collaboration to Ensure Effective Treatment Services.—The agreement recognizes the importance of rehabilitation and
successfully enabling reentry of incarcerated
people into their communities, including
providing mental health, substance misuse,
and other behavioral health support to individuals leaving the custody of the Federal
Bureau of Prisons and entering the Federal
Judiciary’s Probation and Pretrial Services
program for a term of court-ordered post-release supervision. Creating a continuum of
care can help certain offenders adhere to and
continue engagement with their behavioral
health treatment plans, obtain gainful employment, and avoid committing future
crimes. The Committees are aware that
there is continuum of care collaboration between the Federal Judiciary’s Probation and
Pretrial Services program and the Federal
Bureau of Prisons but encourages both entities to strengthen that collaboration to include better information sharing, including
electronic data sharing, on the treatment
needs of individuals coming out of Federal
prison.
Cybersecurity Threats.—The Committees remain concerned regarding past and future
potential breaches to the Judiciary’s PACER
system. The Judiciary is directed to brief the
Committees quarterly on any new breaches
to its systems and all investments made or
needed to address gaps in the Judiciary’s security.
DEFENDER SERVICES

The agreement provides $1,766,010,000 for
Defender Services.
McGirt v. Oklahoma.—The agreement directs the Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts, not later than 120 days after enactment of this Act, to submit a report to the
Committees on the breakdown of cases per
defender in Oklahoma, estimated caseloads
for the next fiscal year, and how these numbers compare with districts around the country.

ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED
STATES COURTS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $106,953,000 for salaries and expenses of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts.
New Courthouse Consultation.—The agreement encourages the AO to consult with the
Chief Judge of the Colorado District Court
during its ongoing analysis of the need for a
new courthouse in Colorado Springs. That
consultation should be inclusive of any recommendations supporting the seating of an
Article III judge in that location.
FEDERAL JUDICIAL CENTER
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $35,121,000 for salaries and expenses of the Federal Judicial
Center.
UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $22,677,000 for salaries and expenses of the United States Sentencing Commission.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—THE JUDICIARY
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement includes the following administrative provisions:
Section 301 makes funds appropriated for
salaries and expenses available for services
authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109.
Section 302 provides transfer authority
among Judiciary appropriations.
Section 303 permits not more than $11,000
to be used for official reception and representation expenses of the Judicial Conference.
Section 304 extends through fiscal year 2026
the delegation of authority to the Judiciary
for contracts for repairs of less than $100,000.
Section 305 continues a pilot program
where the United States Marshals Service
provides perimeter security services at selected courthouses.
TITLE IV
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
FEDERAL FUNDS
Death with Dignity.—Congress has expressly forbidden the use of Federal funding
for purposes related to assisted suicide under
the Assisted Suicide Funding Restriction
Act of 1997 (Public Law 105–12). As such, the
agreement directs that the Chief Financial
Officer for the District of Columbia shall
submit an annual report to the Committees
to certify that no Federal funds are used to
implement D.C. Law 21–182 in the District of
Columbia in contravention of existing law.

FEES OF JURORS AND COMMISSIONERS

FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR RESIDENT TUITION
SUPPORT

The agreement provides $19,108,000 for Fees
of Jurors and Commissioners.

The agreement provides $40,000,000 for District of Columbia resident tuition support.

COURT SECURITY
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR EMERGENCY PLANNING
AND SECURITY COSTS IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

The agreement provides $892,032,000 for
Court Security.

The agreement provides $90,000,000 for
emergency planning and security costs in

PO 00000

Frm 00096

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.021

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

the District of Columbia to remain available
until expended.
Marijuana Dispensary Proximity to Schools.—
The agreement reminds the District of Columbia that the distribution, manufacturing,
and sale of marijuana remains illegal under
Federal law, which includes enhanced penalties for such distribution within one thousand feet of a public or private elementary,
vocational, or secondary school or public or
private college, junior college, or university,
or a playground, among other real property
where children frequent.
Safe DC.—As the Federal capital city,
Washington, D.C. should showcase beautiful,
clean, and safe public spaces. America’s capital must be a place in which residents, commuters, and tourists feel safe at all hours,
including on public transit. The District of
Columbia hosts Federal events such as Presidential inaugurations, foreign dignitary visits, and military parades. It is also home to
many first Amendment activities.
FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA COURTS

The agreement provides $292,068,000 for the
District of Columbia courts, of which
$15,747,000 is for the D.C. Court of Appeals,
$149,349,000 is for the Superior Court,
$97,720,000 is for the D.C. Court System, and
$29,252,000 is for capital improvements to
courthouse facilities.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR DEFENDER SERVICES IN
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA COURTS

The agreement provides $46,005,000 for defender services in the District of Columbia.
FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE COURT SERVICES
AND OFFENDER SUPERVISION AGENCY FOR THE
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

The agreement provides $287,017,000 for
court services and offender supervision in
the District of Columbia.
FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA PUBLIC DEFENDER SERVICE

The agreement provides $53,629,000 for public defender services in the District of Columbia.
FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
COORDINATING COUNCIL

The agreement provides $3,451,000 for the
Criminal Justice Coordinating Council.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR JUDICIAL COMMISSIONS

The agreement provides $630,000 for Judicial Commissions. Within the amount provided, $330,000 is for the Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure and $300,000 is
for the Judicial Nomination Commission.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT

The agreement provides $52,500,000 for
school improvement in the District of Columbia to be distributed in accordance with
the provisions of the Scholarships for Opportunity and Results Act (SOAR Act). These
funds are allocated as follows: $17,500,000 for
District of Columbia Public Schools,
$17,500,000 for Public Charter Schools, and
$17,500,000 for Opportunity Scholarships. The
Committees note the importance of a rigorous evaluation of the SOAR program.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA NATIONAL GUARD

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

The agreement provides $600,000 for the
Major General David F. Wherley, Jr. District
of Columbia National Guard Retention and
College Access Program.
FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR TESTING AND
TREATMENT OF HIV/AIDS

The agreement provides $4,000,000 for HIV/
AIDS testing and treatment.
FEDERAL PAYMENT TO THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY

The agreement provides $8,000,000 for the
District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H817

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FUNDS
The agreement provides authority for the
District of Columbia to spend its local funds
in accordance with the Fiscal Year 2026
Budget Request Act of 2025.
TITLE V
INDEPENDENT AGENCIES
ADMINISTRATIVE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED
STATES
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $3,430,000 for the
Administrative Conference of the United
States.
COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $365,000,000 for the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC).
Data Security.—The agreement directs the
CFTC to brief the Committees within 180
days of enactment of this act on the policies
and procedures in place regarding the accessing and collection of algorithmic trading
source code or other similar intellectual
property. This briefing shall detail the specific guidelines: the CFTC has in place for
the approval of requests by CFTC staff for
such access; and how the CFTC stores and
shares this data securely with the Securities
and Exchange Commission.
CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $150,975,000 for the
Consumer
Product
Safety
Commission
(CPSC). Within the amount provided,
$2,500,000 is available until expended for the
pool and spa safety grants program established by the Virginia Graeme Baker Pool
and Spa Safety Act and $2,000,000 is available
until expended to carry out the program, including administrative costs, authorized by
section 204 of the Nicholas and Zachary Burt
Memorial Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Prevention Act of 2022.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—CONSUMER
PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION

Section 501 prohibits the use of Federal
funds in fiscal year 2026 for the adoption or
implementation of the proposed rule on
ROVs until a study by the National Academy
of Sciences is completed.
Section 502 prohibits the CPSC from promulgating, implementing, administering, or
enforcing any regulation to ban gas stoves as
a class of products.
COUNCIL OF THE INSPECTORS GENERAL ON
INTEGRITY AND EFFICIENCY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $5,450,000 for the
Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency.
Early Warning Fraud Detection.—The agreement directs the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee (PRAC), within 270
days of enactment of this act, to issue a report to the Committees, the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, and the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs describing additional savings to be achieved
through the creation of an early warning
fraud detection program to support federal
and state agencies and Offices of Inspectors
General in their efforts to detect and mitigate waste, fraud, abuse, and other improper
payments and awards. The report should also
describe the PRAC’s ability to leverage artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning
models and network analysis to identify
anomalies or issues not otherwise detected
or identified in the early warning fraud detection program.

PO 00000

Frm 00097

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $23,860,000 for the
salaries and expenses of the Election Assistance Commission (EAC), of which $1,500,000
shall be made available to the National Institute of Standards and Technology for election reform activities.
Election Resources.—The agreement encourages the EAC to conduct a study on what
would be needed to produce comprehensive
information on the scope of election funding
needs, as reported by local election administrators, no later than 90 days after enactment of this act. The study should describe
any challenges in further ascertaining the
funding needs of local election administrators.
ELECTION SECURITY GRANTS

The agreement provides $45,000,000 to the
EAC to make payments to states for activities to improve the administration of elections for Federal office, including to enhance
election technology and make election security improvements, as authorized under sections 101, 103, and 104 of the Help America
Vote Act of 2002 (P.L. 107–252).
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $416,112,000 for salaries and expenses of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The agreement
provides that $416,112,000 be derived from offsetting collections, resulting in no net appropriation.
Broadband Map Accuracy.—The agreement
directs the FCC to review the challenge processes it has implemented pursuant to Section 802(b)(5)(A) to ensure that these are
properly calibrated to identify errors within
the location Fabric and identify errors or
overstatements of coverage made by Internet
service providers (ISPs) reporting on the
Broadband Service Location (BSL) to which
they claim to offer broadband. Within 90
days of enactment of this act, the FCC shall
brief the Committees on the findings of this
review.
Broadband Funding Map.—The agreement
directs the FCC to brief the Committees, no
less than 90 days after the enactment of this
act, with a comprehensive update on the
measures the FCC has taken to coordinate
with relevant Federal agencies and populate
the Broadband Funding Map with the required data pursuant to Section 60105 of the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(Public Law 117–58). In the briefing, the FCC
shall identify the extent to which each Federal agency is currently submitting the data
necessary to populate the map in a timely
manner and any challenges with incomplete
data availability or accessibility.
Rip and Replace Report.—The agreement directs the FCC to provide a briefing to the
Committees on the status of current Chinese
technology and equipment eligible for the
Rip and Replace program, including information on the number of at-risk networks, the
number of grant requests outstanding, and
key security vulnerabilities the FCC has
identified through the program within 60
days of enactment of this act.
5G Fund.—In lieu of the House language,
the agreement encourages the FCC to consider mobile 5G connectivity nationwide as
well as changes in technology and service
within the 5G framework when allocating resources in the Universal Service Fund (USF).
BEAD and 5G.—The agreement directs the
FCC not to modify, amend, or change the
rules or regulations of the FCC for universal
service high-cost support for competitive eligible telecommunications carriers until it
has consulted with National Telecommunication Information Administration (NTIA)

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.023

H14JAPT1

H818

regarding awards from the Broadband Equity
and Development (BEAD) program.
Robocalls.—The agreement directs the FCC
to prioritize resources to combat illegal
robocalling and caller ID spoofing.
Pirate Radio Operators.—The agreement encourages the FCC to continue prioritizing pirate radio enforcement and directs the FCC
to update the Committees on additional enforcement actions taken during the fiscal
year.
Contraband Cell Phones.—The agreement directs the FCC to brief the Committees within 90 days of enactment of this act on the
legal, technical, or operational challenges
surrounding GN Docket No. 13–111 and any
related dockets.
Tribal E–Rate.—The agreement supports increasing access to the E–Rate programs for
Tribal communities to include Tribal Essential Community-Serving Institutions as eligible for E–Rate funding. Because Tribal Essential
Community-Serving
Institutions
have not been eligible since the creation of
E–Rate in 1996, Tribes have historically
missed out on being eligible for this critical
Federal program. Not later than 90 days
after enactment of this act, the FCC is directed to brief the Committees on the status
of this issue.
9–8–8.—Congress commends efforts by the
FCC to improve access to the 9–8–8 Suicide
and Crisis Lifeline by issuing a final rule on
georouting calls. Within 60 days of enactment of this act, the FCC shall brief the
Committees on approaches to ensure each
provider of commercial mobile services
transmits all calls and text messages made
or sent to 9–8–8, including a call or text message that originates from a nonservice-initiated handset, and that Multi-Line telephone
systems can directly initiate a call to 9–8–8.
Artificial
Intelligence
(AI)-Generated
Robocalls.—Congress commends the FCC for
adopting a declaratory ruling effectively
banning the use of AI-generated robocalls,
but remains concerned that rapidly developing AI technology is becoming dangerously harder to detect. The agreement directs the FCC, within 60 days of enactment
of this act, to brief the Committees on illegal AI-generated robocalls.
FCC Baseline Report.—Pursuant to section
608 of this act, the agreement directs the
FCC to submit a baseline report not later
than 60 days after the enactment of this act
and directs the FCC to consult with the
Committees not later than 30 days after the
enactment of this act on the form and content of such report.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

Section 510 extends an exemption from the
Antideficiency Act for the USF.
Section 511 prohibits the FCC from changing rules governing the USF regarding single
connection or primary line restrictions.
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL

The agreement provides a transfer of
$48,500,000 to fund the Office of Inspector
General (OIG) for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The OIG’s appropriations
are derived from the Deposit Insurance Fund
and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
Corporation Resolution Fund.
FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $80,857,000 for salaries and expenses of the Federal Election
Commission.
FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $29,500,000 for the
Federal Labor Relations Authority.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $383,600,000 for salaries and expenses of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). This appropriation is partially offset by premerger filing and Telemarketing Sales Rule fees estimated at
$310,000,000 and $15,000,000, respectively.
Contact Lenses.—The agreement directs the
FTC to brief the Committees not later than
90 days after enactment of this act on its
plans to reevaluate the Contact Lens Rule
and protect patients from the potential
health risks of non-compliant automated
telephone verification such as the substitution of lenses not prescribed by a patient’s
doctor.
Financial Scams and Frauds.—The agreement encourages the FTC to continue its
collaboration and coordination with usa.gov
and mymoney.gov and develop a centralized
and comprehensive online resource page for
victims of financial scams and frauds, which
includes links to www.ReportFraud.ftc.gov,
as well as information about recovery steps
and best practices after being scammed.
Researcher Data Access.—The agreement directs the FTC to work with other Federal
agency partners to convene stakeholder best
practices and codes of conduct for the sharing of data with independent researchers to
study platform behavior while protecting the
privacy of user information and the types of
research and data access that would best inform the FTC’s work.
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
Continued Presence of IT Products Developed
by the People’s Republic of China.—Congress is
concerned about the continued presence of
IT products from companies with ties to the
People’s Republic of China on General Services Administration (GSA) Multiple Award
Schedules. According to GSA Inspector General reports published in 2023 and 2024, GSA
has sold products on the Schedules that have
been banned outright by the U.S. government. Therefore, the agreement directs GSA
to conduct an audit and submit a report to
the Committees within 180 days of enactment that includes a detailed accounting of
all IT equipment from the Schedules that
has been prohibited under Sec. 889 of the
John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law
115–232), placed on the Department of Defense list of Chinese military companies operating in the U.S. pursuant to Section 1260H
of the National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2021, or identified as a threat
to national security by DOD IG–2019–106.
Deferred Maintenance.—Congress is concerned that deferred maintenance costs on
federal real property are rising at an
unsustainable rate. Congress recognizes that
by selling federal real property the federal
government can save taxpayer dollars but
the process for disposing of federal real property is burdensome and bureaucratic. The
agreement directs GSA to conduct a study
on the administrative and regulatory burdens to the disposal process for federal real
property with high levels of deferred maintenance and report back findings to the Committees.
Accessible Federal Technology.—The agreement recognizes a need to ensure that technology at Federal departments and agencies
is accessible for people with disabilities, as
required by Section 508 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973. As the Nation’s population ages,
there will be more people with disabilities
who rely on accessibility tools to access government resources. This underscores the importance of making Federal websites, apps,
kiosks, and other technology accessible in
the coming decades. Congress therefore appropriates up to $1,400,000 for its Office of

PO 00000

Frm 00098

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Technology Policy and Initiatives, under its
Office of Government-wide Policy (OGP).
Through that office, GSA shall continue to
develop tools and training, and provide technical assistance, to help agencies comply
with Federal law. It shall also continue to
provide valuable data to Congress by conducting an annual, Federal-wide assessment
on Section 508 compliance.
Classical Federal Buildings.—The agreement
recognizes that Federal public buildings
should be visibly identifiable as civic buildings and reflect regional, traditional, and
classical architectural heritage. Public architecture should uplift and beautify public
spaces, respect regional traditions, and ennoble our system of self government. Congress
believes this is best achieved by designing
Federal buildings in classical or traditional
architectural styles. The agreement encourages the GSA to incorporate classical and
traditional architecture in the planning and
design of future Federal buildings.
Dirksen Courthouse.—The Dirksen Courthouse in Chicago is adjacent to vacant federally-owned buildings that are in critical disrepair. Funding has been provided to GSA for
the demolition of these properties, as previous proposals for the private redevelopment of the properties raised significant concerns about increased security risks to the
courthouse and Federal agencies located in
the courthouse complex. GSA is commended
for efforts to involve stakeholders in discussion to address the vacant federally-owned
State Street properties that are in disrepair
and pose security risks to the adjacent Dirksen Courthouse in Chicago. The agreement
reminds GSA that they are expected to continue to provide advance notice to and consult with the Committees before taking any
actions with respect to these properties.
Five-Year Plan.—The agreement reminds
GSA that the Committees expect to receive
an updated Five-Year Plan submitted annually with the GSA congressional budget justification, per statute.
GSA Childcare Facilities.— The agreement
directs GSA to provide a report to the Committees within 180 days on the status and operations of childcare centers located in GSAmanaged facilities. These reports will include (1) the current number and location of
operational centers; (2) accreditation status
and cost-sharing arrangements; (3) the impact of recent staffing reductions on program oversight, quality, and accessibility;
and (4) expenditures spent and/or saved related to childcare oversight and facility upgrades.
Improving Constituent Service Experiences
Through AI.—Congress recognizes the importance of improving customer satisfaction for
constituents seeking information about benefits and government resources. The agreement encourages the GSA to work with Federal agencies to develop improved customer
experiences when interfacing with their government websites. This should include hiring
full-time technical experts with relevant experience and the employment of best practices for effective government website
rollouts, cybersecurity and data privacy, accessibility, and regular user testing and feedback.
Odell Horton Federal Building.—The agreement directs the GSA to initiate the feasibility study on the Odell Horton Federal
Building in the City of Memphis prior to the
end of the calendar year. The agreement provided $1,500,000 in this act for that purpose
and expects the project will receive priority
consideration.
Plum Island Closure and Sale.—The agreement directs GSA to coordinate expeditiously with the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) on efforts to remediate and
transfer ownership of Plum Island. GSA is

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.024

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

directed to provide the Committees with a
briefing on the status of the Plum Island
Closure and Sale project and GSA’s coordination with DHS on the project within 180 days
of enactment.
Santa
Teresa
Land
Port
of
Entry
(STLPOE).—The agreement recognizes that
land ports of entry along the southwest border have a significant role in facilitating increased international trade and interdicting
fentanyl seized by U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP). Congress also acknowledges that the GSA’s findings in its completed feasibility study for the expansion and
modernization of the STLPOE would dramatically increase its capacity to facilitate
increased international trade and interdict
fentanyl seized by CBP. Furthermore, Congress acknowledges the prioritization of
STLPOE’s modernization in CBP’s report to
the Congress, pursuant to the Fiscal Year
2024 Homeland Security Subcommittee’s Explanatory Statement. Therefore, the agreement provides no less than $1,500,000 for the
completion of the project design study and
environmental impact statement for the
modernization and expansion of STLPOE.
The National Archives at Seattle.—The
agreement recognizes that the Federal Archives and Records Center at the National
Archives
and
Records
Administration
(NARA)’s Sand Point facility, which is in
disrepair, houses invaluable and significant
Territorial, Native American, archival and
Federal records for Alaska, Hawaii, Idaho,
Oregon, Washington, and outlying areas. The
Federal records stored at the Sand Point facility hold significant value to individuals
and organizations, including Indian Tribes
and Alaska Native organizations, State
agencies, higher education institutions, researchers, scientists, students, and individuals. GSA is directed to continue to provide
advance notice to and consult with the Committees regarding the overall project Tribes
and Alaska Native organizations, State
agencies, higher education institutions, researchers, scientists, students, and individuals. GSA is directed to continue to provide
advance notice to and consult with the Committees regarding the overall project schedules and critical milestones for repair
projects at the Sand Point facility, and before any actions requiring the movement of
records. Further, the agreement directs
GSA, in consultation with NARA, to continue consultation with impacted State and
Tribal governments on the analysis and design of a future construction project for a
long-term records storage facility in the Seattle, Washington region.
The National Archives at Seattle: Basic Repairs.—The agreement notes the GSA budget
request for the existing NARA facility in Seattle requiring not less than $3,000,000 for
necessary Basic repairs to the existing building. It is the expectation of Congress that
this project will be completed within the
funding provided.
REAL PROPERTY ACTIVITIES
FEDERAL BUILDINGS FUND
LIMITATIONS ON AVAILABILITY OF REVENUE
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

The agreement provides resources from the
GSA Federal Buildings Fund totaling
$9,686,761,000.

State

Description

CT .........
PR .........

Hartford, U.S. Courthouse ...........................
San Juan, Clemente Ruiz-Nazario U.S.
Courthouse and Federico Degetau Federal Building.
Chattanooga, U.S. Courthouse ....................
Memphis, Odell Horton Federal Building ....
Seattle, National Archives Replacement Facility.
Environmental Remediation .........................

TN .........
TN .........
WA .........
...............

$10,000,000
20,000,000
43,500,000
1,500,000
30,000,000
60,661,000

Innovative Wood Products.—The agreement
supports the GSA in investing and using biobased materials, including domestically produced innovative wood products and mass
timber. The agreement supports the implementation and utilization of bio-based materials in Federal building construction.
REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS

The agreement provides $933,553,000 for repairs and alterations:

Major Repairs and Alterations .........................................
Basic Repairs and Alterations .........................................
Special Emphasis Programs ............................................

$239,000,000
479,000,000
215,553,000

RENTAL OF SPACE

The agreement provides $5,574,593,000 for
rental of space.
BUILDING OPERATIONS

The agreement provides $3,012,954,000 for
building operations.
Lifesaving Safety Stations.—The agreement
directs GSA, in consultation with Department of Health and Human Services, to continue to work in coordination with relevant
Federal agencies and provide them with any
necessary additional guidance that will aid
in the deployment of lifesaving Safety Stations to implement an automated external
defibrillator, opioid reversal agents, and
hemorrhagic control program.
Preventing Procurement From Foreign Entities of Concern.—The agreement directs GSA
not to enter into a contract with or award
Federal financial assistance to a ‘‘foreign entity of concern’’ as defined by section 9901(6)
of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
2021 (15 U.S.C. 4651(8)) consistent with 15 CFR
§ 231.104 that manufactures solar modules as
defined by 26 U.S.C. § 45X 3(c)(3)(B)(v). Additionally, GSA should preference procurement of electricity from solar modules manufactured with domestic content.
GENERAL ACTIVITIES
GOVERNMENT-WIDE POLICY

The agreement provides $64,000,000 for GSA
government-wide policy activities.
OPERATING EXPENSES

The agreement provides $48,000,000 for operating expenses.
COVS Act.—Congress is encouraged that
GSA’s Utilization and Disposal (U&D) Program is beginning the process of analyzing
how it can best support the requirements of
the Computers for Veterans and Students
Act (COVS Act). The agreement encourages
GSA to act expediently to ensure that U&D
can meet the requirements under the act and
provide refurbished computers to veterans
and disadvantaged persons to bridge the digital divide.

CONSTRUCTION AND ACQUISITION

CIVILIAN BOARD OF CONTRACT APPEALS

The agreement provides $10,248,000 for the
Civilian Board of Contract Appeals.

State

Account

Project Name

OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

Amount

The agreement provides $165,661,000 for
construction and acquisition:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H819

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Recipient

The agreement provides $73,837,000 for the
Office of Inspector General.
ALLOWANCES AND OFFICE STAFF FOR FORMER
PRESIDENTS

The agreement provides $5,353,000 for allowances and office staff for former Presidents.
FEDERAL CITIZEN SERVICES FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $70,000,000 for deposit into the Federal Citizen Services Fund
and authorizes use of appropriations, revenues, and collections in the Fund in an aggregate amount not to exceed $150,000,000.
Briefing.—Congress welcomes efforts to increase federal agencies’ access to secure
cloud computing products and services. To
that end, Congress appreciates efforts to improve the Federal Risk and Authorization
Management Program (FedRAMP), including
the recently announced FedRAMP 20x effort.
However, Congress remains concerned about
a lack of detail from GSA. Therefore, the
agreement directs GSA to provide a briefing
to the Committees on the implementation
plan for FedRAMP 20x within 90 days of enactment of this Act.
TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION FUND

The agreement provides $5,000,000 for the
Technology Modernization Fund.
ASSET PROCEEDS AND SPACE MANAGEMENT
FUND

The agreement provides $143,328,000 for the
Asset Proceeds and Space Management
Fund.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—GENERAL
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

Section 520 specifies that funds are available for hire of motor vehicles.
Section 521 authorizes transfers within the
Federal Buildings Fund, with advance approval of the Committees.
Section 522 requires transmittal of a fiscal
year 2027 request for courthouse construction that meets design guide standards, reflects the priorities in the Judicial Conference’s 5-year construction plan, and includes a standardized courtroom utilization
study.
Section 523 specifies that funds in this Act
may not be used to increase the amount of
occupiable space or provide services such as
cleaning or security for any agency that does
not pay the rental charges assessed by GSA.
Section 524 permits GSA to pay certain
construction-related claims against the Federal Government from savings achieved in
other projects.
Section 525 requires that the delineated
area of procurement for leased space match
the approved prospectus, unless the Administrator provides an explanatory statement to
the appropriate Congressional committees.
Section 526 requires a spending plan for the
Federal Citizen Services Fund.
Section 527 provides funds for initiatives
related to repairs and alterations, to be
awarded as follows:
Account
($)

Requestor(s)

AK

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Anchorage Federal Building Roof

General Services Administration

2,500,000

Murkowski

AK

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Juneau Federal Building Repairs

General Services Administration

2,232,000

Murkowski

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00099

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.025

H14JAPT1

H820
State

Account

Project Name

Recipient

Requestor(s)

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Dothan Federal Building and U.S.
Courthouse

United States Courts for
the Middle District of
Alabama

5,000,000

Britt

AL

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Hugo L. Black U.S. Courthouse

U.S. District Court—
Northern District of
Alabama

4,000,000

Britt

DE

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Capital Improvements and Safety
Upgrades—J. Caleb Boggs Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse

General Services Administration

3,014,000

Coons

GA

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Improvements to Richard B. Russell
Building in Atlanta, Georgia

General Services Administration

1,580,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

MS

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Colmer Building—Exterior Tuckpoint
and Caulking

William M. Colmer Federal Building & U.S.
Courthouse

1,088,000

Hyde-Smith

MS

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Lightning Protection System—Russell Courthouse

Dan M. Russell Jr. United
States Courthouse

3,448,000

Hyde-Smith

SD

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Sallyport at Pierre Federal Building

General Services Administration

750,000

Rounds

HARRY S TRUMAN SCHOLARSHIP FOUNDATION

ENVIRONMENTAL DISPUTE RESOLUTION FUND

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $3,862,000 for payment to the Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS
ADMINISTRATION

SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $51,480,000 for the
salaries and expenses of the Merit Systems
Protection Board. Within the amount provided, $49,135,000 is a direct appropriation
and $2,345,000 is a transfer from the Civil
Service Retirement and Disability Fund to
adjudicate retirement appeals.
MORRIS K. UDALL AND STEWART L. UDALL
FOUNDATION
MORRIS K. UDALL AND STEWART L. UDALL
TRUST FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $1,582,000 for payment to the Morris K. Udall and Stewart L.
Udall Trust Fund.
State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account
($)

AL

The agreement provides $2,970,000 for payment to the Harry S Truman Scholarship
Foundation Trust Fund.
Eliminating Ideological Bias.—Congress is
aware of concerns regarding ideological bias
in the selection process of Truman Scholars.
The agreement directs the Harry S Truman
Scholarship Foundation (the Foundation),
not later than 180 days after enactment of
this act, to provide a report to the Committees on the Foundation’s policies and procedures to ensure the application process is
free of political or ideological bias. The report shall also include specific steps the
Foundation is taking to attract more candidates from across the ideological spectrum.
MERIT SYSTEMS PROTECTION BOARD

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

OPERATING EXPENSES

The agreement provides $421,000,000 for the
operating expenses of the National Archives
and Records Administration (NARA).
Alaskan Records.—The agreement directs
NARA to submit a report to the Committees
no later than 180 days after enactment of
this act that summarizes the consultations
that have occurred, the result of those consultations, a list of records that have been
digitized and posted online to date, and a
timeline for completing the digitization
within one year or, if complete digitization
exceeds one year, then documentation for
the reasons additional time will be necessary.
Missing Armed Forces and Civilian Personnel
Records.—The agreement notes that since the
beginning of World War II, the fates of
roughly 80,000 uniformed and civilian personnel remain unknown. The families of
these Americans lack the closure that comes
from knowing how their loved ones paid the
last full measure defending the United
States. The agreement directs NARA to provide a briefing to the Committees on the
process of acquiring such records within 45
days of enactment of this act. Congress encourages NARA to work with the Departments of Defense and State to secure the
missing records of military service members.

Account

Project Name

Recipient

The National Archives at Seattle.—Congress
appreciates NARA’s efforts to work with
GSA and consult with impacted State and
Tribal governments to ensure Federal
records at the Sand Point facility are stored
at a future long-term records storage facility
in the Seattle, Washington region. The
agreement directs NARA to provide advance
notice to and consult with the Committees
before taking any action with respect to the
permanent relocation of archival records
from the Sand Point facility.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

The agreement provides $5,920,000 for the
Office of Inspector General.
REPAIRS AND RESTORATION

The agreement provides $8,000,000 for the
repair, alteration, and improvement of archives facilities and museum exhibits, related equipment for public spaces, and to
provide adequate storage for holdings to remain available until expended.
NATIONAL HISTORICAL PUBLICATIONS AND
RECORDS COMMISSION GRANTS PROGRAM

The agreement provides $5,000,000 for the
National
Historical
Publications
and
Records Commission grants program.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISION—NATIONAL
ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION

Section 530 is a provision providing funds
for initiatives related to preserving and publishing of historical records, including the
construction of exhibits, to be awarded as
follows:
Amount
($)

Requestor(s)

AK

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Arctic Digital Library Project

Alaska Library Network

100,000

Murkowski

AK

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Voices Across Generations: A Native
Alaska Audio Preservation Project

Alaska Music Archives

285,000

Murkowski

AK

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Voices of Our Ancestors: Preserving
Elders’ Knowledge

Wrangell Cooperative Association

130,000

Murkowski

CO

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

History Preservation and Education

University of Colorado
Colorado Springs

348,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

GA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Supporting the Preservation and
Public Accessibility of United
States Military History in Columbus, Georgia

Columbus State University

175,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

HI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Bishop Museum Digitization

Bishop Museum

1,581,000

Hirono, Schatz

IL

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digitization Initiative

Eureka College

200,000

Durbin

IL

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digitization Initiative

Galena-Jo Daviess County Historical Society

300,000

Durbin

KS

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digitizing and Preserving Senator
Bob Dole’s Archives

Robert J. Dole Institute
of Politics

5,292,000

Moran

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00100

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.026

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026
State

Project Name

Recipient

LA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Los Isleños Cultural and Coastal
Museum and Community Archive

Nunez Community College

883,000

Cassidy

LA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Louisiana Humanities Disaster Preparedness and Preservation Program

Louisiana Endowment for
the Humanities

750,000

Kennedy

ME

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Northeast Indigenous Archaeology
and Heritage Science Center
Record Digitization

University of Maine System

750,000

Collins, King

MI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digital Preservation of the Lansing
Labor News Newspaper

Michigan State University

210,000

Peters, Slotkin

MI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

In Their Own Words: Collecting, Preserving and Celebrating Detroiters’ Oral Histories

Detroit Historical Society

125,000

Slotkin

NJ

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Documenting America250—Education Portal & Programming for
the Foundations of Freedom in
New Jersey

Harriet Tubman Museum
of Cape May

1,000,000

Booker, Kim

NV

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

University of Nevada, Reno—Repository of Tribal Cultural Artifacts

University of Nevada
Reno

442,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

NV

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Desert Research Institute—Southern
Nevada Historic Preservation
Project

The Desert Research Institute

558,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

NY

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Conducting oral histories

Jazz at Lincoln Center
Inc.

200,000

Schumer

NY

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Long Island Studies Institute

Hofstra University

459,000

Schumer

PA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digitizing the Battle of Homestead
Foundation Labor History Archives

Battle of Homestead
Foundation

174,000

Fetterman

RI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Preservation and Digitization of
RIBHS Collections

Rhode Island Black Heritage Society

200,000

Reed

VA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Exploring America’s Routes

America’s Routes

57,000

Kaine, Warner

WI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Oneida Language Documentation,
Resource Development, and Community Outreach Program

Skanikulat, Inc.

125,000

Baldwin

NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION

The agreement provides $3,465,000 for the
Community Development Revolving Loan
Fund (CDRLF).
CDRLF Oversight.—To ensure proper oversight capabilities are in place for CDRLF
grant and loan recipients, the agreement directs the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) to brief the Committees within
90 days of enactment of this Act on how the
program is overseen, including how the
NCUA ensures grant and loan dollars are
used according to the rules of the program.
OFFICE OF GOVERNMENT ETHICS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $23,037,000 for salaries and expenses of the Office of Government Ethics.
OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF TRUST FUNDS)

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Amount
($)

Account

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT REVOLVING LOAN
FUND

The agreement provides $382,140,000 for salaries and expenses of the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM). Within the amount provided, $167,535,000 is a direct appropriation
and $214,605,000 is a transfer from OPM trust
funds.
Contracting.—The agreement directs OPM
to notify the Committees at least two days
prior to issuing any sole source contracts to
support OPM’s activities or any competitive
contracts issued valued at $2,000,000 or more.
Area of Application Criteria.—The agreement directs OPM to provide a report to the
Committees within 90 days of enactment of
this Act on how eligibility criteria are determined, how often it is reviewed, how employment interchange rates currently attempt to
account for remote workers, and how the increase in remote work impacts locality pay
determinations.
Identity Protection Coverage.—The agreement directs OPM to provide a briefing to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H821

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

the Committees within 90 days of enactment
of this Act on the remaining budget authority in OPM’s Revolving Fund for providing
this service and the anticipated costs of extending the service for an additional five
years.
Postal Service Health Benefits (PSHB).—The
PSHB Program was established within the
Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB)
Program by the Postal Service Reform Act
of 2022. The program serves 1.7 million postal
employees, retirees, and their families. The
Committees have appropriated more than
$50,000,000 over the past two fiscal years to
support successful implementation. The
agreement directs OPM to provide the Committees with updates quarterly on the implementation of the PSHB Program, including
any gaps in OPM’s capacity to successfully
implement the program.
Federal Workforce.—The agreement directs
OPM to make publicly available, not later
than 60 days after enactment of this Act, the
full number of federal civilian employees on
payroll as of January 19, 2025, September 30,
2025, and enactment of this Act including
agency, occupation, and duty station, pay
and related costs, and which of these federal
civilian employees participated in the deferred resignation program.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF TRUST FUNDS)

The agreement provides $36,031,000 for salaries and expenses of the Office of Inspector
General. Within the amount provided,
$6,839,000 is a direct appropriation and
$29,192,000 is a transfer from OPM trust
funds.
OFFICE OF SPECIAL COUNSEL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement includes $31,585,000 for salaries and expenses of the Office of Special
Counsel (OSC).
Caseload Reporting.—The agreement directs
the OSC to, within 60 days of enactment of

PO 00000

Frm 00101

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Requestor(s)

this Act and not later than 45 days after the
last day of each fiscal quarter, provide the
Committees with a report on new matters received and closed. The report should also include the number of Hatch Act complaints
and of whistleblower disclosures received
and closed.
PRIVACY AND CIVIL LIBERTIES OVERSIGHT
BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $13,700,000 for salaries and expenses of the Privacy and Civil
Liberties Oversight Board.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS REFORM BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $3,605,000 for salaries and expenses of the Public Buildings Reform Board (PBRB).
Sand Point.—The agreement directs the
PBRB to refrain from moving forward with a
sale of the Sand Point facility until all of its
records are digitized and available online or
relocated to another facility in the Seattle
area.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $2,149,000,000 for
the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC). All funds are derived from offsetting
collections, resulting in no net appropriation.
Technical Expertise in Digital Asset Regulation.—Congress recognizes that effective
oversight of digital assets and emerging financial technologies requires a workforce
with both legal and technical expertise. The
agreement directs the SEC to prioritize the
recruitment and retention of staff with experience in blockchain protocols, smart contract engineering, and decentralized finance.
This includes hiring engineers, protocol designers, and technologists who have practical experience with blockchain systems.
The agreement also encourages the SEC to
strengthen internal training and professional

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.027

H14JAPT1

H822

development efforts to ensure staff develop a
foundational understanding of digital asset
technologies.
Consolidated Audit Trail (CAT) Oversight.—
The agreement directs the SEC Inspector
General to periodically review its procedures
and safeguards to ensure the continued prevention of data breaches with regard to the
CAT.
Section 31 User Fee Adjustments.—The agreement directs the SEC to submit to the Committees no later than 30 days after enactment of this act its recommendations of the
best time during the fiscal year the fee rate
should be set and the best time or times during the fiscal year for an adjustment to the
fee rate.
SELECTIVE SERVICE SYSTEM
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $31,300,000 for the
salaries and expenses of the Selective Service System.
SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The agreement provides $323,118,000 for salaries and expenses of the Small Business Administration (SBA). The agreement includes
at least $12,000,000 for SBA’s Office of Credit
Risk Management (OCRM) for lender oversight and risk-based reviews. Funding for the
Office of General Counsel is provided separately from this amount. OCRM must play a
key role in eliminating waste, fraud, and
abuse in SBA lending programs and protecting taxpayer losses on loans by ensuring
lenders comply with procedures that mitigate the risk of loss under SBA’ s loan programs.
District and Regional Offices.—The agreement directs the SBA, not later than 180
days after the enactment of this Act, to submit a report to the Committees detailing the
number of FTE, funding obligated, and city
and state for each district and regional office
during the previous fiscal year; and the number of FTE, funding level, and city and state
for the current fiscal year for each district
and regional office.
Support for Programs.—The agreement includes robust funding for the Women-Owned
Small Business Federal Contract Program
and Native American Affairs Outreach Program.
Cybersecurity and IT Oversight at SBA.—The
agreement directs the Administrator of the
SBA, not later than 180 days after the date of
enactment of this act, to provide to the Committees and the Committees of jurisdiction
in the House and Senate a list of all cybersecurity, software, artificial intelligence, or
IT-related projects undertaken the previous
fiscal year.
District Office Staffing Levels.—Congress
recognizes that operational resources and
adequate staffing at district offices are essential to the SBA’s mission. District offices
offer a critical line of communication and
source of advice for small businesses. The
agreement encourages the SBA to ensure
each State has no fewer than seven full-time
equivalent staffers across its district offices
and shall speedily fill vacant positions below
that level.
Nonprofit Child Care Support.—Congress recognizes the critical role of childcare providers in supporting the economy and workforce and encourages the SBA to allow qualified nonprofit childcare providers access to
all SBA loan programs that for-profit
childcare providers may utilize. A qualified
nonprofit provider must be in compliance
with State licensing requirements, operate
as a 501(c)3 organization, primarily engage in
providing childcare for children from birth
through school age including preschool or
prekindergarten or care for school-age chil-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

dren outside of school hours or schedule, and
comply with background checks for each employee and regular volunteer.
Paid Leave Tax Credit Outreach and Awareness.—The agreement directs that, of the
funds provided under this heading, not to exceed $1,000,000 shall be used for SBA to educate small businesses about the availability
of the Paid Family and Medical Leave tax
credit under Section 45S of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) of 1986. In partnership with
district offices, the SBA shall conduct outreach which could include targeted communications, education, training, and technical
assistance to relevant parties.
Place of Business Requirement.—The agreement notes that Native and other minorityowned businesses have concerns about the effect and practicality of implementing the
rule promulgated by the Administrator of
the SBA for the SBA 8(a) Business Development Program that proposes to clarify the
place of business requirement in 13 CFR
124.501(k). Congress expects the SBA to work
closely with its authorizers on this issue.
Succession Planning Toolkit.—The agreement directs the SBA to develop a publicly
available online toolkit that can be used by
the SBA and its resource partners, including
Small Business Development Centers, to
guide small business owners through the
process of creating a business succession
plan, connect owners with relevant resources
and provide information on employee ownership options, including Employee Stock
Ownership Plans and cooperatives, as a succession planning strategy.
Rural Small Business Assistance.—The agreement directs the SBA within 180 days of enactment of this act, in collaboration with
USDA, to submit a report to the Committees, the Committee on Small Business and
Entrepreneurship of the Senate, and the
Committee on Small Business of the House
of Representatives on the activities undertaken as a result of the memorandum of understanding dated November 20, 2023. The report should include an update on barriers to
the SBA programs for cooperatives and opportunities to collaborate on technical assistance, especially with respect to exportation and procurement.
ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

The agreement provides $330,000,000 for
SBA Entrepreneurial Development Programs.
Program

($000)

7(j) Technical Assistance Program (Contracting Assistance)
Cybersecurity for Small Business Pilot Program ...................
Entrepreneurship Education ...................................................
Federal and State Technology (FAST) Partnership Program
Growth Accelerators ...............................................................
HUBZone Program ..................................................................
Microloan Technical Assistance .............................................
National Women’s Business Council .....................................
Native American Outreach .....................................................
PRIME Technical Assistance ..................................................
Regional Innovation Clusters .................................................
SCORE ....................................................................................
Small Business Development Centers (SBDC) ......................
State Trade Expansion Program (STEP) ................................
Veterans Outreach .................................................................
Women’s Business Centers (WBC) ........................................
Total, Entrepreneurial Development Programs .............

3,800
3,000
2,000
9,000
9,000
4,000
41,000
1,500
5,300
7,000
9,000
17,000
150,000
20,000
21,400
27,000
330,000

SBDC Minimum Funding Awards.—The
agreement encourages SBA to assess the
minimum funding levels awarded to States
and U.S. territories through the SBDC Program to ensure adequate resources are provided to meet the demand of each State. The
SBA shall provide a report on its recommendations to the Committees within 180
days of enactment of this act.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

The agreement provides $37,020,000 for the
Office of Inspector General (OIG).
OFFICE OF ADVOCACY

The agreement provides $10,109,000 for the
Office of Advocacy.

PO 00000

Frm 00102

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

BUSINESS LOANS PROGRAM ACCOUNT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $161,000,000 for the
Business Loans Program Account, of which
$3,000,000 is for the Microloan Program and
$158,000,000 is for the authorized expenses of
administering the business loans programs.
Small Manufacturers.—The agreement directs SBA to provide a report to the Committees within 180 days of enactment of this
act on ways to increase access to SBA business loans for small U.S. manufacturers.
Small Business Investment Company Collaboration.—The agreement directs SBA to continue its collaborative effort with the Securities and Exchange Commission to ensure
effective oversight of Small Business Investment Companies (SBICs) and the protection
of SBIC investors.
DISASTER LOANS PROGRAM ACCOUNT
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $282,000,000 for the
Disaster Loans Program, of which $250,000,000
is designated as being for disaster relief for
major disasters and $32,000,000 is provided for
the authorized expenses of administering
SBA-declared disasters.
Budget Formulation and Forecasting.—The
agreement directs the Administrator of the
SBA, not later than 180 days after the date of
enactment of this act, to submit to the Committees and the Committees of jurisdiction
in the House and Senate a report detailing
corrections the SBA has made and will make
to improve forecasting, data quality, and
budget assumptions relating to budget submissions relating to amounts made available
for the cost of SBA disaster loans.
Disaster Declarations.—The agreement directs the SBA to publish each month in the
Federal Register a list of all requests, for the
current fiscal year, from States or Governors
to the Administrator to certify or a declare
an SBA or administrative disaster as defined
in 15 USC 636(b)(2)(C) and a list of all requests from States or Governors for certification to qualify for financial assistance to
respond to economic injury caused by a disaster made under 15 USC 636(b)(2)(E), such
list shall include the name of the State making the request, the date and nature of the
disaster, the date the request was received
from the State, and the approval status. If a
request has been outstanding for 30 or more
days without approval, the SBA is directed
to list the reason for not approving the request.
Low-Snow Assistance.—Congress recognizes
the prominent role that the SBA plays in
providing Federal resources to small businesses during ongoing Federal drought disaster declarations. Congress further acknowledges the work and relief the SBA has
provided to these small businesses, particularly through the issuance of Economic Injury Disaster Loans (EIDL). However, Congress is concerned that small businesses that
experience drought conditions in the form of
warm winters and low to no snow accumulation have—at times—not been eligible for
certain SBA assistance programs, including
the EIDL program and disaster assistance.
As such, the agreement directs the SBA to
provide a report on work the agency is already doing to address concerns for small
businesses experiencing low snow accumulation (or below average snowfalls), but not
qualifying for EIDL and recommend additional ways to provide funding to small businesses seeking Federal relief because of low
to no snow and warm winters. Further, the
Government Accountability Office is directed to review and provide a report to the
Committees within 120 days of enactment of
this act on recommendations for the SBA

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.028

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

and Congress to consider so that small businesses impacted by low to no snow accumulation and warm winters can seek and receive suitable Federal relief.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H823

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—SMALL BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

Section 540 provides transfer authority and
availability of funds.
Section 541 authorizes the transfer of funding available under the SBA ‘‘Salaries and
Expenses’’ and ‘‘Business Loans Program Ac-

count’’ appropriations into the SBA Information Technology System Modernization and
Working Capital Fund.
Section 542 provides funds for initiatives
related to small business development and
entrepreneurship, including programmatic,
construction, and acquisition activities, to
be awarded as follows:
Amount
($)

Account

Project Name

Recipient

AK

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Set Up Shop: Empowering Entrepreneurs in Underserved Communities

Anchorage Community
Land Trust (ACLT)

AL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Athens State University LaunchBox

Athens State University

205,000

Britt

AL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

University of North Alabama Center
for Innovation

University of North Alabama

5,000,000

Britt

AZ

Small Business Administration (SBA)

City of Phoenix Start-Up Commercialization Accelerator

City of Phoenix

925,000

Gallego, Kelly

CA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Contract Ready LA

City of Los Angeles

1,000,000

Padilla

CA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

County of Santa Clara—Small Business Resource at the Vietnamese
American Services Center

County of Santa Clara

1,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

CO

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Statewide Collaboration on Resource
Navigation and Education

Good Business Colorado

903,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

CO

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Health Focused Small Business Accelerator

Exponential Impact

256,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

CO

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Small Business Software Procurement

Startup Colorado

493,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Arts Council of Greater New Haven
for Skillbox: Artists as Small
Business Initiative

Arts Council of Greater
New Haven

194,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Entrepreneurial Center at CT State
Northwestern for Small Business
Programming

CT State Northwestern

1,740,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Entrepreneurial Skill Building

Black Business Alliance

1,000,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

KNOX, Inc. for Urban Farmer Small
Business Training

KNOX, Inc.

194,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

UConn Small Business Development
Center for Digital Transformation
of Connecticut Small Businesses

University of Connecticut
Small Business Development Center

885,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

DE

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Agricultural Business Programming

University of Delaware

494,000

Blunt Rochester, Coons

DE

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Training and Assistance

La Plaza Delaware

300,000

Blunt Rochester, Coons

DE

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Technical Assistance for Local Small
Real Estate Development Businesses

Cinnaire Lending Corporation

206,000

Blunt Rochester, Coons

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Empowering Small Businesses:
Strategies for Growth and Sustainability

Greater Wealth Works,
Inc.

250,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Expanding Entrepreneurship for
Georgians with Disabilities

Synergies Work, Inc.

475,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Expanding Entrepreneurship in
Gwinnett County, Georgia

Gwinnett County Public
Library Foundation,
Inc.

334,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

GCSU Bobcat Business Incubator

Georgia College and
State University

313,000

Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Greater Georgia Mobile Tech Unit

Greater Georgia Black
Chamber of Commerce

200,000

Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Increasing Small Business Readiness in Federal Contracting

Georgia Hispanic Chamber of Commerce
Business Development
Center

189,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Madison Village for Advanced Entrepreneurship

Madison Village for Advanced Entrepreneurship

400,000

Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Northeast Georgia Gateway for Business Momentum

Northeast Georgia Black
Chamber of Commerce

64,000

Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

OU Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Center’s Entrepreneurship Empowerment Zone

Oglethorpe University,
Inc.

105,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Small Business Impact Initiative

GABCC Foundation

500,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Federal Contracting
Support

University of Georgia Research Foundation,
Inc.

500,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Incubator and Creative Makerspace

Athens Regional Library
System

198,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Supporting Veteran Small Businesses and Entrepreneurs in
Clayton County, Georgia

Library Foundation of
Clayton County, Inc.

300,000

Ossoff

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00103

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.029

200,000

Requestor(s)
Murkowski

H14JAPT1

H824

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Project Name

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Supporting Veterans Transitioning to
Entrepreneurship

ATLVets, Inc.

223,000

Ossoff

HI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Hawaii Innovation Center Hilo (Renovation)

University of Hawaii

1,000,000

Hirono

HI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Kauai Technology Hub

Kaua‘i Economic Development Board

124,000

Schatz

HI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Kunia Farmer Service Center

Oahu Resource Conservation and Development Council

904,000

Schatz

HI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Oahu Small Business Development
Initiative

Office of Economic Revitalization

404,000

Schatz

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Comprehensive Small Business Programming Support

Chicago’s Sunshine Enterprises, Inc.

550,000

Duckworth

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Entrepreneur & Business Center Initiative

Joliet Junior College

800,000

Durbin

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Entrepreneurship Center

Chicago Urban League

513,000

Durbin

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Development Initiative

John Wood Community
College

400,000

Durbin

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Educational Initiative

Rock Valley College

800,000

Durbin

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

The Aux Evanston: A Small Business
Start Up Center

The Growing Season

450,000

Duckworth

KS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Advanced Manufacturing Innovation Lab

Fort Hays Tech | Northwest

1,744,000

Moran

LA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Greater New Orleans Food and Beverage Incubator

Jefferson Parish Economic Development &
Port District (JEDCO)

3,650,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

MA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Local Small Business Development
and Ecosystem Building

Black Economic Council
of Massachusetts

700,000

Markey, Warren

MA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Regional Community Supported Agriculture

Eastie Farm

1,000,000

Markey, Warren

MA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Venture Studio for Small Businesses
in Western MA

WMLBS.Inc dba Living
Local

300,000

Markey, Warren

MD

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Expanding the Family Child Care
Pipeline

Maryland Family Network

770,000

Van Hollen

MD

Small Business Administration (SBA)

FSC First Level Up Program

Prince George’s Financial
Services Corporation
dba FSC First

244,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

MD

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Kingdom Cares Economic Empowerment and Innovation Center

Kingdom Global Community Development
Coorporation

1,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

MD

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Veteran Institute for Procurement
(VIP)

Montgomery County
Chamber Community
Foundation

2,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

ME

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Child Care Business Lab

Coastal Enterprises, Inc.

400,000

King

ME

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Maine Entrepreneurship Accelerator

MaineStream Finance

225,000

King

ME

Small Business Administration (SBA)

SMCC Education and Training Accelerator Lab

Southern Maine Community College

2,237,000

Collins

MI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Operational Support for Northern Initiatives

Northern Great Lakes Initiatives (dba Northern
Initiatives)

500,000

Slotkin

MI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Supporting the Success of Detroit
Small Business Owners

Invest Detroit Foundation

375,000

Slotkin

MI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Supporting Wayne County Small
Businesses

Wayne State University

1,000,000

Peters, Slotkin

MI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Westside Service Center Renovation
Initiative

City of Grand Rapids

1,803,000

Peters

MN

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Accelerating Small Business Growth
in Greater Minnesota

Latino Economic Development Center

500,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

MN

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Business Technical Assistance Program

Rondo Community Land
Trust

690,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

MN

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Measuring and Addressing Small
Business Financial Health in
Underinvested Communities

Neighborhood Development Center

670,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Bridging the Startup Gap: Creating
Mississippi’s Innovator Hub

Innovate Mississippi

1,495,000

Hyde-Smith

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Mississippi State University for
Childcare and Entrepreneurship
Program

Mississippi State University

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Master Entrepreneurship Volunteer Program

Mississippi State University

750,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rust College Center for Entrepreneurship and Innovation

Rust College

500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Owner Financial Literacy Training Program

Hinds Community College

850,000

Hyde-Smith

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

University of Mississippi for Small
Business Technology Program

The University of Mississippi

5,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00104

Fmt 4634

Recipient

Amount
($)

Account

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.029

Requestor(s)

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H825

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Amount
($)

Account

Project Name

Recipient

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Child Care Business Development

Monadnock Economic Development Corporation

600,000

Shaheen

Requestor(s)

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Claremont Small Business Center

Claremont Development
Authority

466,000

Shaheen

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Coos County Outdoor Economy Small
Business Resiliency Support

Coos Economic Development Corporation

200,000

Shaheen

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

NH SBDC Rural Business Advising

University System of New
Hampshire

444,000

Shaheen

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Strafford EDC Technical Assistance
Project

Strafford Economic Development Corporation

300,000

Shaheen

NJ

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Center for South Jersey Economic
Development

Rutgers University-Camden

370,000

Booker

NJ

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small & Diverse Business Training
Platform and Network Development

NJ State Veterans Chamber of Commerce

630,000

Booker

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Business Resource and Innovation
Center (BRIC)

Downtown Taos Inc (Taos
MainStreet)

250,000

Heinrich

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

CABQ Small Business Assistance

City of Albuquerque Economic Development
Department

388,000

Heinrich

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Indian Pueblo Entrepreneur Complex

Indian Pueblo Cultural
Center

1,000,000

Heinrich, Luján

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Key Industry Small Business Accelerators

Women’s Economic SelfSufficiency Team
(WESST)

650,000

Heinrich

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

New Mexico Heritage Entrepreneurial
Academy

Northern Rio Grande National Heritage Area

633,000

Heinrich, Luján

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Small Business Marketing and
Development

The Middle Rio Grande
Economic Development
Association

150,000

Heinrich

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Southern New Mexico Technical Assistance Program

City of Albuquerque

200,000

Luján

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Vida Mejor Capital Navigation Services Center

Vida Mejor Capital

167,000

Heinrich, Luján

NV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Northern Nevada Development Authority—Northern Nevada Center
of Excellence Small Business Incubator

Northern Nevada Development Authority

1,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Global Entrepreneurship Support and
Business Innovation Program Expansion

Yeshiva University

500,000

Schumer

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Human Resource Services Support
for Small Businesses

Staten Island Chamber
of Commerce Foundation Inc.

500,000

Schumer

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Program

Korean American Civic
Empowerment for
Community

500,000

Schumer

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Staten Island Chamber of Commerce—New York City Small
Business Resource Network
(SBRN)

Staten Island Chamber
of Commerce Foundation Inc.

3,000,000

Gillibrand

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Support for Small Businesses in
Central Brooklyn

Bridge Street Development Corporation

446,000

Schumer

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Technical Assistance and Seminars
for Small Businesses Expanding
Online Presence

Asian American Federation, Inc.

500,000

Gillibrand,
Schumer

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Built Oregon Small Business Market
Growth and Support Program

Built Oregon

200,000

Merkley, Wyden

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Native Business Accelerator Program

Native American Youth
Alliance

551,000

Merkley, Wyden

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

North Coast Food Web Facilities

North Coast Food Web

610,000

Merkley, Wyden

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Oregon UAS Accelerator

City of Pendleton

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

REAP Young Entrepreneurs Program

REAP, Inc.

652,000

Merkley, Wyden

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

New Accelerator Model Project

Innovation Works

750,000

McCormick

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Pennsylvania AI Data Centers & Energy Future

Catalyst Connection

600,000

Fetterman,
McCormick

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Entrepreneurial Technical Assistance Project in Bedford County

Bedford County Development Association

350,000

Fetterman,
McCormick

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

TechVentures Lab Initiative

Ben Franklin Technology
Partners of Northeastern Pennsylvania

4,800,000

McCormick

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

University City Science Center’s
Pathways to SBIR/STTR

University City Science
Center

400,000

Fetterman,
McCormick

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Beautiful Day Food Entrepreneurship
Program

Beautiful Day

1,650,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Farm Fresh Small Business Supports

Farm Fresh Rhode Island

700,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Hope & Main Providence

Hope & Main

1,700,000

Reed

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00105

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.029

H14JAPT1

H826

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Amount
($)

Account

Project Name

Recipient

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

ONB Small Business Technical Assistance

Olneyville Housing Corporation DBA ONE
Neighborhood Builders

385,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Preparing RI Businesses for Growing
Cybersecurity Needs

RI Commerce Corporation

380,000

Whitehouse

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Providence Revolving Fund Small
Business Assistance Program

Providence Revolving
Fund

125,000

Reed, Whitehouse

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Residential Construction Small Business Supports

Residential Construction
Workforce Partnership
(RCWP)

450,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

RIHub Startup Incubator

RIHub

495,000

Reed, Whitehouse

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business AI Training

Bryant University

1,600,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Strategically Growing the Reach of
the Chamber

The Rhode Island Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce

200,000

Reed

VA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Roanoke Biotechnology Ecosystem
Equipment Essential (Project
RBE)

City of Roanoke

1,000,000

Kaine, Warner

VA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Prosperity Program @ Virginia
Innovation Accelerator

The Advancement Foundation

943,000

Kaine, Warner

VT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Growing Vermont’s Working Lands
Economy for Small Businesses

Vermont Housing & Conservation Board

750,000

Welch

VT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Southern Vermont Outreach and Employee Ownership Governance Programming

Vermont Employee Ownership Center Inc.

445,000

Sanders

VT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Technical Assistance to Small Businesses for Navigating Changes to
International Trade

Vermont Department of
Economic Development

250,000

Welch

VT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Vermont Small Business Legal Resilience Project at Vermont Law and
Graduate School

Vermont Law and Graduate School

555,000

Sanders

WA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Shared Food Facility

Seattle Good Business
Network DBA Good
Business Network of
Washington

2,000,000

Murray

WA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

SW Washington Child Care Partnership

Support for Early Learning & Families (SELF)

1,034,000

Murray

WA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Technical Assistance for Small Business Startup and Entrepreneurship Growth in Washington

Northwest Native Chamber

2,000,000

Cantwell, Murray

WI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Hmong Chamber Innovation Hub

Hmong Wisconsin Chamber of Commerce

1,687,000

Baldwin

WI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Sherman Phoenix Foundation—Phoenix Rise MKE

Sherman Phoenix Foundation, Inc.

959,000

Baldwin

WI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

University of Wisconsin-Stout

UW-Stout Center for Innovation and Development (CID)

202,000

Baldwin

WI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Wisconsin Technology Council

Wisconsin Technology
Council

40,000

Baldwin

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Charleston Area Alliance Small Business Incubator Modernization

Capital Area Development Corporation of
West Virginia dba
Charleston Area Alliance

800,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Façade Improvement Program

City of Fairmont

500,000

Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

FASTER WV Support for Entrepreneurial Development

Advantage Valley Community Development
Corporation

690,000

Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Growing Small Businesses in Man
and Logan

Hatfield McCoy Convention & Visitors Bureau

500,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Marshall University Aviation

Marshall University

2,502,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

PCDA Former Kanawha Manufacturing Building Rehabilitation

Putnam County Development Authority

500,000

Capito

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Public-Private Childcare Cohort
Model—Raleigh County, WV

New River Gorge Regional Development
Authority

750,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rise Together: Building Businesses
and Community Capacity

WV Hive Network, Inc.

750,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Strengthening Rural Economies
Project

West Virginia Food and
Farm Coalition, Inc.

748,000

Capito

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Strengthening Small Businesses in
WV

West Virginia Women
Work

500,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

WVDA West Virginia Grown Expansion Through Marketing &
Trainings

West Virginia Department
of Agriculture

371,000

Capito, Justice

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00106

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.029

Requestor(s)

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026
UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE
PAYMENT TO THE POSTAL SERVICE FUND

The agreement provides $38,360,000 for a
payment to the Postal Service Fund.
Consolidation of Postal Offices.—The agreement directs the United States Postal Service (USPS) to provide a briefing to the Committees on the ‘Delivering for America Plan’
and any updates regarding any consolidation
of postal offices, including rural and small
postal offices, within 180 days of enactment
of this act. Congress remains concerned regarding the status of proposed and underway
consolidations like Huntsville, AL, Fayetteville, AR, and Reno, NV, that plan to transport mail across state lines, Congress is
deeply concerned about the potential negative impacts on mail service to the American
people, customer satisfaction, and cost overruns potentially undermining the goals outlined in the DFA plan.
Postal Office Locations.—Congress is concerned that many cities, including the City
of Eastvale, California currently lack a post
office within city boundaries, causing significant disruptions to mail services for residents. The agreement directs the USPS, not
later than 90 days after enactment of this
Act, to report to the Committees on metrics
used to determine the construction or acquisition of new postal facilities. Additionally,
the report should include a comprehensive
analysis related to the construction or acquisition of a new post office in the City of
Eastvale.
Accurate Address Listing.—The agreement
directs the USPS to conduct an internal review on the numerous instances, nationwide,
where assigned zip-codes overlap municipal
jurisdictions resulting in multiple city listings or incorrect listings. Given that the
USPS recognizes the importance of last-line
city designations, the agreement further direct the USPS to provide a detailed report of
their findings to the Committees within 120
days of enactment of this Act, to include
what solutions could be utilized to ensure
proper designations in the future and; options to designate a single, unique zip code
for jurisdictions affected by this issue including, but not limited to, Miami Lakes,
FL, Cooper City, FL, Priceville, AL and
Eastvale, CA.
First Class Mail.—The agreement encourages the USPS to continue their standards
operations for first class mail.
Overseas Voting and Mail for the Blind.—The
agreement includes provisions to ensure that
mail for overseas voting and mail for the
blind shall continue to be free.
Project Safe Delivery.—The agreement encourages the USPS to continue combatting
mail theft and violent crimes targeting postal service employees.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement provides $274,000,000 for the
Office of Inspector General (OIG).
Processing Centers and Delay of Mail.—Congress is concerned with the closure of processing facilities, which has resulted in significant delays in mail delivery times and
standards in multiple communities across
the country. Within 180 days of enactment of
this Act, the agreement directs the OIG to
provide the Committees with an analysis on
the impact of closing processing facilities on
mail delivery times and standards across the
United States.
Delay of Post Office Reopenings in North
Carolina.—Congress is concerned with the
delay in reopening post offices in Western
North Carolina that were closed due to Hurricane Helene. Within 90 days of enactment
of this Act, the agreement directs the OIG to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H827

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

provide the Committees with a plan on how
USPS will reopen the closed facilities in
Western North Carolina.
Access to the Postal Service Asset Forfeiture
Fund.—Congress recognizes that, since 2005,
the USPS OIG has been a valuable law enforcement partner and active participant in
the Postal Service’s asset forfeiture program, which is managed by the U.S. Postal
Inspection Service. Notably, over the past 15
years, the OIG has contributed over
$35,000,000 in forfeited funds to the Postal
Service Fund, either from cases where it was
the lead investigating agency or as a participant in joint law enforcement investigations.
However, Congress is concerned that the OIG
no longer has access to proceeds in the Postal Service Fund, as it has had since 2005.
Congress further notes its strong support for
the OIG’s ongoing efforts to investigate narcotics trafficking and healthcare fraud involving the Postal Service.
Mail Security.—The agreement encourages
the OIG to make recommendations to USPS
as it looks to make significant improvements in the security of the mail. OIG recommendations should take into consideration its findings in recent Field Operations
Review Team audits and other relevant
work.
UNITED STATES TAX COURT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement provides $55,000,000 for salaries and expenses of the United States Tax
Court, of which not to exceed $3,000 is available for official reception and representation
expenses.
TITLE VI
GENERAL PROVISIONS—THIS ACT
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS OF FUNDS)

Section 601 prohibits pay and other expenses of non-Federal parties intervening in
regulatory or adjudicatory proceedings funded in this Act.
Section 602 prohibits obligations beyond
the current fiscal year and prohibits transfers of funds unless expressly provided except
for transfers made pursuant to the authority
in section 3173(d) of title 40, United States
Code.
Section 603 limits expenditures for any
consulting service through procurement contracts to those contracts where such expenditures are a matter of public record and
available for public inspection.
Section 604 prohibits funds in this Act
from being transferred without express authority.
Section 605 prohibits the use of funds to
engage in activities that would prohibit the
enforcement of section 307 of the Tariff Act
of 1930 (46 Stat. 590).
Section 606 prohibits the use of funds unless the recipient agrees to comply with the
Buy American Act.
Section 607 prohibits funding for any person or entity convicted of violating the Buy
American Act.
Section 608 authorizes the reprogramming
of funds, specifies the reprogramming procedures for agencies funded by this Act, and
penalizes late reporting.
Section 609 ensures that 50 percent of unobligated balances may remain available for
certain purposes.
Section 610 restricts the use of funds for
the Executive Office of the President to request official background reports from the
Federal Bureau of Investigation without the
written consent of the individual who is the
subject of the report.
Section 611 ensures that the cost accounting standards shall not apply with respect to
a contract under the Federal Employees
Health Benefits Program.
Section 612 allows the use of certain funds
relating to nonforeign area cost-of-living allowances.

PO 00000

Frm 00107

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Section 613 prohibits the expenditure of
funds for abortions under the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program.
Section 614 provides an exemption from
section 613 if the life of the mother is in danger, or the pregnancy is a result of an act of
rape or incest.
Section 615 waives restrictions on the purchase of nondomestic articles, materials, and
supplies in the case of acquisition by the
Federal Government of information technology.
Section 616 prohibits the acceptance by
agencies or commissions funded by this Act,
or by their officers or employees, of payment
or reimbursement for travel, subsistence, or
related expenses from any person or entity
(or their representative) that engages in activities regulated by such agencies or commissions.
Section 617 requires agencies covered by
this Act with independent leasing authority
to consult with the General Services Administration before seeking new office space or
making alterations to existing office space.
Section 618 provides for several appropriated mandatory accounts, where authorizing language requires the payment of funds
for Compensation of the President, the Judicial Retirement Funds (Judicial Officers’ Retirement Fund, Judicial Survivors’ Annuities Fund, and the United States Court of
Federal Claims Judges’ Retirement Fund),
the Government Payment for Annuitants for
Employee Health Benefits and Employee
Life Insurance, and the Payment to the Civil
Service Retirement and Disability Fund. In
addition, language is included for certain retirement, healthcare, and survivor benefits
required by 3 U.S.C. 102 note.
Section 619 prohibits funds for the Federal
Trade Commission to complete the draft report on food marketed to children.
Section 620 provides authority for Chief Information Officers over information technology spending.
Section 621 prohibits funds from being used
in contravention of the Federal Records Act.
Section 622 relates to electronic communications.
Section 623 prohibits funds to be used to
deny Inspectors General access to records.
Section 624 relates to Universal Service
Fund payments for wireless providers.
Section 625 relates to pornography and
computer networks.
Section 626 prohibits funds to pay for
award or incentive fees for contractors with
below satisfactory performance.
Section 627 relates to conference expenditures.
Section 628 prohibits funds made available
under this Act from being used to fund firstclass or business-class travel in contravention of Federal regulations.
Section 629 relates to contracts for public
relations services.
Section 630 relates to advertising and educational programming.
Section 631 relates to statements by grantees regarding projects or programs funded by
this agreement.
Section 632 prohibits funds for the SEC to
finalize, issue, or implement any rule, regulation, or order requiring the disclosure of
political contributions, contributions to taxexempt organizations, or dues paid to trade
associations in SEC filings.
Section 633 requires agencies funded in this
Act to submit to the Committees quarterly
budget reports on obligations.
Section 634 rescinds $300,000,000 from the
Department of the Treasury, Treasury Forfeiture Fund.
Section 635 rescinds unobligated balances
from prior appropriations for the Special Inspector General for Pandemic Recovery.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.029

H14JAPT1

H828

TITLE VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS—GOVERNMENTWIDE
DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES, AND CORPORATIONS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

Section 701 requires agencies to administer
a policy designed to ensure that its workplaces are free from the illegal use of controlled substances.
Section 702 sets specific limits on the cost
of passenger vehicles purchased by the Federal Government with exceptions for police,
heavy duty, electric hybrid, and clean fuels
vehicles and with an exception for commercial vehicles that operate on emerging motor
vehicle technology.
Section 703 allows funds made available to
agencies for travel to also be used for quarters allowances and cost-of-living allowances.
Section 704 prohibits the Government from
employing non-U.S. citizens whose posts of
duty would be in the continental United
States.
Section 705 ensures that agencies will have
authority to pay GSA for space renovation
and other services.
Section 706 allows agencies to use receipts
from the sale of materials for acquisition,
waste reduction and prevention, environmental management programs, and other
Federal employee programs.
Section 707 provides that funds for administrative expenses may be used to pay rent
and other service costs in the District of Columbia.
Section 708 precludes interagency financing of groups absent prior statutory approval.
Section 709 prohibits the use of appropriated funds for enforcing regulations disapproved in accordance with the applicable
law of the United States.
Section 710 limits the amount that can be
used for redecoration of offices under certain
circumstances.
Section 711 permits interagency funding of
national security and emergency preparedness telecommunications initiatives that
benefit multiple Federal departments, agencies, and entities.
Section 712 requires agencies to certify
that a schedule C appointment was not created solely or primarily to detail the employee to the White House.
Section 713 prohibits the use of funds to
prevent Federal employees from communicating with Congress or to take disciplinary or personnel actions against employees
for such communication.
Section 714 prohibits Federal training not
directly related to the performance of official duties.
Section 715 prohibits the use of appropriated funds for publicity or propaganda designed to support or defeat legislation pending before Congress.
Section 716 prohibits the use of appropriated funds by an agency to provide home
addresses of Federal employees to labor organizations, absent employee authorization
or court order.
Section 717 prohibits the use of appropriated funds to provide nonpublic information such as mailing or telephone lists to
any person or organization outside of the
Government without approval of the Committees.
Section 718 prohibits the use of appropriated funds for publicity or propaganda
purposes within the United States not authorized by Congress.
Section 719 directs agencies’ employees to
use official time in an honest effort to perform official duties.
Section 720 authorizes the use of current
fiscal year funds to finance an appropriate

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

share of the Federal Accounting Standards
Advisory Board administrative costs.
Section 721 authorizes the transfer of funds
to GSA to finance an appropriate share of
various Government-wide boards and councils under certain conditions.
Section 722 authorizes breastfeeding at any
location in a Federal building or on Federal
property.
Section 723 permits interagency funding of
the National Science and Technology Council and requires OMB to report on the budget
and resources of the Council.
Section 724 requires identification of the
Federal agencies providing Federal funds and
the amount provided for all proposals, solicitations, grant applications, forms, notifications, press releases, or other publications
related to the distribution of funding to a
State.
Section 725 prohibits the use of funds to
monitor personal information relating to the
use of Federal Internet sites.
Section 726 relates to contraceptive coverage under the Federal Employees Health
Benefits Plan.
Section 727 recognizes that the United
States is committed to ensuring the health
of Olympic, Pan American, and Paralympic
athletes, and supports strict adherence to
anti-doping in sport activities.
Section 728 allows departments and agencies to use official travel funds to participate
in the fractional aircraft ownership pilot
programs.
Section 729 prohibits funds for implementation of OPM regulations limiting detailees
to the legislative branch and placing certain
limitations on the Coast Guard Congressional Fellowship program.
Section 730 restricts the use of funds for
Federal law enforcement training facilities
with an exception for the Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers.
Section 731 prohibits executive branch
agencies from creating or funding prepackaged news stories that are broadcast or
distributed in the United States unless specific notification conditions are met.
Section 732 prohibits funds used in contravention of the Privacy Act, section 552a of
title 5, United States Code, or section 522.224
of title 48 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
Section 733 prohibits funds in this or any
other Act from being used for Federal contracts with inverted domestic corporations
or other corporations using similar inverted
structures, unless the contract preceded this
Act or the Secretary grants a waiver in the
interest of national security.
Section 734 requires agencies to remit to
the Civil Service Retirement and Disability
Fund an amount equal to the OPM average
unit cost of processing a retirement claim
for the preceding fiscal year, to be available
to OPM for the cost of processing retirements of employees who separate under Voluntary Early Retirement Authority or who
receive Voluntary Separation Incentive Payments.
Section 735 prohibits funds to require any
entity submitting an offer for a Federal contract to disclose political contributions.
Section 736 prohibits funds for the painting
of a portrait of an employee of the Federal
Government, including the President, the
Vice President, a Member of Congress, the
head of an executive branch agency, or the
head of an office of the legislative branch.
Section 737 limits the pay increases of certain prevailing rate employees.
Section 738 requires reports to Inspectors
General concerning expenditures for agency
conferences.
Section 739 prohibits the use of funds to increase, eliminate, or reduce a program or
project unless such change is made pursuant
to reprogramming or transfer provisions.

PO 00000

Frm 00108

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Section 740 prohibits OPM or any other
agency from using funds to implement regulations changing the competitive areas under
reductions-in-force for Federal employees.
Section 741 prohibits the use of funds to
begin or announce a study or a public-private competition regarding the conversion
to contractor performance of any function
performed by civilian Federal employees
pursuant to OMB Circular A–76 or any other
administrative regulation, directive, or policy.
Section 742 ensures that contractors are
not prevented from reporting waste, fraud,
or abuse by signing confidentiality agreements that would prohibit such disclosure.
Section 743 prohibits the expenditure of
funds for the implementation of agreements
in certain nondisclosure policies unless certain provisions are included in the policies.
Section 744 prohibits funds to any corporation with certain unpaid Federal tax liabilities unless an agency has considered suspension or debarment of the corporation and
made a determination that this further action is not necessary to protect the interests
of the Government.
Section 745 prohibits funds to any corporation that was convicted of a felony criminal
violation within the preceding 24 months unless an agency has considered suspension or
debarment of the corporation and has made
a determination that this further action is
not necessary to protect the interests of the
Government.
Section 746 relates to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). Given the
need for transparency and accountability in
the Federal budgeting process, the CFPB is
directed to provide an informal, nonpublic
full briefing at least annually before the relevant Appropriations subcommittee on the
CFPB’s finances and expenditures.
Section 747 eliminates automatic statutory
pay increases for the Vice President, political appointees paid under the executive
schedule, ambassadors who are not career
members of the Foreign Service, political appointed (noncareer) Senior Executive Service
employees, and any other senior political appointee paid at or above level IV of the executive schedule.
Section 748 requires reporting Impoundment Control Act violations to Congress.
Section 749 requires that any executive
branch agency notify the Committees if an
apportionment of an appropriation for such
agency is not approved in a timely and appropriate manner.
Section 750 requires the retention of certain records pertaining to certain GAO audits.
Section 751 addresses interagency funding
for the United States Army Medical Research and Development Command, the Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs and the National Institutes of Health
research programs.
Section 752 authorizes the transfer of funds
to GSA to finance an appropriate share of
various information technology projects
among Government-wide boards and councils
under certain conditions.
Section 753 allows agencies receiving funds
in Public Law 117–58 to transfer funds to the
Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine Fisheries Service for the costs of carrying out the responsibilities related to 16
U.S.C. 1531 et seq.
Section 754 declares the inapplicability of
these general provisions to title IV and title
VIII.
TITLE VIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS—DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

Section 801 allows the use of local funds for
making refunds or paying judgments against
the District of Columbia government.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.031

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

Section 802 prohibits the use of Federal
funds for publicity or propaganda designed to
support or defeat legislation before Congress
or any State legislature.
Section 803 establishes reprogramming
procedures for Federal funds.
Section 804 prohibits the use of Federal
funds for the salaries and expenses of a shadow U.S. Senator or U.S. Representative.
Section 805 places restrictions on the use
of District of Columbia government vehicles.
Section 806 prohibits the use of Federal
funds for a petition or civil action that seeks
to require voting rights for the District of
Columbia in Congress.
Section 807 prohibits the use of Federal
funds in this Act to distribute, for the purpose of preventing the spread of bloodborne
pathogens, sterile needles or syringes in any
location that has been determined by local
public health officials or local law enforcement authorities to be inappropriate for
such distribution.
Section 808 concerns a ‘‘conscience clause’’
on legislation that pertains to contraceptive
coverage by health insurance plans.
Section 809 prohibits Federal funds to
enact or carry out any law, rule, or regulation to legalize or reduce penalties associated with the possession, use, or distribution
of any schedule I substance under the Controlled
Substances
Act
or
any
tetrahydrocannabinols derivative. In addition, section 809 prohibits Federal and local
funds to enact any law, rule, or regulation to
legalize or reduce penalties associated with
the possession, use, or distribution of any
schedule I substance under the Controlled
Substances
Act
or
any
tetrahydrocannabinols derivative for recreational purposes.
Section 810 prohibits the use of funds for
abortion except in the cases of rape or incest

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H829

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
or if necessary, to save the life of the mother.
Section 811 requires the CFO to submit a
revised operating budget no later than 30 calendar days after the enactment of this Act
for agencies the CFO certifies as requiring a
reallocation to address unanticipated program needs.
Section 812 requires the CFO to submit a
revised operating budget for the District of
Columbia Public Schools, no later than 30
calendar days after the enactment of this
Act, which aligns schools’ budgets to actual
enrollment.
Section 813 allows for transfers of local
funds between operating funds and capital
and enterprise funds.
Section 814 prohibits the obligation of Federal funds beyond the current fiscal year and
transfers of funds unless expressly provided
herein.
Section 815 provides that not to exceed 50
percent of unobligated balances from Federal
appropriations for salaries and expenses may
remain available for certain purposes. This
provision applies to the District of Columbia
Courts, the Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency, and the District of Columbia Public Defender Service.
Section 816 appropriates local funds during
fiscal year 2027 if there is an absence of a
continuing resolution or regular appropriation for the District of Columbia. Funds are
provided under the same authorities and conditions and in the same manner and extent
as provided for in fiscal year 2026.
Section 817 relates to the District of Columbia ability to use local funds during a
continuing resolution.
Section 818 provides the District of Columbia authority to transfer, receive, and acquire lands and funding it deems necessary
for the construction and operation of inter-

Account

Project Name

Recipient

state bridges over navigable waters, including related infrastructure, for a project to
expand commuter and regional passenger
rail service and provide bike and pedestrian
access crossings.
Section 819 requires each Federal and District government agency appropriated Federal funding in this Act to submit to the
Committees quarterly budget reports on obligations.
Section 820 relates to the increase in maximum award amount for resident tuition
support.
Section 821 specifies that references to
‘‘this Act’’ in this title or title IV are treated as referring only to the provisions of this
title and title IV.
DISCLOSURE OF EARMARKS AND
CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING ITEMS

Following is a list of congressional earmarks and congressionally directed spending
items (as defined in clause 9 of rule XXI of
the Rules of the House of Representatives
and rule XLIV of the Standing Rules of the
Senate, respectively) included in the bill or
this explanatory statement, along with the
name of each House Member, Senator, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner who submitted a request to the Committee of jurisdiction for each item so identified. For each
item, a Member is required to provide a certification that neither the Member nor the
Member’s immediate family has a financial
interest, and each Senator is required to provide a certification that neither the Senator
nor the Senator’s immediate family has a pecuniary interest in such congressionally directed spending item. Neither the bill nor
the explanatory statement contains any limited tax benefits or limited tariff benefits as
defined in the applicable House and Senate
rules.
Amount
($)

Requestor(s)

AK

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Arctic Digital Library Project

Alaska Library Network

100,000

Murkowski

AK

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Voices Across Generations: A Native
Alaska Audio Preservation Project

Alaska Music Archives

285,000

Murkowski

AK

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Voices of Our Ancestors: Preserving
Elders’ Knowledge

Wrangell Cooperative Association

130,000

Murkowski

CO

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

History Preservation and Education

University of Colorado
Colorado Springs

348,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

GA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Supporting the Preservation and
Public Accessibility of United
States Military History in Columbus, Georgia

Columbus State University

175,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

HI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Bishop Museum Digitization

Bishop Museum

1,581,000

Hirono, Schatz

IL

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digitization Initiative

Eureka College

200,000

Durbin

IL

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digitization Initiative

Galena-Jo Daviess County Historical Society

300,000

Durbin

KS

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digitizing and Preserving Senator
Bob Dole’s Archives

Robert J. Dole Institute
of Politics

5,292,000

Moran

LA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Los Isleños Cultural and Coastal
Museum and Community Archive

Nunez Community College

883,000

Cassidy

LA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Louisiana Humanities Disaster Preparedness and Preservation Program

Louisiana Endowment for
the Humanities

750,000

Kennedy

ME

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Northeast Indigenous Archaeology
and Heritage Science Center
Record Digitization

University of Maine System

750,000

Collins, King

MI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digital Preservation of the Lansing
Labor News Newspaper

Michigan State University

210,000

Peters, Slotkin

MI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

In Their Own Words: Collecting, Preserving and Celebrating Detroiters’ Oral Histories

Detroit Historical Society

125,000

Slotkin

NJ

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Documenting America250—Education Portal & Programming for
the Foundations of Freedom in
New Jersey

Harriet Tubman Museum
of Cape May

1,000,000

Booker, Kim

NV

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

University of Nevada, Reno—Repository of Tribal Cultural Artifacts

University of Nevada
Reno

442,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00109

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

H830

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Amount
($)

Account

Project Name

Recipient

NV

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Desert Research Institute—Southern
Nevada Historic Preservation
Project

The Desert Research Institute

558,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

NY

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Conducting oral histories

Jazz at Lincoln Center
Inc.

200,000

Schumer

NY

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Long Island Studies Institute

Hofstra University

459,000

Schumer

PA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Digitizing the Battle of Homestead
Foundation Labor History Archives

Battle of Homestead
Foundation

174,000

Fetterman

RI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Preservation and Digitization of
RIBHS Collections

Rhode Island Black Heritage Society

200,000

Reed

VA

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Exploring America’s Routes

America’s Routes

57,000

Kaine, Warner

WI

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

Oneida Language Documentation,
Resource Development, and Community Outreach Program

Skanikulat, Inc.

125,000

Baldwin

AK

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Prevention and Awareness Expansion

AK Fentanyl Response
Project

400,000

Murkowski

MN

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Rice County Youth Substance Use
Disorder Prevention

Community Action Center

140,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

MS

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Rural Youth Mental Health and Substance Abuse Prevention Program

The University of Mississippi

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

NM

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Strategic Prevention Framework

San Juan County Partnership

375,000

Heinrich

NM

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Youth Substance Use Prevention
Education

Capacity Builders Inc.
(CBI)

200,000

Heinrich

RI

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Student Assistance Program: Addressing Youth Mental Health and
Substance Use in Rhode Island
Schools

Coastline EAP, d.b.a.
Rhode Island Student
Assistance Services

2,756,000

Reed

WA

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Safe Yakima Valley Youth Mentoring
Program

Safe Yakima Valley

200,000

Cantwell

WV

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

WV Coalition Support for Substance
Use and Suicide Prevention

West Virginia Hope in
Action Alliance, Inc.

400,000

Capito

WV

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

Adverse Childhood Experiences
(ACEs) and Substance Use (SU)
Mitigation Project

Morgan County Partnership, Inc.

600,000

Justice

AK

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Set Up Shop: Empowering Entrepreneurs in Underserved Communities

Anchorage Community
Land Trust (ACLT)

200,000

Murkowski

AL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Athens State University LaunchBox

Athens State University

205,000

Britt

AL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

University of North Alabama Center
for Innovation

University of North Alabama

5,000,000

Britt

AZ

Small Business Administration (SBA)

City of Phoenix Start-Up Commercialization Accelerator

City of Phoenix

925,000

Gallego, Kelly

CA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Contract Ready LA

City of Los Angeles

1,000,000

Padilla

CA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

County of Santa Clara—Small Business Resource at the Vietnamese
American Services Center

County of Santa Clara

1,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

CO

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Statewide Collaboration on Resource
Navigation and Education

Good Business Colorado

903,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

CO

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Health Focused Small Business Accelerator

Exponential Impact

256,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

CO

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Small Business Software Procurement

Startup Colorado

493,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Arts Council of Greater New Haven
for Skillbox: Artists as Small
Business Initiative

Arts Council of Greater
New Haven

194,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Entrepreneurial Center at CT State
Northwestern for Small Business
Programming

CT State Northwestern

1,740,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Entrepreneurial Skill Building

Black Business Alliance

1,000,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

KNOX, Inc. for Urban Farmer Small
Business Training

KNOX, Inc.

194,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

CT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

UConn Small Business Development
Center for Digital Transformation
of Connecticut Small Businesses

University of Connecticut
Small Business Development Center

885,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

DE

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Agricultural Business Programming

University of Delaware

494,000

Blunt Rochester, Coons

DE

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Training and Assistance

La Plaza Delaware

300,000

Blunt Rochester, Coons

DE

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Technical Assistance for Local Small
Real Estate Development Businesses

Cinnaire Lending Corporation

206,000

Blunt Rochester, Coons

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Empowering Small Businesses:
Strategies for Growth and Sustainability

Greater Wealth Works,
Inc.

250,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00110

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

Requestor(s)

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H831

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Account

Project Name

Recipient

Amount
($)

Requestor(s)

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Expanding Entrepreneurship for
Georgians with Disabilities

Synergies Work, Inc.

475,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Expanding Entrepreneurship in
Gwinnett County, Georgia

Gwinnett County Public
Library Foundation,
Inc.

334,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

GCSU Bobcat Business Incubator

Georgia College and
State University

313,000

Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Greater Georgia Mobile Tech Unit

Greater Georgia Black
Chamber of Commerce

200,000

Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Increasing Small Business Readiness in Federal Contracting

Georgia Hispanic Chamber of Commerce
Business Development
Center

189,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Madison Village for Advanced Entrepreneurship

Madison Village for Advanced Entrepreneurship

400,000

Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Northeast Georgia Gateway for Business Momentum

Northeast Georgia Black
Chamber of Commerce

64,000

Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

OU Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Center’s Entrepreneurship Empowerment Zone

Oglethorpe University,
Inc.

105,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Small Business Impact Initiative

GABCC Foundation

500,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Federal Contracting
Support

University of Georgia Research Foundation,
Inc.

500,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Incubator and Creative Makerspace

Athens Regional Library
System

198,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Supporting Veteran Small Businesses and Entrepreneurs in
Clayton County, Georgia

Library Foundation of
Clayton County, Inc.

300,000

Ossoff

GA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Supporting Veterans Transitioning to
Entrepreneurship

ATLVets, Inc.

223,000

Ossoff

HI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Hawaii Innovation Center Hilo (Renovation)

University of Hawaii

1,000,000

Hirono

HI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Kauai Technology Hub

Kaua‘i Economic Development Board

124,000

Schatz

HI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Kunia Farmer Service Center

Oahu Resource Conservation and Development Council

904,000

Schatz

HI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Oahu Small Business Development
Initiative

Office of Economic Revitalization

404,000

Schatz

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Comprehensive Small Business Programming Support

Chicago’s Sunshine Enterprises, Inc.

550,000

Duckworth

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Entrepreneur & Business Center Initiative

Joliet Junior College

800,000

Durbin

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Entrepreneurship Center

Chicago Urban League

513,000

Durbin

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Development Initiative

John Wood Community
College

400,000

Durbin

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Educational Initiative

Rock Valley College

800,000

Durbin

IL

Small Business Administration (SBA)

The Aux Evanston: A Small Business
Start Up Center

The Growing Season

450,000

Duckworth

KS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Advanced Manufacturing Innovation Lab

Fort Hays Tech | Northwest

1,744,000

Moran

LA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Greater New Orleans Food and Beverage Incubator

Jefferson Parish Economic Development &
Port District (JEDCO)

3,650,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

MA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Local Small Business Development
and Ecosystem Building

Black Economic Council
of Massachusetts

700,000

Markey, Warren

MA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Regional Community Supported Agriculture

Eastie Farm

1,000,000

Markey, Warren

MA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Venture Studio for Small Businesses
in Western MA

WMLBS.Inc dba Living
Local

300,000

Markey, Warren

MD

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Expanding the Family Child Care
Pipeline

Maryland Family Network

770,000

Van Hollen

MD

Small Business Administration (SBA)

FSC First Level Up Program

Prince George’s Financial
Services Corporation
dba FSC First

244,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

MD

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Kingdom Cares Economic Empowerment and Innovation Center

Kingdom Global Community Development
Coorporation

1,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

MD

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Veteran Institute for Procurement
(VIP)

Montgomery County
Chamber Community
Foundation

2,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

ME

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Child Care Business Lab

Coastal Enterprises, Inc.

400,000

King

ME

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Maine Entrepreneurship Accelerator

MaineStream Finance

225,000

King

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00111

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

H832

Amount
($)

Requestor(s)

Southern Maine Community College

2,237,000

Collins

Operational Support for Northern Initiatives

Northern Great Lakes Initiatives (dba Northern
Initiatives)

500,000

Slotkin

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Supporting the Success of Detroit
Small Business Owners

Invest Detroit Foundation

375,000

Slotkin

MI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Supporting Wayne County Small
Businesses

Wayne State University

1,000,000

Peters, Slotkin

MI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Westside Service Center Renovation
Initiative

City of Grand Rapids

1,803,000

Peters

MN

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Accelerating Small Business Growth
in Greater Minnesota

Latino Economic Development Center

500,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

MN

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Business Technical Assistance Program

Rondo Community Land
Trust

690,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

MN

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Measuring and Addressing Small
Business Financial Health in
Underinvested Communities

Neighborhood Development Center

670,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Bridging the Startup Gap: Creating
Mississippi’s Innovator Hub

Innovate Mississippi

1,495,000

Hyde-Smith

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Mississippi State University for
Childcare and Entrepreneurship
Program

Mississippi State University

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Master Entrepreneurship Volunteer Program

Mississippi State University

750,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rust College Center for Entrepreneurship and Innovation

Rust College

500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Owner Financial Literacy Training Program

Hinds Community College

850,000

Hyde-Smith

MS

Small Business Administration (SBA)

University of Mississippi for Small
Business Technology Program

The University of Mississippi

5,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Child Care Business Development

Monadnock Economic Development Corporation

600,000

Shaheen

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Claremont Small Business Center

Claremont Development
Authority

466,000

Shaheen

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Coos County Outdoor Economy Small
Business Resiliency Support

Coos Economic Development Corporation

200,000

Shaheen

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

NH SBDC Rural Business Advising

University System of New
Hampshire

444,000

Shaheen

NH

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Strafford EDC Technical Assistance
Project

Strafford Economic Development Corporation

300,000

Shaheen

NJ

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Center for South Jersey Economic
Development

Rutgers University-Camden

370,000

Booker

NJ

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small & Diverse Business Training
Platform and Network Development

NJ State Veterans Chamber of Commerce

630,000

Booker

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Business Resource and Innovation
Center (BRIC)

Downtown Taos Inc (Taos
MainStreet)

250,000

Heinrich

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

CABQ Small Business Assistance

City of Albuquerque Economic Development
Department

388,000

Heinrich

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Indian Pueblo Entrepreneur Complex

Indian Pueblo Cultural
Center

1,000,000

Heinrich, Luján

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Key Industry Small Business Accelerators

Women’s Economic SelfSufficiency Team
(WESST)

650,000

Heinrich

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

New Mexico Heritage Entrepreneurial
Academy

Northern Rio Grande National Heritage Area

633,000

Heinrich, Luján

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Small Business Marketing and
Development

The Middle Rio Grande
Economic Development
Association

150,000

Heinrich

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Southern New Mexico Technical Assistance Program

City of Albuquerque

200,000

Luján

NM

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Vida Mejor Capital Navigation Services Center

Vida Mejor Capital

167,000

Heinrich, Luján

NV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Northern Nevada Development Authority—Northern Nevada Center
of Excellence Small Business Incubator

Northern Nevada Development Authority

1,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Global Entrepreneurship Support and
Business Innovation Program Expansion

Yeshiva University

500,000

Schumer

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Human Resource Services Support
for Small Businesses

Staten Island Chamber
of Commerce Foundation Inc.

500,000

Schumer

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business Program

Korean American Civic
Empowerment for
Community

500,000

Schumer

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Account

Project Name

Recipient

ME

Small Business Administration (SBA)

SMCC Education and Training Accelerator Lab

MI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

MI

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00112

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H833

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Account

Project Name

Recipient

Amount
($)

Requestor(s)

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Staten Island Chamber of Commerce—New York City Small
Business Resource Network
(SBRN)

Staten Island Chamber
of Commerce Foundation Inc.

3,000,000

Gillibrand

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Support for Small Businesses in
Central Brooklyn

Bridge Street Development Corporation

446,000

Schumer

NY

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Technical Assistance and Seminars
for Small Businesses Expanding
Online Presence

Asian American Federation, Inc.

500,000

Gillibrand,
Schumer

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Built Oregon Small Business Market
Growth and Support Program

Built Oregon

200,000

Merkley, Wyden

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Native Business Accelerator Program

Native American Youth
Alliance

551,000

Merkley, Wyden

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

North Coast Food Web Facilities

North Coast Food Web

610,000

Merkley, Wyden

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Oregon UAS Accelerator

City of Pendleton

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

OR

Small Business Administration (SBA)

REAP Young Entrepreneurs Program

REAP, Inc.

652,000

Merkley, Wyden

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

New Accelerator Model Project

Innovation Works

750,000

McCormick

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Pennsylvania AI Data Centers & Energy Future

Catalyst Connection

600,000

Fetterman,
McCormick

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Entrepreneurial Technical Assistance Project in Bedford County

Bedford County Development Association

350,000

Fetterman,
McCormick

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

TechVentures Lab Initiative

Ben Franklin Technology
Partners of Northeastern Pennsylvania

4,800,000

McCormick

PA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

University City Science Center’s
Pathways to SBIR/STTR

University City Science
Center

400,000

Fetterman,
McCormick

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Beautiful Day Food Entrepreneurship
Program

Beautiful Day

1,650,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Farm Fresh Small Business Supports

Farm Fresh Rhode Island

700,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Hope & Main Providence

Hope & Main

1,700,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

ONB Small Business Technical Assistance

Olneyville Housing Corporation DBA ONE
Neighborhood Builders

385,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Preparing RI Businesses for Growing
Cybersecurity Needs

RI Commerce Corporation

380,000

Whitehouse

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Providence Revolving Fund Small
Business Assistance Program

Providence Revolving
Fund

125,000

Reed, Whitehouse

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Residential Construction Small Business Supports

Residential Construction
Workforce Partnership
(RCWP)

450,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

RIHub Startup Incubator

RIHub

495,000

Reed, Whitehouse

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Small Business AI Training

Bryant University

1,600,000

Reed

RI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Strategically Growing the Reach of
the Chamber

The Rhode Island Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce

200,000

Reed

VA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Roanoke Biotechnology Ecosystem
Equipment Essential (Project
RBE)

City of Roanoke

1,000,000

Kaine, Warner

VA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rural Prosperity Program @ Virginia
Innovation Accelerator

The Advancement Foundation

943,000

Kaine, Warner

VT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Growing Vermont’s Working Lands
Economy for Small Businesses

Vermont Housing & Conservation Board

750,000

Welch

VT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Southern Vermont Outreach and Employee Ownership Governance Programming

Vermont Employee Ownership Center Inc.

445,000

Sanders

VT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Technical Assistance to Small Businesses for Navigating Changes to
International Trade

Vermont Department of
Economic Development

250,000

Welch

VT

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Vermont Small Business Legal Resilience Project at Vermont Law and
Graduate School

Vermont Law and Graduate School

555,000

Sanders

WA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Shared Food Facility

Seattle Good Business
Network DBA Good
Business Network of
Washington

2,000,000

Murray

WA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

SW Washington Child Care Partnership

Support for Early Learning & Families (SELF)

1,034,000

Murray

WA

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Technical Assistance for Small Business Startup and Entrepreneurship Growth in Washington

Northwest Native Chamber

2,000,000

Cantwell, Murray

WI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Hmong Chamber Innovation Hub

Hmong Wisconsin Chamber of Commerce

1,687,000

Baldwin

WI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Sherman Phoenix Foundation—Phoenix Rise MKE

Sherman Phoenix Foundation, Inc.

959,000

Baldwin

WI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

University of Wisconsin-Stout

UW-Stout Center for Innovation and Development (CID)

202,000

Baldwin

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00113

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

H834

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Account

Project Name

Recipient

Amount
($)

Requestor(s)

WI

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Wisconsin Technology Council

Wisconsin Technology
Council

40,000

Baldwin

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Charleston Area Alliance Small Business Incubator Modernization

Capital Area Development Corporation of
West Virginia dba
Charleston Area Alliance

800,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Façade Improvement Program

City of Fairmont

500,000

Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

FASTER WV Support for Entrepreneurial Development

Advantage Valley Community Development
Corporation

690,000

Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Growing Small Businesses in Man
and Logan

Hatfield McCoy Convention & Visitors Bureau

500,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Marshall University Aviation

Marshall University

2,502,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

PCDA Former Kanawha Manufacturing Building Rehabilitation

Putnam County Development Authority

500,000

Capito

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Public-Private Childcare Cohort
Model—Raleigh County, WV

New River Gorge Regional Development
Authority

750,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Rise Together: Building Businesses
and Community Capacity

WV Hive Network, Inc.

750,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Strengthening Rural Economies
Project

West Virginia Food and
Farm Coalition, Inc.

748,000

Capito

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

Strengthening Small Businesses in
WV

West Virginia Women
Work

500,000

Capito, Justice

WV

Small Business Administration (SBA)

WVDA West Virginia Grown Expansion Through Marketing &
Trainings

West Virginia Department
of Agriculture

371,000

Capito, Justice

AK

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Anchorage Federal Building Roof

General Services Administration

2,500,000

Murkowski

AK

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Juneau Federal Building Repairs

General Services Administration

2,232,000

Murkowski

AL

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Dothan Federal Building and U.S.
Courthouse

United States Courts for
the Middle District of
Alabama

5,000,000

Britt

AL

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Hugo L. Black U.S. Courthouse

U.S. District Court—
Northern District of
Alabama

4,000,000

Britt

DE

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Capital Improvements and Safety
Upgrades—J. Caleb Boggs Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse

General Services Administration

3,014,000

Coons

GA

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Improvements to Richard B. Russell
Building in Atlanta, Georgia

General Services Administration

1,580,000

Ossoff,
Warnock

MS

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Colmer Building—Exterior Tuckpoint
and Caulking

William M. Colmer Federal Building & U.S.
Courthouse

1,088,000

Hyde-Smith

MS

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Lightning Protection System—Russell Courthouse

Dan M. Russell Jr. United
States Courthouse

3,448,000

Hyde-Smith

SD

General Services Administration
(GSA)

Sallyport at Pierre Federal Building

General Services Administration

750,000

Rounds

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00114

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H835

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00115

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/95 here EH140126.001

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00116

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/96 here EH140126.002

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H836

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H837

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00117

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/97 here EH140126.003

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00118

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/98 here EH140126.004

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H838

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H839

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00119

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/99 here EH140126.005

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00120

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/100 here EH140126.006

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H840

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H841

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00121

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/101 here EH140126.007

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00122

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/102 here EH140126.008

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H842

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H843

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00123

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/103 here EH140126.009

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00124

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/104 here EH140126.010

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H844

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H845

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00125

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/105 here EH140126.011

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00126

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/106 here EH140126.012

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H846

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H847

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00127

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/107 here EH140126.013

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00128

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/108 here EH140126.014

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H848

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H849

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00129

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/109 here EH140126.015

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00130

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/110 here EH140126.016

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H850

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H851

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00131

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/111 here EH140126.017

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00132

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/112 here EH140126.018

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H852

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H853

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00133

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/113 here EH140126.019

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00134

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/114 here EH140126.020

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H854

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H855

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00135

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.032

H14JAPT1

Insert graphic folio 2901/115 here EH140126.021

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H856

DIVISION B—NATIONAL SECURITY, DEPARTMENT OF STATE, AND RELATED
PROGRAMS APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
In implementing this agreement, Federal
agencies, commissions, and other entities
are directed to comply with the directives,
reporting requirements, and instructions
contained in H. Rept. 119–217 (House report)
accompanying H.R. 4779 (House bill) as
though stated in this explanatory statement,
unless specifically directed to the contrary.
This explanatory statement, while repeating some House report language for emphasis
or clarification, does not negate language in
such report unless expressly provided herein.
Language expressing an opinion or making
an observation in the House report represents the view of such Committee unless
specifically endorsed in this explanatory
statement.
Reports required to be submitted pursuant
to the Act, including reports required by this
explanatory statement and the House report,
may not be consolidated to include responses
to multiple requirements in a single report,
except following consultation with, and approval by, the Committees on Appropriations.
For purposes of this explanatory statement, the term ‘‘the Act’’ means the National Security, Department of State, and
Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2026,
and the term ‘‘prior Acts’’’ means prior Acts
making appropriations for the Department
of State, foreign operations, and related programs.
Federal agencies funded by the Act shall
notify the Committees on Appropriations of
any reprogramming, as required by section
7015 of the Act, at the most detailed level of
the Congressional Budget Justification
(CBJ), the Act, or this explanatory statement.
Congressional notifications submitted by
the heads of the Federal agencies funded in
the Act for funds that are being reallocated
prior to initial obligation or reprogrammed
shall, to the maximum extent practicable,
contain detailed information about the
sources of the funds and why such funds are
no longer needed or intended to be used as
previously justified.
The Secretary of State is directed to submit notifications for the obligation of funds
made available by the Act and prior Acts not
later than 60 days prior to the expiration of
such funds.
Section 7019 of the Act requires that
amounts designated in the respective tables
included in this explanatory statement for
funds appropriated in titles III through V,
including tables in title VII, shall be made
available at not less than the amounts designated, unless otherwise provided for in the
Act, and shall be the basis of the report required by section 653(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (FAA) (653(a) report),
where applicable. In lieu of the funding tables and allocations of funding contained in
the House report, the tables and allocations
contained in this explanatory statement
shall guide agencies, commissions, and other
entities when allocating funds. The Act provides that the amounts designated in the tables shall be made available notwithstanding
the date of the transmission of the 653(a) report.
Proposed deviations from tables in title I
in this explanatory statement are subject to
the regular notification procedures of the
Committees on Appropriations unless an exception or deviation authority is specifically
provided in the Act or this explanatory
statement.
The Secretary of State shall continue to
provide the Committees on Appropriations
electronic copies of all reports, notifications,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

spend plans, and any other documents required by the Act, prior Acts, this and prior
explanatory statements and statements of
managers, the House report, and prior House
and Senate reports.
Notwithstanding authority included in any
provision of the Act shall not be construed
to exclude the requirements of such provision.
Pursuant to section 7016(b) of the Act, any
Federal agency receiving funds made available by the Act shall post on its publicly
available website, in a central location and
in a readily accessible manner, any report
required by the Act not later than 45 days
following the receipt of such report by Congress. Such requirement shall also apply to
prior fiscal year reports. This requirement
does not apply if the head of the applicable
agency determines and reports to the Committees on Appropriations in a transmittal
letter accompanying such report that the
public posting of the report would compromise national security, including the conduct of diplomacy, or the report contains
proprietary or other privileged information,
or if the public posting of the report is specifically exempted in the House report or
this explanatory statement.
For purposes of the Balanced Budget and
Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (Public Law 99–177), with respect to appropriations contained in the Act, the term ‘‘program, project, and activity’’ (PPA) means
any item for which a dollar amount is specified in the Act or this explanatory statement. In addition, the definition of PPA in
section 7023 of the Act shall apply to the accounts listed in that section. In carrying out
any Presidential sequestration, Federal
agencies funded by the Act shall conform to
the definition of PPA described in this paragraph.
In submitting annual CBJs, each Federal
agency funded by the Act shall include detailed information on all available resources,
including estimated prior fiscal year unobligated balances and recoveries, reimbursable
agreements, funds transferred pursuant to
section 632(a) and (b) of the FAA and significant uses of the Economy Act (31 U.S.C.
1535). Agencies that use a Working Capital
Fund (WCF) shall include in CBJs the total
budgetary resources for each office that receives funds from a WCF, and include a table
on WCF resources that will serve as a baseline for reprogramming and transfer purposes. CBJs shall also include estimated
costs and savings from any proposed office or
mission closure or reorganization, addition
or elimination of special envoys and other
senior-level special representatives, and actual prior fiscal year representation and entertainment expenses for each agency where
such expenses are authorized.
Spend plans submitted pursuant to section
7062(b) of the Act shall: (1) include all intended sources of funds made available by
the Act and any other resources, as applicable, for such program; and (2) conform to the
definition of such plan under section
7034(1)(7) of the Act.
Consistent with prior fiscal years, none of
the funds made available by the Act may be
used to send or otherwise pay for the attendance of more than 50 employees of Federal
agencies who are stationed in the United
States at any single international conference
occurring outside the United States, unless
the Secretary of State reports to the appropriate congressional committees at least 5
days in advance that such attendance is important to the national interest. For purposes of this restriction, the term ‘‘international conference’’ means a conference attended by representatives of the United
States Government and of foreign governments, international organizations, or other
stakeholders.

PO 00000

Frm 00136

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The heads of Federal agencies funded by
the Act shall not provide bonuses to government contractors who fail to complete their
contract in a satisfactory manner, including
as a result of scheduling delays or cost overruns.
TITLE I
DEPARTMENT OF STATE AND RELATED
PROGRAMS
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
ADMINISTRATION OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
The agreement includes $12,772,212,000 for
Administration of Foreign Affairs. Of the
total, $5,771,528,000 is for embassy security,
which are allocated according to the following table:

EMBASSY SECURITY
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Account/Program

Budget
Authority

Worldwide Security Protection ........................................
Embassy Security, Construction, and Maintenance ......

3,758,836
2,012,692

Total ......................................................................

5,771,528

DIPLOMATIC PROGRAMS

The agreement includes $9,358,236,000 for
Diplomatic Programs. Funds appropriated by
the Act for activities, bureaus, and offices
under this heading are allocated according to
the following table and subject to sections
7015 and 7062 of the Act:

DIPLOMATIC PROGRAMS
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Category

Budget
Authority

Human Resources ..........................................................
Worldwide Security Protection ...............................
Overseas Programs ........................................................
Diplomatic Policy and Support ......................................
Security Programs ..........................................................
Worldwide Security Protection ...............................

3,987,233
724,204
1,437,707
871,645
3,061,651
3,034,632

Total .............................................................

9,358,236

Bureau/Office
(Includes salary and bureau-managed funds)
Ambassador-at-Large for Arctic Affairs ........................
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor.
Atrocities prevention training ...............................
Democracy fellowship program .............................
Human rights vetting ...........................................
Division for Counter Threat Finance and Sanctions .....
Office of China Coordination .........................................
Office of International Religious Freedom .....................
Office of the Chief Economist .......................................
Office of the Special Envoy for Holocaust Issues .........
Office to Monitor and Combat Anti-Semitism ..............
Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons ..
Office of Special Coordinator for Tibetan Issues ..........

Budget
Authority
2,000
500
800
20,000
10,691
14,475
10,900
1,200
1,500
2,600
23,107
1,000

Anomalous Health Incidents.—Not later than
30 days after the date of enactment of the
Act, the Secretary of State shall consult
with the appropriate congressional committees on the implementation of section 5604 of
the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2026 (Public Law 116–90) regarding exceptions for individuals to receive HAVANA Act payments for qualifying injuries
that took place since September 11, 2001.
Arctic Issues.—The agreement includes not
less than $100,000 to promote cooperation between Arctic nations at the municipal and
community levels. The Secretary of State
shall work with the relevant agency heads to
ensure the appropriate level of funding for
the Arctic Youth Ambassadors program.
The agreement includes not less than
$100,000 to support the next Conference of
Parliamentarians of the Arctic Region
hosted by the United States, including the
participation of individuals from the United
States, as appropriate.
Bureau of Intelligence and Research.—The
agreement includes funds for the Bureau of

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.038

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

Intelligence and Research at levels consistent with, and for the purposes described
in, the classified annex accompanying the
Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2026 (division F of Public Law 119–60),
subject to prior consultation with the Committees on Appropriations.
Columbia River Treaty.—Not later than 30
days after the date of enactment of the Act
and quarterly thereafter until September 30,
2027, the Secretary of State shall brief the
Committees on Appropriations on negotiations between the United States and Canada
and the execution plan for a modernized
agreement, including matters related to
flood control operations, power, and ecological functions.
Department of State Training Programs.—The
agreement includes funding for the Thomas
R. Pickering Foreign Affairs Fellowship and
Charles B. Rangel International Affairs programs as authorized by sections 5134 and 5135
of the National Defense Authorization Act of
Fiscal Year 2026 (Public Law 116–90). The
Secretary of State shall include planned
amounts for such programs in the operating
plan required by section 7062(a) of the Act.
Enhanced Video Analytics.—Not later than
30 days after the completion of the pilot
project described under this heading in the
House report, the Secretary of State shall
submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees detailing the cost, status,
timeline, successes, and any challenges associated with the implementation of the embassy security and video analytics pilot program.
Intercountry Adoption.—The Secretary of
State shall include in the next annual report
on Intercountry Adoptions, as required by
the Intercountry Adoption Act of 2000 (Public Law 106–279): (1) details on the efforts of
the Department of State to increase the accessibility of intercountry adoptions in fiscal year 2026; (2) steps taken by the Bureau
of Consular Affairs to address impediments
to intercountry adoption, especially in countries where American families are in the
process of adoption but such adoptions have
been slowed or blocked; and (3) an assessment of the country-specific technical assistance required to strengthen intercountry
adoption programs in partner countries.
International Child Abduction.—The agreement includes $1,000,000, as authorized, to
carry out the study required by section 202 of
the Sean and David Goldman International
Child Abduction Prevention and Return Act
of 2014 (22 U.S.C. 9122). Not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall submit a report to
the Committees on Appropriations on the
status and timeline of such study.
International Research Security Engagement.—As open science and technology ecosystems are being exploited by countries of
concern to the detriment of United States
interests, the Secretary of State is directed
to continue to support engagements with research institutions, in coordination with
other Federal agencies undertaking similar
initiatives, to improve the security of United
States science and technology research.
Modernizing Diplomatic Security Platforms.—
The Bureau of Diplomatic Security shall
modernize its diplomatic security platform
to enhance post security programs, contracting, procurement, and information reporting, including the enhancement of the
security of the Department of State’s operational networks and buildings.
Plan to Combat Online Holocaust Denial, Distortion, and Antisemitism.—The Special Envoy
to Monitor and Combat Antisemitism and
the Special Envoy on Holocaust Issues, in
consultation with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, are directed to
prioritize efforts with international partners

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H857

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

to address Holocaust denial, distortion, and
antisemitism on social media and artificial
intelligence platforms. Not later than 90
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Special Envoys shall brief the appropriate congressional committees on a plan of
action detailing the ways in which the Department is addressing such issues.
Previously-Obligated Foreign Assistance.—
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, and quarterly thereafter
until September 30, 2027, the Secretary of
State shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing all funds appropriated under titles III and IV of prior
Acts that were obligated during their initial
period of availability, have not expired or
been canceled, but for which the associated
contract, grant, or cooperative agreement
has been terminated. Such report shall be
disaggregated by fiscal year, account, and
operating unit, and include details on the
amounts and purposes of such funds.
Robert Levinson Hostage Recovery and Hostage-taking Accountability Act.—The agreement includes funds for implementation of
the Robert Levinson Hostage Recovery and
Hostage-taking Accountability Act (subtitle
A of title III of Public Law 116–260).
Training.—Consistent with section 7060(g)
of the Act, the agreement includes not less
than $1,000,000 under this heading for training for personnel under Chief of Mission authority on recognizing signs of human trafficking and on the protocols for reporting
such cases.
Vetting.—Not later than 60 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State is directed to submit a report to the
Committees on Appropriations detailing the
personnel and process changes to vetting related to implementing section 620M of the
FAA under the July 2025 reorganization, including details on the allocation of such
funds.
CONSULAR AND BORDER SECURITY PROGRAMS

The agreement includes $513,000,000 for
Consular and Border Security Programs.
Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the Committees on
Appropriations on the information technology modernization strategy for consular
systems, timelines, and costs associated with
modernizing such vital systems.
Visa Wait Times.—The agreement endorses
the report directed under this heading in the
House report and such report should include
the impact of new vetting procedures on visa
wait times, preventing fraud, safeguarding
security interests, the cost of visa operations, and how the Department is
prioritizing the allocation of resources to
posts with high visa wait times, including
providing surge capacity for additional daily
shifts, and the costs associated with such actions.
CAPITAL INVESTMENT FUND

The agreement includes $399,700,000 for
Capital Investment Fund.

EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL EXCHANGE
PROGRAMS

The agreement includes $667,000,000 for
Educational and Cultural Exchange Programs.
Funds under this heading are allocated according to the following table:

EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL EXCHANGES
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Program/Activity

Budget
Authority

Academic Programs
Fulbright Program
Madeleine K. Albright Young Women Leaders Program .............................................
McCain Fellowships .....................................
Special Academic Exchanges
Benjamin Gilman International Scholarship
Program
of which, McCain Scholars ........
of which, South Pacific Scholarships ......................................
Professional and Cultural Exchanges
Special Professional and Cultural Exchanges
J. Christopher Stevens Virtual Exchange .....
Arctic Exchange Program ......................................
Special Initiatives
Pawel Adamowicz Exchange Program .........

1,500
900

700
1,000
5,000
750
1,000

Consultations.—Not less than 30 days prior
to the submission of the operating plan required by section 7062(a) of the Act for funds
appropriated or otherwise made available
under this heading, the Assistant Secretary
of State for the Bureau of Educational and
Cultural Affairs (ECA) shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations on the allocation of funding, program and country
prioritization, and use of independent and
external evaluations.
The operating plan shall include a table
with funding by program consistent with
prior fiscal year operating plans, including
the allocation of any unobligated balances
and recoveries, as well as any planned transfers to this account during fiscal year 2026.
The operating plan shall also include
amounts allocated for each of the programs
and activities detailed in the House report.
The Secretary of State shall consult with
the Committees on Appropriations on the establishment of the Senator Paul Simon
Study Abroad Program, if authorized.
Muskie Fellowships.—The agreement recognizes that the Muskie Fellowship Program
has helped individuals from Eurasia and Central Asia to foster mutual understanding,
build democracy, and encourage the transition to market economies.
REPRESENTATION EXPENSES

The agreement includes $10,000,000 for Representation Expenses, subject to section
7010(e) of the Act.
PROTECTION OF FOREIGN MISSIONS AND
OFFICIALS

The agreement includes $30,890,000 for Protection of Foreign Missions and Officials.
EMBASSY SECURITY, CONSTRUCTION, AND
MAINTENANCE

The agreement includes $2,012,692,000 for
Embassy Security, Construction, and Maintenance. Funds appropriated under this
heading are allocated according to the following table:

OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

The agreement includes $135,550,000 for Office of Inspector General of the Department
of State, of which $6,000,000 is for the Special
Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction.
Realignment of Functions.—The Inspector
General of the Department of State and the
Office of Inspector General in title II shall
coordinate regularly on oversight activities
related to the realignment of functions previously administered under title II of prior
Acts, with the goal of ensuring continuity
and effective implementation on an ongoing
basis.

PO 00000

Frm 00137

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

EMBASSY SECURITY, CONSTRUCTION, AND MAINTENANCE
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Account/Program
Repair, Construction, and Operations ...........................
Worldwide Security Upgrades ........................................
Capital Security Cost Sharing and Maintenance
Cost Sharing Programs ....................................
Compound Security Program ................................
Total, Embassy Security, Construction, and
Maintenance .....................................................

Budget
Authority
812,836
1,199,856
1,118,856
81,000
2,012,692

Accessibility.—The Secretary of State shall
increase funding above fiscal year 2024 levels

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.039

H14JAPT1

H858

for global accessibility projects in fiscal year
2026.
Capital Security Cost Sharing and Maintenance Cost Sharing Programs.—The agreement
includes $1,118,856,000 under this heading, as
well as an additional $186,569,000 in consular
fees, for the Department of State contribution to the Capital Security Cost Sharing
and Maintenance Cost Sharing programs. An
additional $900,937,000 is available from other
agency contributions.
Compound Security Program.—The agreement endorses the directive in the House report concerning the deployment of lightweight thermal/visual surveillance systems
for embassy protection.
Historic Consulate Compound in Chiang Mai,
Thailand.—The agreement includes funds and
supports efforts to preserve the historic
value of the current Consulate compound in
Chiang Mai after its decommissioning. Not
later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall
consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the status of such initiative.
Mail Screening.—The agreement includes
not less than $5,000,000 for mail screening facilities that protect United States interests
at overseas embassies, consulates, and other
diplomatic locations worldwide as directed
in the House report.
Secure Facilities.—The Secretary of State
shall increase the number of secure facilities, including secure communications capabilities, around the world to ensure that
United States foreign policy priorities can be
fully coordinated across all Federal agencies.
EMERGENCIES IN THE DIPLOMATIC AND
CONSULAR SERVICE

The agreement includes $8,885,000 for
Emergencies in the Diplomatic and Consular
Service.
REPATRIATION LOANS PROGRAM ACCOUNT

The agreement includes $2,550,000 for Repatriation Loans Program Account and
$1,000,000 transfer authority under Emergencies in the Diplomatic and Consular Service to support the subsidy cost and a total
loan level of $5,520,137.
PAYMENT TO THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE IN
TAIWAN

The agreement includes $35,964,000 for Payment to the American Institute in Taiwan.
INTERNATIONAL CENTER, WASHINGTON,
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

The agreement includes $745,000 for International Center, Washington, District of Columbia.
PAYMENT TO THE FOREIGN SERVICE
RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY FUND

The agreement includes $60,000,000 for Payment to the Foreign Service Retirement and
Disability Fund.
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
CONTRIBUTIONS TO INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS

The agreement includes $1,389,152,000 for
Contributions to International Organizations, of which $96,240,000 may remain available until September 30, 2027.
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL
PEACEKEEPING ACTIVITIES

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The agreement includes $1,230,667,000 for
Contributions for International Peacekeeping Activities, of which $615,334,000 may
remain available until September 30, 2027.
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSIONS

In addition, for expenses to carry out paragraph (3) of section 5602(b) of the National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
2024 (Public Law 118–31), $12,500,000, to remain available until expended for urgent operations and maintenance needs of the International Outfall Interceptor in Nogales, Arizona.

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Commission/Activity

COMMISSIONS

The agreement includes $18,204,000 for
American Sections, International Commissions, of which $10,881,000 is for the International Joint Commission (IJC), $2,323,000 is
for the International Boundary Commission,
and $5,000,000 is for the North American Development Bank, including to support the recently established Water Resilience Fund.
Transboundary Watershed Management.—
The agreement includes funds at not less
than the prior fiscal year level for the IJC, in
collaboration with the United States interagency working group led by the Office of
Canadian Affairs, to address gaps and limitations in transboundary governance between
British Columbia and Alaska, Washington,
Idaho, and Montana.
INTERNATIONAL FISHERIES COMMISSIONS

The agreement includes $68,570,000 for
International Fisheries Commissions. Funds
appropriated under this heading are allocated according to the following table:

INTERNATIONAL FISHERIES COMMISSIONS
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Budget
Authority

Commission/Activity
Great Lakes Fishery Commission ...................................
Lake Champlain and Lake Memphremagog Basins ...................................................................
Grass Carp ............................................................
Lake Memphremagog Fishery ...............................

PO 00000

Frm 00138

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

52,403
10,000
1,000
500

Budget
Authority

Pacific Salmon Commission ..........................................
International Pacific Halibut Commission .....................
Other Marine Conservation Organizations .....................

5,868
5,300
4,999

Total ......................................................................

68,570

CONSTRUCTION

The agreement includes $78,000,000 for Construction.
Funds appropriated by the Act and prior
Acts are made available to address urgent
water management and water quality improvement programs of the United States
Section of the International Boundary and
Water Commission (USIBWC), including the
rehabilitation and expansion of the South
Bay International Wastewater Treatment
Plant. Not less than 30 days prior to the submission of the operating plan required by
section 7062(a) of the Act for the funds appropriated or otherwise made available under
this heading, the Commissioner of the
USIBWC shall brief the Committees on Appropriations on the scope, timeline, and cost
of such programs and projects.
1944 Water Treaty Assessment.—Not later
than 180 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Commissioner of the USIBWC
shall submit a report to the Committees on
Appropriations with recommendations for
improving existing system storage, water
movement, and deliveries in the regions affected by the 1944 Water Treaty. Such report
shall include the feasibility of constructing
the third international reservoir, including a
timeline and any cost considerations, and
whether the construction of such reservoir
will capture and store water sufficient to
meet the needs of agricultural and municipal
users in the United States.
Sediment Removal.—The agreement includes
funds appropriated under this heading to
prioritize the reduction of sediment, including in areas of the Rio Grande where there
are available lands for disposal. Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Commissioner of the USIBWC
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on funds to be allocated for this
purpose from the Act and prior Acts.
AMERICAN SECTIONS, INTERNATIONAL

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARY AND WATER
COMMISSION, UNITED STATES AND MEXICO

The agreement includes $67,300,000 for Salaries and Expenses, of which $10,095,000 may
remain available until September 30, 2027.

INTERNATIONAL FISHERIES COMMISSIONS—Continued

Funds provided for the Inter-American
Tropical Tuna Commission are included in
the table under Other Marine Conservation
Organizations.
Fisheries Sanctions Evasion.—Not later than
90 days after the date of enactment of the
Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation
with the heads of the other relevant Federal
agencies, shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations on the implementation of Executive Order (EO) 14068, as it relates to Russian Federation-origin seafood
and fish. The report should include: (1) a description of measures that the relevant agencies have developed to ensure compliance
with the EO; (2) ways to improve enforcement capabilities; and (3) information on the
Russian Federation’s efforts, if any, to circumvent any seafood and fish-related sanctions imposed by the United States.
International Fisheries Management Coordination.—The agreement notes that unresolved territorial disputes and recent modifications to the Atlantic Large Whale Take
Reduction Plan have resulted in conflicting
American and Canadian fisheries management measures in the Gulf of Maine, including regulations and conservation practices
that undermine American protections for the
sustainability of stocks. The Secretary of
State shall work with Canadian officials to
develop an agreement that provides for cooperative fisheries management of this unique
area. Not later than 90 days after the date of
enactment of the Act, the Secretary shall
submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations on progress toward, and the details
of, any such agreement.
RELATED AGENCY
UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR GLOBAL MEDIA
INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING OPERATIONS

The agreement includes $643,000,000 for
International
Broadcasting
Operations.
Funds appropriated under this heading are
allocated according to the following table:

INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING OPERATIONS
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Entities/Grantees
USAGM Operations ...........................................................
Voice of America ..............................................................
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty .....................................
Radio Free Asia ................................................................
Middle East Broadcasting Networks ................................
Open Technology Fund .....................................................

Budget Authority
138,000
199,500
112,500
53,500
69,000
40,500

Briefings.—Not later than 30 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, and quarterly
thereafter until September 30, 2027, the
United States Agency for Global Media
(USAGM) Chief Executive Officer (CEO) shall
brief the appropriate congressional committees on the status of agency operations, including staffing, language services, facilities
and real property, transmissions, and other
related issues.
Consultations.—Not less than 30 days prior
to the submission of the operating plan required by section 7062(a) of the Act for funds
appropriated or otherwise made available
under this heading, the USAGM CEO shall
consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the allocation of funding by entity
and prioritization of language services and
audiences, and provide the level of detail
consistent with the USAGM program plan
submitted in fiscal year 2024.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.040

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

Following consultation with the USAGM
CEO, any entity receiving funds made available under this heading shall consult with
the appropriate congressional committees
prior to pausing, terminating, or otherwise
materially altering operations, including the
sale, auction, transfer, or liquidation of assets.
Networks.—The USAGM CEO is directed to
use the expertise of the Office of Cuba Broadcasting to inform programming about Cuba
by other USAGM networks.
BROADCASTING CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS

The agreement includes $9,700,000 for
Broadcasting Capital Improvements.
RELATED PROGRAMS
THE ASIA FOUNDATION
The agreement includes $20,000,000 for The
Asia Foundation.
UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF PEACE
The agreement includes $20,000,000 for
United States Institute of Peace.
CENTER FOR MIDDLE EASTERN WESTERN
DIALOGUE TRUST FUND
The agreement provides $203,000 from interest and earnings from the Center for Middle Eastern-Western Dialogue Trust Fund.
EISENHOWER EXCHANGE FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
The agreement includes $180,000 from interest and earnings from the Eisenhower Exchange Fellowship Program Trust Fund.
ISRAELI ARAB SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM
The agreement includes $117,000 from interest and earnings from the Israeli Arab Scholarship Endowment Fund.
EAST-WEST CENTER
The agreement includes $22,000,000 for
East-West Center.
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR DEMOCRACY
The agreement includes $315,000,000 for National Endowment for Democracy, of which
$210,316,000 shall be allocated in the traditional and customary manner, including for
the core institutes, and $104,684,000 for democracy programs.
OTHER COMMISSIONS
COMMISSION FOR THE PRESERVATION OF
AMERICA’S HERITAGE ABROAD

TITLE II
ADMINISTRATION OF ASSISTANCE
FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT
OPERATING EXPENSES

The agreement includes $111,988,000 for Operating Expenses.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

The agreement includes $62,500,000 for Office of Inspector General.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Inspector General
shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations an oversight plan for the independent agencies under its jurisdiction to be
carried out over the next two fiscal years.
TITLE III
BILATERAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT
GLOBAL HEALTH PROGRAMS

The agreement includes $9,415,775,000 for
Global Health Programs. Funds under this
heading are allocated according to the following table and subject to section 7019 of
the Act:

GLOBAL HEALTH PROGRAMS
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Budget
Authority

Program/Activity
Maternal and Child Health ............................................
Polio ......................................................................
The GAVI Alliance ..................................................
Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus ...........................
Nutrition .........................................................................
Iodine Deficiency Disorder ....................................
Micronutrients .......................................................
of which, Vitamin A .....................................
Vulnerable Children .......................................................
Blind Children .......................................................
HIV/AIDS .........................................................................
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and
Malaria .............................................................
Microbicides ..........................................................
Prevention, Treatment, and Response Initiative
(Section 7058(e)) ..............................................
UNAIDS ..................................................................
Family Planning/Reproductive Health ............................
Global Health Security ...................................................
Malaria ...........................................................................
Tuberculosis ...................................................................
Global TB Drug Facility .........................................
Neglected Tropical Diseases ..........................................
Total .............................................................

915,000
85,000
300,000
2,000
165,000
3,000
33,000
[22,500]
29,925
4,275
5,883,800
1,250,000
45,000
10,000
45,000
523,950
615,605
795,000
378,720
14,400
108,775
9,415,775

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement includes $770,000 for the
Commission for the Preservation of America’s Heritage Abroad, of which $116,000 may
remain available until September 30, 2027.
UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON
INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement includes $4,000,000 for
United States Commission on International
Religious Freedom.
COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN
EUROPE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement includes $3,059,000 for Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
CONGRESSIONAL-EXECUTIVE COMMISSION ON
THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

The agreement includes $2,300,000 for Congressional-Executive Commission on the
People’s Republic of China.
UNITED STATES-CHINA ECONOMIC AND
SECURITY REVIEW COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement includes $4,000,000 for
United States-China Economic and Security
Review Commission.
HOUSE DEMOCRACY PARTNERSHIP
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

The agreement includes $2,300,000 for House
Democracy Partnership.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H859

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Drug Resistant Forms of Infectious Diseases.—The Secretary of State shall brief the
Committees on Appropriations not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act on the scale and potential health security impacts of drug-resistant infectious
diseases overseas.
GAVI Alliance.—The agreement includes
$300,000,000 for a contribution to The GAVI
Alliance for the sixth strategic period and
encourages other donors to increase their
contributions.
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and
Malaria.—The agreement supports the Administration’s pledge of $4,600,000,000 for the
eighth replenishment of the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria
(Global Fund) and includes $1,250,000,000 for
the first installment of such replenishment.
Such funds shall be contributed to the Global Fund on a quarterly basis to the fullest
extent practicable, while leveraging matching contributions received from other
sources. Sufficient unobligated balances
exist from prior Acts to fully fund the first
installment of the eighth replenishment and
to fulfill the United States pledge for the
seventh replenishment, for which the Secretary of State is directed to contribute such
funds to the Global Fund in a timely manner
and which are in addition to funds provided
in the Act for the eighth replenishment.
GHS Contributions.—The agreement includes funds for a United States contribution
to the Pandemic Fund, pursuant to section

PO 00000

Frm 00139

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

5563(i) of the Global Health Security and
International Pandemic, Prevention, Preparedness, and Response Act of 2022 (subtitle
D of title LV of division E of Public Law 117–
263), and funds for a United States contribution to the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, pursuant to section 6501 of
the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117–81), consistent with the fiscal year 2024 level. The
Secretary of State shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations not later
than 45 days after the date of enactment of
the Act regarding the status of such contributions.
Health Service Delivery.—Not later than 90
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Secretary of State shall update the report required under this heading in Senate
Report 118–71 regarding telehealth and other
digital solutions in health service delivery.
Innovation Fund.—The Secretary of State
shall brief the Committees on Appropriations not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of the Act on planned efforts to
support an Innovation Fund and related
health investments, including efforts to ensure partnership with both private companies and non-profit organizations.
Market Access Strategy.—Not later than 90
days after the date of the enactment of the
Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a
strategy to the appropriate congressional
committees for expanding market access for
United States pharmaceuticals, medical devices, and medical equipment related to
child survival, HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis (TB), and global health security in
low and middle income countries, including
through establishing programs to reduce regulatory, procurement, and distribution barriers, and ensure that global health supply
chains comply with United States standards.
Non-communicable Diseases.—Not later than
90 days after the date of enactment of the
Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a
report to the Committees on Appropriations
summarizing how the Department of State’s
global health programs advance countries’
capacity to prevent, diagnose, and treat noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), including the
diagnosis and treatment of severe childhoodonset chronic NCDs.
Nutrition.—The agreement supports effective nutrition interventions and expects not
less than 50 percent of nutrition funding be
devoted to the most cost-effective and evidence-based nutrition interventions, including American-made Ready-to-Use Therapeutic Foods (RUTF); breastfeeding support,
prenatal vitamins, and vitamin A supplementation.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on the nutrition outcomes achieved over the previous fiscal year,
which shall include: (1) the outcomes,
disaggregated by regional bureau, including
nutrition-specific treatment and prevention
interventions on a country-by country basis;
(2) the approximate number of additional
children treated for severe acute r malnutrition and receiving vitamin A supplementation as a result of United States assistance; (3) the approximate number of women
receiving
prenatal
vitamins
and
breastfeeding education and support as a result of such assistance; and (4) a comprehensive accounting of funds expended on procurement and distribution of RUTF. The report should include a valid estimate of funds
expended to achieve each reported result and
a description of the method of estimation
used.
Prevention.—The agreement includes funding to support HIV prevention activities, including to scale-up the use of long-acting

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.041

H14JAPT1

H860

injectable antiretrovirals, to reduce HIV
transmission in vulnerable populations. The
Secretary of State shall rapidly rollout this
intervention through the Global Fund and
bilateral programs and prioritize these technologies in high-burden countries to stem
new HIV infections, particularly among
those most at risk, including young women,
adolescent girls, and orphans, and enable a
more rapid and effective transition toward
country-led ownership of the HIV response.
RUTF.—The agreement endorses the directives under this heading in the House report,
to include the procurement and delivery
costs of such commodities. Not later than 60
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Secretary of State shall submit a report
to the Committees on Appropriations on the
use of RUTF in the prior fiscal year, including the locations and number of beneficiaries
reached.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the feasibility of funding a new
public-private
partnership
intended
to
streamline and scale-up the procurement and
delivery of American-made RUTF and prenatal vitamins.
Transfers.—To achieve the goals set forth
in the September 2025 America First Global
Health Strategy, the agreement supports
continued transfer of funding and collaboration between the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention and the Department of State,
to support functions related to key areas of
collaboration, including: surveillance; laboratory, data, and health information technology systems; clinical service delivery for
programs; and outbreak prevention, detection, and response.
Tuberculosis Report.—Not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall update the report
required under this heading in Senate Report
118–71 regarding TB priority countries.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE

The agreement includes $5,400,000,000 for
International Humanitarian Assistance. The
agreement provides for life-saving humanitarian assistance under a new consolidated
account which includes the funding and authorities previously made available under
International Disaster Assistance and Migration and Refugee Assistance.
Coordination and Oversight Report.—Not
later than 30 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall
submit a report and brief the Committees on
Appropriations on the Department of State’s
plans to effectively program, manage, and
monitor humanitarian assistance funding.
The report shall include: (1) the roles and responsibilities for each bureau responsible for
implementing humanitarian assistance funding, including the proposed staff and mechanisms to monitor and oversee specific
awards; (2) the guidance and criteria each
bureau has been given to assess country and
regional requirements for humanitarian assistance, including specific types of programs and activities that the Secretary has
determined are not eligible for funding; and
(3) the internal process for reporting instances of diversion or loss to the Office of
Inspector General (OIG) and the Committees
on Appropriations, consistent with section
7015(j) of the Act.
Efficacy of Humanitarian Assistance Delivery
Means.—The Secretary of State shall implement a pilot program in three countries of
strategic interest to the United States to assess the efficacy of humanitarian assistance
delivery means, following consultation with
the Committees on Appropriations. Such
countries shall possess local implementation
capacity.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

Global Food Security Transition Report.—Not
later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall
submit to the appropriate congressional
committees a report that includes: (1) a description of the organizational structure,
funding, staffing, and mechanisms to monitor and oversee United States international
food assistance programs transferred to the
Department of State on or after July 1, 2025;
(2) an assessment of current global food insecurity; and (3) actions undertaken by the Department of State to address each emerging
food crisis identified during calendar year
2025, including projected needs, United
States assistance provided, and assistance
provided by other donors.
Spend Plan.—The Secretary of State shall
consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the initial planned allocation of
funds prior to the submission of the initial
spend plan required under this heading. The
spend plan shall include planned obligations
by region, country, program, and type of
support, including but not limited to food,
health, nutrition, shelter, protection, water
and sanitation, third-party monitoring, general contributions, program support, and
other administrative expenses. Subsequent
quarterly spend plans shall include actual
obligations and disbursements from the preceding reporting periods.
UNITED STATES EMERGENCY REFUGEE AND
MIGRATION ASSISTANCE FUND

The agreement includes $100,000,000 for
United States Emergency Refugee and Migration Assistance Fund.
NATIONAL SECURITY INVESTMENT PROGRAMS

The agreement includes $6,766,874,000 for
National Security Investment Programs.
The National Security Investment Programs
account consolidates bilateral economic assistance accounts funded in prior Acts, as described under this heading in the House report. Funds included under this heading to
meet the directive for Africa should be focused on sub-Saharan Africa.
Funds under this heading are allocated according to the following table and subject to
section 7019 of the Act:

NATIONAL SECURITY INVESTMENT PROGRAMS
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Country/Program

Budget Authority

Africa:
Young African Leaders Initiative (YALI) ...............
East Asia and the Pacific:
Cambodia countering PRC programs ...................
Vietnam .................................................................
Europe/Eurasia:
Abducted Children ................................................
BOLD Balkan Young Leaders ................................
Moldova .................................................................
Middle East and North Africa:
Iraq Scholarship Program .....................................
Lebanon Scholarship Programs ............................
Middle East Partnership Initiative ........................
Middle East Regional Cooperation .......................
Near East Regional Democracy ............................
Nita M. Lowey Middle East Partnership for Peace
Act ....................................................................
United States-Israel Development Cooperation ....
Western Hemisphere:
Caribbean Energy Initiative ..................................
Caribbean Economic Growth .................................
Colombia Human Rights .......................................
Dominican Republic ..............................................
Maya Biosphere .....................................................
State Western Hemisphere Regional ....................
Global Programs:
Arctic Council ........................................................
Assistive technology ..............................................
Atrocities prevention .............................................
Combating child marriage ....................................
Family Planning/Reproductive Health ...................
Implementation of Public Law 99–415
Information communications technology training
Leahy War Victims Fund .......................................
Peace process monitoring .....................................
Mobility program ...................................................
Trade capacity building ........................................
Victims of torture ..................................................

16,000
5,000
84,000
015,000
2,000
36,500
10,000
20,000
20,000
7,000
50,000
37,500
3,000
7,000
9,000
15,000
19,000
5,700
65,000
1,000
8,000
3,000
15,000
51,050
4,000
1,000
12,000
3,500
3,000
15,000
9,600

Cybersecurity
Capacity
Building.—The
agreement directs that funds under this

PO 00000

Frm 00140

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

heading be used to strengthen cybersecurity
capabilities in Costa Rica, Guatemala, Paraguay, and Peru to counter cyber threats, particularly from the People’s Republic of
China (PRC).
Directives.—Not later than 45 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, and prior to
the initial obligation of such funds, the Secretary of State shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the use of
funds to implement directives in the table
under this heading.
Emerging Challenges.—Funds under this
heading shall be made available to respond
to emerging challenges overseas and supporting countries transitioning from conflict.
Faith-based Organizations.—The Secretary
of State shall continue to use the faith sector, in conjunction with the public and private sectors, for the delivery of assistance
under this heading and under Global Health
Programs.
Innovation Ventures.—Funds made available under this heading shall be made available for an innovation ventures program at
the Department of State to support earlystage ideas and scale-up proven solutions
that demonstrate cost-effectiveness and
measurable impact on assistance outcomes.
Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on such program.
Marla Fund.—Not later than 45 days after
the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the status of
the Marla Ruzicka Fund for Innocent Victims of Conflict (Marla Fund) and provide a
description of plans to support the Marla
Fund with funds appropriated in the Act.
Peace Accord Implementation and Conflict
Resolution.—The agreement includes funds
for evidence-based programs that assess the
implementation of peace agreements and
peace accords, in support of the Department
of State’s efforts to support peace processes
and conflict resolution globally.
Requirement.—Not later than 120 days after
the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on efforts to provide technical assistance and other support
to communities around the world to preserve
indigenous cultural heritage, including the
preservation and revitalization of endangered languages.
Stoves.—The agreement includes funding
for programs that address health and safety
issues arising from the use of cookstoves.
DEMOCRACY FUND

The agreement includes $205,200,000 for Democracy Fund.
INDEPENDENT AGENCIES
PEACE CORPS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

The agreement includes $410,500,000 for
Peace Corps, of which $7,800,000 is for the Office of Inspector General.
Report.—Not later than 60 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, and every 180
days thereafter until September 30, 2027, the
Director of the Peace Corps shall submit a
report to the appropriate congressional committees on the personnel levels of the domestic and overseas workforce of the Peace
Corps, including United States direct hires,
experts and consultants, and personal services contractors, on an organizational unitby-organizational-unit basis.
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION

The agreement includes $830,000,000 for Millennium Challenge Corporation.
Notifications.—Pursuant to section 7015(a)
of the Act and consistent with the criteria

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.042

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

included in section 610(a) of the Millennium
Challenge Act of 2003 (22 U.S.C. 7709), the
MCC CEO shall notify the appropriate congressional committees before terminating
assistance made available under a compact
or threshold program. Such notifications
shall include: (1) the justification for the
proposed termination, based on the requirements in section 611(a) of 22 U.S.C. 7710; (2)
actions required by MCC, including the
Board of Directors, to effectuate the termination of assistance, and the anticipated
timeline for each; (3) details on the status of
the compact or program, including individual activities, and the impact the termination will have on fulfilling the intended
development objectives; (4) a breakdown of
funding that will be deobligated as a result
of the termination, including any proposed
reprogramming of funds; (5) a summary of
the financial and legal obligations of the
partner country at the time of termination,
including the recipient government’s co-investment and remaining obligations under
the compact or threshold program; and (6)
risks of litigation arising from early contract, employment, and other terminations.
INTER-AMERICAN FOUNDATION
The agreement includes $29,000,000 for
Inter-American Foundation.
UNITED STATES AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
FOUNDATION

The agreement includes $12,000,000 for
United States African Development Foundation.
Oversight and Accountability.—Not later
than 30 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the President of the United States
African Development Foundation (USADF)
shall submit a report to the Committees on
Appropriations detailing the status the
Foundation’s overseas funds and assets. Such
report shall also include a detailed description of mechanisms in place to retain oversight over these funds and assets.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the USADF President
shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees detailing a comprehensive plan to address the recommendations of Government Accountability Office
Report GAO–25–107574, titled ‘‘U.S. African
Development Foundation: Strategic Approach Needed to Mitigate Fraud Risks’’
(September 15, 2025) and Inspector General
Report E–ADF–25–004–M, titled ‘‘U.S. African
Development Foundation: Gaps in Policy and
Guidance Hindered Strategic Partnerships
and Grants Administration’’ (August 28,
2025).
UNITED STATES FOUNDATION FOR NATURAL
SECURITY AND COUNTERTERRORISM

The agreement includes $100,000,000 for
United States Foundation for Natural Security and Counterterrorism.
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE

The agreement includes $30,000,000 for
International Affairs Technical Assistance.
DEBT RESTRUCTURING

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

The agreement includes $52,000,000 for Debt
Restructuring.
TITLE IV
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY ASSISTANCE
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT

The agreement includes $1,400,000,000 for
International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement. Funds for certain countries, programs, and activities under this heading are
allocated according to the following table
and subject to section 7019 of the Act:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H861

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT

NONPROLIFERATION, ANTI-TERRORISM,
DEMINING AND RELATED PROGRAMS

[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]

The agreement includes $870,000,000 for
Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism, Demining
and Related Programs. Funds for certain
programs and activities under this heading
are allocated according to the following
table and subject to section 7019 of the Act:

Budget
Authority

Country/Program/Activity
Atrocities prevention ........................................................
Central America Regional Security Initiative ..................
Costa Rica ..............................................................
Combating Scam Centers in Southeast Asia ..................
Combating wildlife trafficking .........................................
Demand reduction ............................................................
Ecuador ............................................................................
Europe/Eurasia .................................................................
Fighting corruption ..........................................................
Inter-Regional Aviation Support ......................................
Programs to combat illegal mining ................................
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru ........................................
State Western Hemisphere Regional ...............................
Caribbean Basin Security Initiative ........................
Southern Cone .........................................................
Thailand ...........................................................................
Trafficking in persons ......................................................
Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons ....................................................................
of which, child protection compacts .................
of which, modern slavery ...................................
Tunisia .............................................................................
Vietnam ............................................................................

3,000
170,000
40,000
10,000
47,500
20,000
30,000
80,000
25,000
60,000
35,000
20,000
56,000
45,000
11,000
3,500
89,500
76,000
[12,500]
[25,000]
4,000
6,500

Combating Human Trafficking in Latin America and the Caribbean.—The agreement includes $2,500,000 under this heading for partnerships to combat human trafficking in
Latin America and the Caribbean, as described under section 7060 in the House report.
Combating Ritualized Murder.—The agreement includes $2,500,000 under this heading
to combat ritualized murder of children in
West Africa.
Cyber Crime and Intellectual Property
Rights.—The agreement includes funds under
this heading to support capacity building efforts to counter cybercrime, including technical assistance to support partner nation efforts to develop, revise, and implement national laws, policies, and procedures that address cybercrime and strengthen law enforcement and judicial capacity to hold malign
actors accountable.
The Secretary of State is encouraged to coordinate with the United States Attorney
General to increase the local capacity of
criminal justice sectors in partner countries
to investigate and litigate criminal cases, including
through
the
United
States
Transnational and High-Tech Crime Global
Law Enforcement Network (GLEN), to ensure the GLEN and other related partnerships result in adequate global coverage, particularly to combat intellectual property
crime and cybercrime activities.
Fentanyl.—Pursuant to section 7036 of the
Act, the agreement includes not less than
$150,000,000 to counter the flow of fentanyl
and other synthetic drugs, including not less
than the prior fiscal year level from funds
made available under this heading.
Maritime Security.—Consistent with the Department of State’s assessment of additional
funding needs, in addition to funds otherwise
made available for maritime security funded
under this heading, the agreement includes
not less than $20,000,000 for East Asia and Pacific Maritime Law Enforcement programs
and not less than $10,000,000 for South Asia
Maritime Law Enforcement programs. The
agreement also includes $3,000,000 to provide
enhanced maritime domain awareness in
Oceania, to include the provision of data, advanced analytics, and training, to combat
and deter illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing.
Office of Security Coordinator.—Funds appropriated under this heading that are made
available for programs of the Office of the
Security Coordinator, Department of State,
shall be the responsibility of such Security
Coordinator. Not later than 45 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall consult with the Committees
on Appropriations on the use of such funds.

PO 00000

Frm 00141

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

NONPROLIFERATION, ANTI-TERRORISM, DEMINING AND
RELATED PROGRAMS
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Program/Activity

Budget
Authority

International Atomic Energy Agency ................................
Conventional Weapons Destruction .................................
Humanitarian demining ..........................................
of which, Southeast Asia ...................................

95,000
265,000
222,000
[77,000]

Artificial Intelligence Safety and Security Initiative.—The agreement provides $13,000,000
for the Bureau of International Security and
Nonproliferation’s Artificial Intelligence
Safety and Security Initiative.
Conventional Weapons Destruction.—The
agreement includes funds for humanitarian
demining and unexploded ordnance (UXO)
clearance activities in Angola, Cambodia,
Laos, Pacific Islands countries (PICs), Sri
Lanka, Vietnam, and Zimbabwe. The Secretary of State shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the proposed
allocation of funds for humanitarian
demining in fiscal year 2026 prior to submitting the 653(a) report.
PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS

The agreement includes $335,458,000 for
Peacekeeping Operations.
FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT
INTERNATIONAL MILITARY EDUCATION AND
TRAINING

The agreement includes $119,152,000 for
International Military Education and Training.
FOREIGN MILITARY FINANCING PROGRAM

The agreement includes $6,158,397,000 for
Foreign Military Financing Program. Funds
under this heading for certain countries and
programs are allocated according to the following table and subject to section 7019 of
the Act:

FOREIGN MILITARY FINANCING PROGRAM
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Country/Program
Colombia ..........................................................................
Costa Rica .......................................................................
Ecuador ............................................................................
Estonia .............................................................................
Europe/Eurasia .................................................................
Latvia ...............................................................................
Lithuania ..........................................................................
Mongolia ...........................................................................
Morocco ............................................................................
Panama ............................................................................
Thailand ...........................................................................
Vietnam ............................................................................
Western Hemisphere Regional .........................................

Budget
Authority
37,025
10,000
10,000
10,000
100,000
10,000
10,000
3,000
20,000
2,000
10,000
12,000
20,250

Additional
Regional
Maritime
Security
Needs.—Consistent with the Department of
State’s recent assessment of resource levels
necessary to adequately support maritime
security and enhance maritime awareness,
and in addition to funds otherwise made
available for maritime security, of the funds
appropriated under this heading in the Act
and prior Acts not less than $50,000,000 shall
be made available for East Asia and Pacific
regional and bilateral maritime security and
not less than $41,200,000 shall be made available for South Asia regional and bilateral
maritime security.
Burden Sharing.—Not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall submit a report to

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.044

H14JAPT1

H862

the Committees on Appropriations detailing
opportunities to use funds appropriated
under this heading for the advancement of
co-production and other burden sharing initiatives with allies and partners that contribute to strategic deterrence and interoperability, including by: (1) expanding production capacity of high-demand munitions
and weapon systems; and (2) incentivizing
procurement of novel and non-program of
record capabilities. Such report shall include
lessons learned from prior such efforts.
Unallocated Funds.—Not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall submit a report to
the Committees on Appropriations detailing
all funds appropriated in prior Acts under
this heading, or a predecessor account, that
have been obligated into the Foreign Military Sales Trust Fund and are unallocated to
a case as of the date of enactment of the Act.
TITLE V
MULTILATERAL ASSISTANCE
FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND PROGRAMS

The agreement includes $339,000,000 for
International Organizations and Programs.
Funds under this heading should be programmed consistent with the practice of
prior years.
Spend Plan.—Not later than 60 days after
the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a spend plan detailing
the proposed allocation of funds under this
heading and the entities to be funded. Such
funds shall be subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations. Not less than 30 days prior to submission of the spend plan, the Secretary
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the proposed allocation of funds
appropriated under this heading for international organizations and programs, including identification of funding intended to support core contributions.
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY

The agreement includes $150,200,000 for
Global Environment Facility.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

The agreement includes $1,066,184,000 for
Contribution to the International Development Association.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT
FUND

The agreement includes $43,610,000 for Contribution to the Asian Development Fund.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
BANK

The agreement includes $54,649,000 for Contribution to the African Development Bank.
LIMITATION ON CALLABLE CAPITAL
SUBSCRIPTIONS

The agreement includes $8,656,174,624 for
Limitation on Callable Capital Subscriptions.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE EUROPEAN BANK FOR
RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

The agreement includes $87,500,000 for Contribution to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

CONTRIBUTION TO THE INTERNATIONAL FUND
FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

The agreement includes $54,000,000 for Contribution to the International Fund for Agricultural Development.
TREASURY INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
PROGRAMS

The agreement includes $75,000,000 for
Treasury International Assistance Programs.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

TITLE VI
EXPORT AND INVESTMENT ASSISTANCE
EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF THE UNITED STATES
INSPECTOR GENERAL

The agreement includes $8,860,000 for Inspector General for the Export-Import Bank
of the United States, of which $1,329,000 may
remain available until September 30, 2027.
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

The agreement includes $125,000,000 for Administrative Expenses for the Export-Import
Bank of the United States, of which up to
$18,750,000 may remain available until September 30, 2027.
PROGRAM BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS

The agreement includes $20,000,000 for Program Budget Appropriations.
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
FINANCE CORPORATION
INSPECTOR GENERAL

The agreement includes $7,200,000 for Inspector General for the United States International Development Finance Corporation.
Report.—The United States International
Development Finance Corporation (DFC)
CEO shall prioritize and expeditiously work
with the OIG to fill all current OIG vacancies. Concurrent with the fiscal year 2027
President’s Budget Request, the OIG shall
submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing: (1) a list of current vacancies, duration of each vacancy, and impact to OIG’s work resulting from such vacancies; (2) any obstacles to filling these vacancies, including capacity or support issues
on the part of DFC human resources personnel; and (3) a proposed organizational
chart expanding the OIG footprint to conduct appropriate oversight of DFC resources
in light of DFC’s expanded mandate in the
DFC Modernization and Reauthorization Act
of 2025 (title LXXXVII of Public Law 119–60).
CORPORATE CAPITAL ACCOUNT

The agreement includes $983,250,000 for
Corporate
Capital
Account,
including
$243,000,000 for administrative expenses,
which may be paid to the United States
International Development Finance Corporation Program Account.
Account.—The agreement notes that DFC
has sufficient flexibility under this heading
to make equity investments and understands
that DFC is working to operationalize the
Development Finance Corporate Equity Investment Account authorized under section
1421(c) of the BUILD Act of 2018 (division F
of Public Law 115–254), as amended by the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2026 (title LXXXVII of Public Law
119–60). The DFC CEO is directed to expeditiously operationalize all components of the
BUILD Act reauthorization and submit, as
part of its fiscal year 2027 Congressional
Budget Justification, any technical language
changes needed in future appropriations
bills. Any transfers from the Corporate Capital Account into the Equity Investment Account shall be subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations.
Accountability.—The agreement includes
not less than $540,000 to support the work of
the DFC’s Office of Accountability (OA), including funds to support no less than three
full-time equivalent (FTE) staff. Not later
than 45 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the OA Director shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees detailing: (1) the staffing posture of
the OA, including the timeline for, and any
challenges to, onboarding three FTEs; (2) adherence by the OA, DFC, and DFC’s Board of
Directors to the Terms of Reference and
other operational guidelines and procedures

PO 00000

Frm 00142

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

of the OA; (3) how the OA is ensuring projectaffected communities and stakeholders are
adequately informed of the OA’s existence,
services, and methods of contact; and (4) any
DFC internal challenges to, and plans to ensure, the OA’s independence, including with
regards to staffing, budgetary needs, and direct reporting to DFC’s Board of Directors.
The OA Director shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations prior to the submission of such report.
Cancellations.—Concurrent with the submission of the quarterly unobligated balances report required by section 7002 of the
Act, the DFC CEO shall brief the Committees on Appropriations on such report, including details on any cancellations during
the relevant reporting period.
Quarterly Report.—Not later than 45 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, and
quarterly thereafter until September 30, 2027,
the DFC CEO shall submit a report to the
Committees on Appropriations detailing current investments by country and sector,
disaggregated by fiscal year.
Strategic Priorities.—The DFC CEO shall
consult with the Committees on Appropriations concurrent with any meeting held as
part of the Congressional Strategic Advisory
Group established pursuant to section 1413(k)
of the BUILD Act of 2018. Not later than 15
days after completion of the development of
a Strategic Priorities Plan, required by section 1413(1) of such Act, or of any revisions to
such Plan, the DFC CEO shall submit such
Plan or revisions to the appropriate congressional committees.
PROGRAM ACCOUNT

The agreement includes up to $740,250,000
for Program Account transferred from Corporate Capital Account.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
The agreement includes $87,000,000 for
Trade and Development Agency.
TITLE VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 7001. Allowances and Differentials (unchanged)
Section 7002. Unobligated Balances Report (unchanged)
Additional Report.—Not later than November 1, 2026, the Secretary of State shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a
report detailing, by account and program,
project, and activity, balances appropriated
by the Act and prior Acts that were: (1) unobligated and expired at the end of the prior
fiscal year; or (2) obligated within the initial
period of availability but canceled.
Section 7003. Consulting Services (unchanged)
Section 7004. Diplomatic Facilities (modified)
Section 7005. Personnel Actions (unchanged)
Section 7006. Prohibition on Publicity or Propaganda (unchanged)
Section 7007. Prohibition Against Direct Funding for Certain Countries (modified)
Consultation.—The Secretary of State shall
consult with the Committees on Appropriations prior to providing humanitarian assistance to a country listed under this section.
Section 7008. Coups d’État (unchanged)
Report.—Beginning after the date of enactment of the Act, not later than 30 days after
a duly elected head of government is deposed
by military coup d’état or decree, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the
heads of other relevant Federal agencies,
shall jointly submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees detailing:
(1) all United States assistance currently allocated or planned for the applicable country
by account and amount; (2) any such assistance not subject to the restriction in this
section on a program, project, or activity
basis; (3) any notwithstanding authorities

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.045

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

available to continue obligating and expending assistance that is otherwise restricted by
such section, and whether such authorities
will be relied on to provide assistance; and
(4) whether any such restricted assistance
will continue pursuant to the first or second
provisos in subsection (a) or the waiver in
subsection (b). Such report shall be updated
in a timely manner for any policy changes.
Section 7009. Transfer of Funds Authority
(modified)
Pre-obligation
Report
Requirement.—Not
later than 15 days prior to the obligation of
funds for any agreement entered into by the
Department of State with any department,
agency, or instrumentality of the United
States Government to transfer or allocate
funds appropriated by the Act or prior Acts,
the Secretary of State shall submit a report
to the Committees on Appropriations detailing the recipient agency for, purpose for, and
amount of such transfer. Such requirements
shall not apply to: (1) agreements entered
into between any department, agency, or instrumentality funded by the Act or prior
Acts making appropriations for the Department of State, foreign operations, and related programs; (2) funds notified pursuant
to subsection (b)(3); and (3) funds appropriated by the Act under International Humanitarian Assistance and United States
Emergency Refugee and Migration Assistance Fund and under International Disaster
Assistance, Migration and Refugee Assistance, and United States Emergency Refugee
and Migration Assistance Fund in prior Acts.
Section 7010. Prohibition and Limitation on Certain Expenses (modified)
Section 7011. Assistance
Transparency (new)

Effectiveness

and

Independent Accountability Mechanism.—Not
later than 120 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall
submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees detailing a plan to establish an independent accountability mechanism to which external stakeholders can
communicate concerns about adverse impacts resulting from Department of Statefunded programs, projects, and activities,
and through which the Department of State
can respond. Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall brief such committees on the
status of the Department’s effort to develop
such plan.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Localization.—Pursuant
to
subsection
(a)(2)(D), the Secretary of State shall include
in the strategy required by subsection (a)(l)
plans to provide grants, cooperative agreements, and other awards of not more than
$2,000,000 to local, international, and United
States-based implementers that have received less than $5,000,000 from the United
States Government to implement foreign assistance programs over the previous five fiscal years. Departments or centers of educational institutions may be considered individually in determining such eligibility.
Transparency.—Pursuant to subsection (e)
and the Foreign Aid Transparency and Accountability Act of 2016 (Public Law 114–191),
the DFC CEO shall ensure timely, accurate,
and complete reporting of DFC investments
on the ‘‘ForeignAssistance.gov’’ website. Not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the CEO shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on any challenges to such reporting
and a timeline for addressing such challenges.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H863

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

Section 7012. Limitation on Assistance to Countries in Default (unchanged)
Section 7013. Prohibition on Taxation of United
States Assistance (modified)
Section 7014. Availability and Designated Funding Levels (modified)
Section 7015. Notification Requirements (modified)
Congressional Notifications.—Not later than
30 days after the date of enactment of the
Act, and every 30 days thereafter until September 30, 2027, the Secretary of State and
the heads of other Federal agencies funded
by the Act shall each submit a report to the
Committees on Appropriations of all congressional notifications that are pending beyond the required time period for notification as a result of congressional action. Such
report shall identify the relevant congressional notification, the impacted amount
and intended uses of funds, and the relevant
congressional entity or entities.
Guantanamo Bay.—The agreement endorses
the notification requirement concerning individuals detained at United States Naval
Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba included
under this section in the House report.
Notification
Requirements.—Notifications
submitted pursuant to the requirement in
this section shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, include the source year of funds
and the initial purpose of the funding proposed for re-obligation.
Notifications.—Any notification submitted
pursuant to this section with respect to assistance for Burma or South Sudan shall indicate whether the proposed obligation of
funds includes any new program, project, or
activity.
Requirement to Inform.—Pursuant to the
provison in subsection (j), the Secretary of
State shall inform the Committees on Appropriations not later than 10 days prior to the
planned destruction of commodities that are
in the possession of the Department of State
or an implementing partner that have been
purchased with funds made available by the
Act and prior Acts, including a description
and the cost of the commodities to be destroyed, a justification for the destruction,
and a description of efforts made by the
agency or implementing partner to find alternative uses for such commodities.
For the purposes of implementing subsection (j), the term ‘‘promptly inform’’ shall
mean the Secretary of State informs the appropriate congressional committees within 5
days of receiving such information. Additionally, the subsection shall not apply to
instances of a de minimis nature.
Trust Funds.—Notifications submitted pursuant to subsection (g) shall include the information described under this section in the
House report, including the requirement for
administrative agreements to the extent
practicable.
Section 7016. Documents, Report Posting,
Records Management, and Related Cybersecurity Protections (modified)
Section 7017. Use of Funds in Contravention of
this Act (unchanged)
Section 7018. Prohibition on Funding for Abortions and Involuntary Sterilization (unchanged)
Section 7019. Allocations and Reports (modified)
Report on Directives.—Not later than 45
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Secretary of State shall submit a report
to the Committees on Appropriations listing
all funding directives included in the Act and
the tables in this explanatory statement
that fall under Department of State jurisdiction and the bureau or office responsible for
leading on implementation of such directive.
Such list shall be updated and resubmitted
semi-annually until September 30, 2027, to
reflect any changes.

PO 00000

Frm 00143

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Updates to Reports.—Not later than 60 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations updates to the following reports: Department Report Number
006137; Department Report Number 006693;
Department Report Number 006713; Department Report Number 006714; Department Report Number 006732; Department Report
Number 006768; Department Report Number
006774; Department Report Number 006825;
Department Report Number 006837; and Department Report Number 006851.
Section 7020. Multi-Year Pledges (modified)
Section 7021. Prohibition on Assistance to Governments Supporting International Terrorism (unchanged)
Section 7022. Authorization Requirements (unchanged)
Section 7023. Definition of Program, Project,
and Activity (unchanged)
Section 7024. Clarification (modified)
Section 7025. Commerce, Trade and Surplus
Commodities (unchanged)
Section 7026. Separate Accounts (modified)
Section 7027. Eligibility for Assistance (modified)
Section 7028. Promotion of United States Economic Interests (modified)
Commercial Disputes.—The agreement endorses language in the House report regarding commercial disputes between United
States entities and foreign governments. Of
particular concern are withheld payments by
Kuwait’s state-owned entities to United
States firms for completed projects, and expropriation of real property and other illegal
takings by foreign governments. Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall consult
with the Committees on Appropriations on
actions to be taken by the Department of
State to facilitate the timely resolution of
such disputes.
Commercial Initiatives.—The agreement endorses the directives in the House report
under this section.
Section 7029. International Financial Institutions (modified)
Financial Intermediary Funds.—The Secretary of the Treasury should ensure that no
United States contribution to a financial
intermediary fund that Treasury oversees is
used to provide any loan, extension of financial assistance, or technical assistance to the
PRC or to any country or region subject to
comprehensive sanctions by the United
States.
Report.—Not later than 30 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of the Treasury shall submit a report to the
Committees on Appropriations detailing: (1)
the fiscal year 2026 deadlines for payments to
each of the international financial institutions, funds, or organizations funded in title
V of the Act; (2) the date and amount of actual payments to each of the international
financial institutions, funds, or organizations funded in title V of the Act for the last
three fiscal years; and (3) whether any late
payments occurred during the last three fiscal years and the impact of such delays, including the loss of early encashment credits
or other penalties.
Section 7030. Economic Resilience Initiative
(modified)
Geothermal Energy.—Not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall submit a report to
the Committees on Appropriations assessing
opportunities for the United States to support allies and partners, including in the
Indo-Pacific, in the development and deployment of geothermal energy, including to
counter the ability of United States adversaries
to
exploit
partner
energy
vulnerabilities. Such report shall include an

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.046

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H864

assessment detailing: (1) countries and regions in which the development or expansion
of geothermal energy is most beneficial to
United States national security and economic interests; (2) where geothermal energy
is most feasible, based on factors such as existing geothermal production or exploration,
subsurface data, regulatory and economic
conditions, energy demand, and workforce
capacity; and (3) the funding and personnel
resources necessary at the Department of
State to maximize the effectiveness of such
efforts.
Semiconductor Program.—Not later than 90
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Secretary of State shall consult with the
appropriate congressional committees on the
costs and feasibility of establishing a program to expand the capacity of the semiconductor workforce, including in Japan, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Paraguay.
Section 7031. Financial Management, Budget
Transparency, and Anti-Corruption (modified)
Report on Government-to-Government Assistance.—Not later than 45 days after the date
of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of
State shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a report detailing all government-to-government assistance made available during fiscal years 2025 and 2026 with
funds appropriated by the Act and prior
Acts. Such report shall include the recipient
government, amount, and purpose for each
such agreement. The report shall be updated
quarterly until September 30, 2027, to include
any new agreements below the threshold in
the second proviso of subsection (a)(2).
Requirement.—Prior to the initial obligation of funds appropriated by the Act under
title III and made available for technical assistance for the purposes of critical mineral
extraction, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the Secretary of the Interior,
shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees regarding steps that
have been taken or are intended to be taken
to maximize available domestic mining resources for the purposes of extracting critical minerals and components necessary for
United States national security. The Secretary of State shall prioritize partnerships
with the United States private sector in the
provision of such assistance overseas.
Section 7032. Democracy Programs (modified)
Assistance.—Pursuant to subsection (a), the
agreement includes funding for programs
that advance democracy in adversarial, antiAmerican countries, countries whose malign
activities pose a national security threat to
the United States, or countries seeking to
strengthen democratic institutions and processes.
Human Rights.—The Department of State
shall include in its human rights reporting
an assessment of forced organ harvesting and
trafficking in persons for purposes of the removal of organs. In making such assessments, the term ‘‘forced organ harvesting’’
means the removal of one or more organs
from a person by means of coercion, abduction, deception, fraud, or abuse of power or a
position of vulnerability. Reports should also
include, as appropriate, an assessment of the
misuse of artificial intelligence to monitor
and survey the actions of religious minorities in each foreign country.
Press and Digital Freedom.—Not later than
60 days after the date of enactment of the
Act, the Secretary of State shall consult
with the Committees on Appropriations on
how funds appropriated by the Act will be
used to advance press freedom and digital
freedom, consistent with the prohibition on
censorship in section 7068 of the Act.
Prioritization.—Funds made available pursuant to subsection (a) to strengthen min-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

istries and agencies should be prioritized in
countries that demonstrate a strong commitment to the separation of powers, checks
and balances, the rule of law, and credible
electoral processes.
Section 7033. International Religious Freedom
(modified)
Countries of Particular Concern (CPC).—The
Secretary of State shall update the CPC list
annually, and if the situation in a given
country calls for such country to be designated as a CPC for religious freedom prior
to the annual review, the Secretary shall
make the designation and promptly update
the CPC list. If the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom
(USCIRF) recommends a country for CPC
designation in its annual report, and such
country is not designated as a CPC by the
Department of State, the Secretary should
provide the rationale for such action to the
appropriate congressional committees within 30 days of such decision.
Expansion of Activities Report.—The Secretary of State shall submit a report to the
Committees on Appropriations not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act on efforts and opportunities to expand international religious freedom programs, including through roundtables that
bring together individuals of diverse religions and beliefs.
Officials of CPC Designated Countries.—The
Secretary of State shall apply the requirements of section 7031(c) of the Act to officials of foreign governments, and their immediate family members, about whom the
Secretary has credible information have
been involved, directly or indirectly, or tolerated particularly severe violations of religious freedom.
Section 7034. Special Provisions (modified)
Congressional Notifications.—Pursuant to
subsection (1)(2), notifications shall include
the following: (1) the funds proposed to be
obligated, and whether such amounts differ
from amounts previously justified to Congress or contained in a congressional directive; (2) whether such funds are being reprogrammed, and if so, an explanation of why
funds are no longer being used for their
original purposes; and (3) whether the obligation of funds relies on notwithstanding or
other extraordinary authorities, with accompanying details regarding the authority and
purpose.
Program Coordination.—Not later than 90
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Secretary of State shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations on implementation of subsection (c)(4).
Section 7035. Law Enforcement and Security
(modified)
Combat Casualty Care.—In addition to the
report required in the House report regarding combat casualty care and not later than
90 days after the date of enactment of the
Act, the Secretary of State shall consult
with the Committees on Appropriations on
the strategy of the Department of State to
include such care as a component of security
assistance programs funded by the Act.
Conventional Arms Transfer Policy Oversight.—Funds made available pursuant to
subsection (a)(5) shall be used to increase
staffing and resources to enable the efficient
management, modernization, and robust
oversight of United States security assistance programs, including implementation of
United States Conventional Arms Transfer
Policy and related statutory requirements.
Foreign Military Sales.—Not later than 180
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Secretary of State shall submit a report
to the Committees on Appropriations that
lists a summary of outstanding factors de-

PO 00000

Frm 00144

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

laying or prohibiting the acceptance of each
case listed under Tab A of the report required by section 36(a) of the Arms Export
Control Act. Such report shall also include a
detailed description of the steps taken during the previous calendar year to streamline
and expedite the foreign military sales process. The Secretary shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations on the scope
of such report.
Loans.—Subsection
(b)(7)
provides
$8,000,000,000 in FMF direct loan authority
and $8,000,000,000 in FMF loan guarantee authority through fiscal year 2027.
Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) and Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing.—Not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the Committees on
Appropriations detailing: (1) all ongoing
MDA and IUU programs undertaken with
funds appropriated by prior Acts during fiscal years 2024 and 2025, disaggregated by fiscal year, account, and bureau; and (2) a plan
to increase funding for MDA and IUU programs in fiscal year 2026, including identification of highest priority strategic gaps in
partner capacity. Such report shall be drafted in consultation with the heads of other
relevant Federal agencies.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization.—Not
later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State, in
coordination with the heads of other relevant Federal agencies, shall submit a report
to the appropriate congressional committees
detailing any engagements the Department
of State has conducted with North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) officials and
government officials from NATO member
countries that explicitly addressed Hawaii’s
exclusion from Article 6 of the North Atlantic Treaty. Such report shall include detailed information on: (1) whether the Department of State has made any efforts to
amend the North Atlantic Treaty to explicitly include Hawaii, including the specific
proposals and nature of the opposition to
such proposals, or an explanation of why no
such effort has been made, including any assurances received from NATO member countries by the United States in lieu of such an
effort; (2) challenges impeding such an
amendment; and (3) any options considered
by NATO member countries or proposed by
the United States short of formal amendment of the North Atlantic Treaty to bolster
deterrence against an attack on Hawaii.
Restricted List.—The Secretary of State
should ensure that no funding provided in
the Act is made available to a foreign institution engaging in problematic activity as
described in section 1286, as amended, of the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115–232). The Secretary of State shall coordinate with the
Secretary of Defense, as appropriate, on the
list of foreign talent programs that pose a
threat to national security.
Vehicles.—Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall brief the Committees on Appropriations on demonstrated security assistance needs of partners and allies relating
to armored vehicles, including mine-resistant ambush protected vehicles and armored
personnel carriers, and opportunities to strategically meet such needs through domestic
production of such vehicles.
Section 7036. Countering the Flow of Fentanyl
and Other Synthetic Drugs (modified)
Comprehensive Programming.—In addition to
funds made available pursuant to subsection
(a), the agreement provides additional funding to support broader counternarcotics, law
enforcement, justice sector, and other programming that advances a comprehensive

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.047

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

approach to combating synthetic drugs, including with respect to disrupting the
fentanyl supply chain and related illicit financial flows and online marketplaces.
PRC-linked Criminal Drug Syndicates.—Not
later than 45 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State, in
consultation with the heads of other relevant Federal agencies, shall submit a report
to the appropriate congressional committees
regarding PRC-linked criminal syndicates or
nationals who may be directly or indirectly
involved in illegal drug and money laundering operations in the United States, including in Maine, California, and Oregon.
The information should include, as relevant,
information on the involvement of officials
of the Government of the PRC and PRClinked syndicates operating in Southeast
Asia.
Section 7037. Palestinian Statehood (unchanged)
Section 7038. Prohibition on Assistance to the
Palestinian Broadcasting Corporation (unchanged)
Section 7039. Assistance for the West Bank and
Gaza (modified)
Section 7040. Limitation on Assistance for the
Palestinian Authority (unchanged)
Section 7041. Middle East and North Africa
(modified)
Abraham Accords Signatories.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall submit
to the appropriate congressional committees
a strategy to expand the historic Abraham
Accords, including providing conventional
arms transfers and transfer of certain defense items to signatories.
Combating Antisemitism and Promoting Tolerance.—The agreement endorses language in
the House report regarding combating antisemitism and promoting tolerance. Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall consult
with the Committees on Appropriations on
Department of State programs to be funded
by the Act to promote tolerance, combat
antisemitism, and foster cross-cultural understanding.
Diplomatic Travel and Support Operations
Facility in Libya.—Not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall submit a report to
the Committees on Appropriations on plans
and a proposed timeline for the transition of
the Diplomatic Travel and Support Operations Facility in Libya to an embassy.
Egypt.—In addition to amounts made available pursuant to subsection (a) for assistance
for Egypt, the agreement includes not less
than $2,000,000 under Nonproliferation, Antiterrorism, Demining and Related Programs
and not less than $2,000,000 under International Military Education and Training
for such assistance.
Pursuant to subsection (a)(4), the Secretary of State shall certify and report to
the appropriate congressional committees on
whether the Government of Egypt is taking
sustained and effective steps to: (1) strengthen the rule of law, democratic institutions,
and human rights in Egypt, including to protect religious minorities and the rights of
women, which are in addition to steps taken
during the previous calendar year for such
purposes; (2) implement reforms that protect
freedoms of expression, association, and
peaceful assembly, including the ability of
civil society organizations, human rights defenders, and the media to function without
interference; (3) hold Egyptian security
forces
accountable,
including
officers
credibly alleged to have violated human
rights; (4) investigate and prosecute cases of
extrajudicial killings and forced disappearances; and (5) reduce the number of political

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H865

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

prisoners, provide detainees with due process
of law, and prevent the intimidation or harassment of American citizens.
Iraq.—The agreement includes funds to
support American-style higher education
student scholarships and institutions in Iraq,
including in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq
(KRI), on an open and competitive basis, following consultation with the Committees on
Appropriations.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall brief the Committees on Appropriations on specific efforts the Department of
State will undertake to encourage the Government of Iraq to meet its KRI budget obligations for 2026.
Israel.—The agreement includes $5,000,000
for historical, archaeological, and cultural
initiatives that strengthen and deepen the
United States-Israel special relationship.
Jordan.—Within the total amounts designated in the Act for assistance for Jordan,
the agreement includes not less than
$10,400,000 under Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism, Demining and Related Programs and
$3,800,000 under International Military Education and Training.
Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall consult with the appropriate congressional committees on humanitarian assistance for Jordan.
Lebanon.—The
agreement
provides
$112,500,000 under title III of the Act for assistance for Lebanon.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations regarding diplomatic facilities in
Lebanon, including the CMR.
Oversight.—Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Inspectors
General with authority to conduct oversight
of programs carried out in the Middle East
shall coordinate and submit their respective
plans to the Committees on Appropriations
for conducting risk-based investigations and
related oversight of United States-funded
implementing
partners,
including
subawards, in the West Bank and Gaza that receive funds appropriated by the Act or prior
Acts. Such plans should focus on, but not be
limited to, reports of material support or the
employment of staff or contractors that are
members of, or are affiliated with, a United
States designated terrorist organization or
have participated in any terrorist act. Such
plans should also focus on, but not be limited
to, ensuring compliance with existing, and
making recommendations to improve, risk
mitigation measures necessary to protect
taxpayer funds, complying with applicable
statutory and award-based provisions, and
ensuring that intended beneficiaries receive
aid in accordance with core humanitarian
principles. If determined to be credible, the
OIGs shall refer any investigative findings,
as appropriate, for potential criminal, civil,
or administrative enforcement remedies.
Syria.—Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees assessing
the treatment of religious and ethnic minorities in Syria, including Christians, Druze,
Alawites, and Kurds, during the prior year,
and whether the Government of Syria has
taken all sufficient actions to ensure protections for religious and ethnic minorities in
Syria.
Funds appropriated under titles III and IV
of the Act and prior Acts shall be made
available to address the humanitarian and
security challenges posed by al-Hol and
other camps in Northeast Syria.
Tunisia.—Funds appropriated under titles
III and IV of the Act shall be made available

PO 00000

Frm 00145

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

for assistance for Tunisia for programs to
support democratic governance and civil society, protect due process of law, and maintain regional stability and security.
Section 7042. Africa (modified)
Coastal West Africa.—The agreement includes funding under National Security Investment Programs and not less than
$10,000,000 under title IV of the Act for assistance to promote regional security and stability in Coastal West Africa. Not later than
90 days after the date of enactment of the
Act, the Secretary of State shall consult
with the Committees on Appropriations on
regional approaches to related challenges
and
opportunities.
Assistance
should
prioritize efforts to counter evolving hybrid
threats and violent extremism, enhance
civil-military relations, improve partner capacity to export training and security regionally, strengthen partner country governance capacity, and drive stability through
economic growth and development.
Democratic Republic of the Congo.—The Secretary of State shall address continuing
atrocities committed against certain ethnic
groups
in
the
DRC,
including
the
Banyamulenge, including by sanctioning responsible individuals and engaging with regional officials.
Nigeria.—The agreement includes conditions
on
assistance
and
program
prioritization for funds made available for
Nigeria to ensure the Government of Nigeria
is taking action to reduce violence in all
areas where it exists and to provide technical support to further such efforts. Funds
should address security, justice, and stabilization programming that protects vulnerable communities and strengthens Nigerian
institutional capacity to prevent and respond to such violence, particularly in the
Middle Belt and northern regions.
For the purposes of the requirements in
subsection (e)(l), the Secretary of State shall
include geographic analysis of the response
to violence, including in the Middle Belt. If
the certification is made, the Secretary of
State is directed to utilize all appropriate security assistance authorities to effectively
partner with the Government of Nigeria to
address counterterrorism threats and other
ongoing challenges there to United States
national security, including through Foreign
Military Sales process enhancements to expedite the delivery of defense articles and
services to Nigeria.
The DFC CEO is directed to assess the feasibility of partnering with the private sector
in Nigeria to support economic development
in the Middle Belt, to sustainably develop its
critical minerals sector, and for other shared
developmental priorities.
The agreement includes sufficient funds to
support Department of the Treasury’s programs and activities that partner with Nigeria to strengthen the integrity of its financial system, safeguard United States national security, and enhance the favorable
balance of trade enjoyed by the United
States.
Pursuant to subsection (e)(3), such audit
shall assess whether such assistance has resulted in measurable and sustained reductions in violence and instability, including
intercommunal conflict, insurgent activity,
and other forms of political, criminal, or religious violence. The audit shall include: (1)
an inventory of funds obligated and expended
by account and implementing agency; (2) an
assessment of monitoring and evaluation
systems used to track impact and outcomes;

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.048

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H866

(3) an evaluation of coordination with Nigerian authorities and other international donors; (4) a review of any unintended consequences of such assistance; and (5) recommendations for improving the effectiveness and oversight of United States assistance in Nigeria with respect to reducing violence and instability.
Not later than 12 months after the date of
enactment of the Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a report containing the findings
and recommendations of the audit.
Peace Agreement.—Pursuant to subsection
(b)(l), the agreement includes $60,000,000 for
the implementation of the June 27, 2025
Peace Agreement Between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Republic of
Rwanda and implementation of: (1) the Regional Economic Integration Framework; (2)
the Agreement on the Operating Procedures
of the Joint Security Coordination Mechanism; and (3) the Concept of Operations for
the Harmonized Plan for Neutralization of
the FDLR and Disengagement of Forces/Lifting of Defensive Measures of Rwanda.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the DFC CEO shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations
on opportunities for the DFC to support the
Agreement.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on assistance provided in support of the Agreement, which
shall be updated on a quarterly basis until
all funds made available by the Act for such
purposes are obligated and expended.
Power Africa.—Not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a report to the
Committees on Appropriations detailing a
strategy for the fiscal year to ensure Department activities are aligned with the Electrify Africa Act of 2015 (Public Law 114–121),
with a focus on expanding access to electricity through support for energy systems
that strengthen utility performance and enable reliable power generation and provision.
The strategy shall be designed to support the
level of power generation necessary to enable entrepreneurial development, market
growth, and the widespread use of essential
modern technologies, including refrigeration, air conditioning, high-speed internet,
and
computing,
each
of
which
is
foundational for advancing health, productivity, and economic development in any
sector.
Republic of Rwanda.—Not later than 45
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Secretary of State shall consult with the
appropriate congressional committees on opportunities for trilateral programming with
the Government of Rwanda on shared priorities in the region, including in Burundi and
the Central African Republic.
Not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on assistance necessary to continue support for the Government of
Rwanda’s education reform efforts.
The agreement includes assistance under
Peacekeeping Operations for support for
Rwanda’s peacekeeping operations in Mozambique.
Sahel.—Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State, in consultation with the heads of
other relevant Federal agencies, shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations on United States assistance for
Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger, which shall
include: (1) United States policy objectives,
and the resourcing of such objectives; (2) resources required to further engage with re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

gional partners in North and West Africa to
address instability in the Sahel; and (3) the
scope and scale of actions by extra-regional
malign actors that increase instability and
violence in the region.
Trade and Investment.—The agreement includes funding for targeted initiatives to
strengthen commercial ties and advance
strategic partnerships between the United
States and countries in Africa, including to
promote economic growth, job creation, and
development in countries in Africa. Funding
should support efforts to enhance access and
commercial engagement between the private
sectors in the United States and countries in
Africa in sectors including energy, critical
minerals, agriculture, information and communications technology, health care, financial services, arts and entertainment, and infrastructure.
Uganda.—The agreement includes not less
than $500,000 for programs to support victims
of acid violence in Uganda, including for
legal and health services and to raise awareness, to be awarded on an open and competitive basis.
United States Embassy in the Republic of the
Congo.—The operating plan required by section 7062(a) of the Act shall prioritize the resource and personnel requirements for operations of Embassy Brazzaville, including
amounts needed for emergency support during crises and evacuations in the Central Africa region, strengthen the bilateral relationship, and address strategic competition
and economic cooperation.
Section 7043. East Asia and the Pacific (modified)
Burma.—For purposes of subsection (a)(l),
‘‘non-lethal assistance’’ shall include equipment and associated training to support: (1)
atrocities prevention; (2) the protection of
civilians from military attack; (3) the delivery of humanitarian assistance; (4) investigations into genocide and human rights violations committed by the Burmese military;
(5) local governance and the provision of
services in areas outside the control of the
Burmese military; and (6) medical trauma
care, supplies, and training.
Countering PRC Influence Fund.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall submit
a comprehensive list to the appropriate congressional committees of programs supported by the Countering PRC Influence
Fund (CPIF) in fiscal years 2024 and 2025, by
country, activity, and amount.
The Secretary of State shall manage CPIF
in a manner consistent with the prior fiscal
year. Not later than 90 days after the date of
enactment of the Act, the Secretary shall
brief the appropriate congressional committees on program evaluation processes for the
Fund, including the feasibility of developing
a strategic impact measurement system to
help prioritize the uses of the Fund. Funds
are allocated according to the following
table and subject to section 7019 of the Act:

COUNTERING PRC INFLUENCE FUND
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Account

Budget Authority

National Security Investment Programs ........................
International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement
Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism, Demining and Related
Programs ...................................................................
Foreign Military Financing Program (Section
7043(b)(5)) ................................................................

245,000
80,000
25,000
50,000

The Secretary of State shall prioritize the
procurement or purchase of computers,
printers, or interoperable videoconferencing
services needed for an office environment in
which the manufacturer, bidder, or any subsidiary or parent company of the manufacturer or bidder of the equipment is not an

PO 00000

Frm 00146

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

entity, or parent company of an entity, in
which the PRC has any ownership stake, including in third-party procurement.
Data Analytics Tools.—The Secretary of
State shall increase the Department of
State’s utilization of advanced data analytics tools to collect and analyze data on
PRC activities, including through the increased use of modem cloud infrastructure
for unclassified and classified systems, the
procurement of commercially available data,
and data science services.
Freely Associated States.—The agreement
endorses language in the House report regarding assistance in the Act for the Freely
Associated States, including to counter PRC
influence in such States, which should be
made available from CPIF.
Indo-Pacific Strategy.—The agreement includes sufficient funds to support the operations of the Department of State in implementing the Indo-Pacific Strategy.
Pacific Islands Countries.—Pursuant to subsection (f), the operating plan submitted by
the Secretary of State pursuant to section
7062 shall include details on the requirements and plans to open, expand, and sustain
United States diplomatic presence and foreign assistance programs in PICs during fiscal year 2026. Such plan shall include: (1)
planned and on-board staffing levels, an organizational chart, and a timeline for recruitment of personnel; (2) the operating
costs and regional support for each post; (3)
an assessment of gaps at post, including
staffing, logistics, facilities, housing, secure
communications capacity, or other requirements needed to support a United States
presence; and (4) options and cost for operating and maintaining dedicated transportation assets for personnel and cargo movement and emergency medical evacuation
services.
Not later than 180 days after the date of
enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees, detailing: (1) levels of
UXO contamination in PICs, on a countryby-country basis; (2) past and current United
States efforts to address such UXO; and (3)
recommendations for future Conventional
Weapons Destruction program support to address UXO in the region.
People’s Republic of China.—None of the
funds made available by the Act shall be
used to implement, administer, carry out,
modify, revise, or enforce any action that directly supports or facilitates forced labor
and other violations of human rights, crimes
against humanity, and genocide in the PRC.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the Committees on
Appropriations assessing how the influence
and impact of PRC global development assistance has evolved during the last calendar
year including funding, public messaging,
participation, and representation in donor
coordination mechanisms, and other activities. Such assessment shall be informed by
input and reporting from United States diplomatic missions.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on the extent of debt
owed to the PRC in key regions of the world.
The content of the report should include a
survey of United States embassies in Asia,
Africa, Eurasia, Latin America, and the Middle East on PRC equity and assets within
their respective countries, and should include the following: (1) an assessment of the
country’s overall debt obligations to the
PRC; (2) a listing of known significant infrastructure projects that are financed by capital provided by the Chinese banking system,
State-owned commercial banks, and Chinese

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.049

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

sovereign wealth funds; and (3) an assessment of which infrastructure projects listed
in the report are projects under the Belt and
Road Initiative. The Secretary shall consult
with the committees prior to initiating the
report.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, and quarterly thereafter
until September 30, 2026, the Secretary of
State shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations, detailing efforts to
eliminate Iran’s illicit oil and petrochemical
exports to the PRC, including the dates on
which the Department of State communicated with the PRC or the Chinese Communist Party about such imports during the
reporting period.
Taiwan.—The agreement endorses language
under this heading in the House report concerning Taiwan guidelines and with respect
to the admission of officials from Taiwan
seeking discussions in the United States
with Federal or state government officials in
accordance with section 221 of Public Law
103–416.
Tibet.—Funds made available by the Act
shall not be used to produce or disseminate
documents, reports, maps, or other materials
that recognize, identify, or otherwise refer to
Tibet, including the Tibet Autonomous Region and other Tibetan autonomous counties
and prefectures, as part of the PRC, until the
Secretary of State reports to the appropriate
congressional committees that the Government of the PRC has reached a final negotiated agreement on Tibet with the Dalai
Lama or his representatives or with democratically-elected leaders of the Tibetan people.
The agreement includes assistance for
Tibet, including Tibetan communities, in coordination with the Central Tibetan Administration (CTA), for: (1) education, shelter for
refugees from PRC persecution, economic development, skills development for the next
generation of Tibetan leaders, and health
programs; (2) cultural preservation, digitalization of historical records, and research
on Tibet; (3) democracy and human rights,
including programs in the PRC to continue
to document the repression of the Tibetan
people; (4) programs to strengthen the capacity of the CTA to democratically govern, including leadership training, financial and
human resource management, cybersecurity,
information technology management, and
outreach, engagement and collaboration
with Tibetan communities; (5) direct budget
support for the CTA, consistent with the requirements of section 7031(a) the Act; (6) activities to build and strengthen cooperative
efforts of the Tibetan diaspora, including to
strengthen advocacy, leadership, and political participation with youth; (7) outreach
and advocacy programs to bring attention to
the Tibetan cause in foreign capitals; and (8)
programs to counter PRC malign influence,
including for information resilience. For
purposes of the Act, the CTA shall be considered the Tibetan government-in-exile.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Section 7044. South and Central Asia (modified)
Pursuant to subsection (a), none of the
funds appropriated by the Act may be made
available for assistance to the Taliban.
Consistent with the prohibition on assistance to the Taliban and United States policy, not later than 30 days after the date of
enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the allocation of funds for programs to support education for Afghan students online and in third countries, including for the American University of Afghanistan, and to protect the rights of women and
girls in Afghanistan.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H867

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Section 7045. Latin America and the Caribbean
(modified)
Argentina.—The agreement endorses the directives on Argentina under this section in
the House report.
Assistance Prioritization.—Pursuant to subsection (a), funds made available by the Act
for countries in Latin America and the Caribbean shall be prioritized for programs that:
(1) address the violence, poverty, corruption,
and other factors that contribute to irregular migration to the United States, including for countries that demonstrate a commitment to offsetting large-scale migration
and combating human trafficking; (2)
counter fentanyl and other narcotics trafficking, including to dismantle illegal armed
groups and drug trafficking organizations;
(3) protect the rights of Indigenous people
and support civil society and other independent institutions; and (4) advance democracy, constitutional order, and human
rights, including for countries that demonstrate commitments to such norms, including by cooperating to counter regional
and global authoritarian threats. Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall consult
with the appropriate congressional committees on the use of funds made available by
the Act and prior Acts to further such priorities. Such consultation shall include detail
on baseline data and metrics used to measure progress on such efforts.
Capacity Building and Assistance.—The
agreement includes funds to support the efforts of governments in Latin America and
the Caribbean to resettle migrants in such
countries, including through policy reforms,
capacity building and technical assistance,
and enhanced community integration and
economic development. The agreement also
includes funds for assistance to communities
in countries supporting, or otherwise impacted by, migrants from other countries in
the region, including from Venezuela.
Central America.—Pursuant to subsection
(b)(l), the agreement includes: $61,500,000 to
combat impunity and corruption, including,
as appropriate, with the offices of Attorneys
General; $70,000,000 for programs to reduce
violence against women and girls; and funds
to support locally-led development in Central America.
Colombia.—The agreement underscores the
enduring and strategic relationship between
the United States and the people of Colombia, including strong support for continued
cooperation with the Colombian Armed
Forces and the Colombian National Police,
whose efforts remain central to advancing
shared security, counternarcotics, and governance objectives.
Pursuant to subsection (c)(1), the Secretary of State shall submit a report to the
appropriate congressional committees on the
status of United States bilateral relations
with the Government of Colombia, including
analysis of how such Government’s current
policies align with United States national interests such as the commitment to rule of
law and countering narcotics.
The agreement includes $25,000,000 under
National Security Investment Programs to
support Afro-Colombian and Indigenous communities in Colombia, including support for
organizations led by these communities.
Pursuant to subsection (c)(2)(B), the Secretary of State shall certify and report on
whether, in Colombia: (1) the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and other judicial authorities, as appropriate, are sentencing perpetrators of gross violations of human rights, including those with command responsibility;
(2) the Government of Colombia is making
progress in reducing threats and attacks
against human rights defenders and other

PO 00000

Frm 00147

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

civil society activists, and judicial authorities are prosecuting those responsible for
such attacks; (3) the Government of Colombia is making progress in protecting AfroColombian and Indigenous communities including respecting their rights and territories; (4) senior military officers credibly
alleged, or whose units are credibly alleged,
to be responsible for ordering, committing,
or covering up extrajudicial killings, or of
committing other gross violations of human
rights, or of conducting illicit surveillance,
are being held accountable; and (5) the Colombian Armed Forces are cooperating fully
with the requirements described in (1)
through (4). Not later than 180 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on: (1) the
extent to which crop eradication and drug
interdiction efforts in Colombia have reduced coca cultivation, production, and trafficking during the previous 12-month period;
(2) the tonnage of seizures of illicit narcotics
and precursors in Colombia during the previous 12-month period; (3) the extent to
which the Government of Colombia has
maintained extradition cooperation with the
United States; and (4) efforts by the Government of Colombia to counter criminal activities near the Darien Gap.
Costa Rica.—The agreement supports enhanced security cooperation, including provision of non-lethal maritime domain awareness assets and expanded cybersecurity cooperation for critical infrastructure defense
and ransomware training. The agreement includes funds to support Costa Rica’s role in
detecting fentanyl precursors and disrupting
illicit financial networks and recommends
prioritization under the Central America Regional Security Initiative.
Cuban Doctors Report Consultation.—Not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall
consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the content and methodology for
the report required in subsection (e).
Facilitating Irresponsible Migration.—For the
purposes of subsection (f), humanitarian assistance for migrants shall not include: (1)
cash cards that are usable in countries other
than where they are provided; (2) legal counselling on the United States asylum process;
or (3) referrals to legal representation in the
United States.
Haiti.—Not later than 15 days prior to the
obligation of funds made available under
title IV of the Act for assistance for Haiti,
the Secretary of State shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations.
The agreement includes $7,500,000 under
National Security Investment Programs for
maternal and neonatal care as described in
the House report. Not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations on the uses of
such funds.
The agreement includes $5,000,000 for nonlethal assistance and operational support for
the Haitian Armed Forces, including equipment and professional training, to be made
available following consultation with the
Committees on Appropriations.
The agreement includes funds to continue
reforestation efforts in Haiti to combat deforestation, support agricultural development, and create economic opportunities for
local communities.
Pursuant to subsection (g)(l), the agreement includes funds under titles III and IV
to improve the administration of justice in
Haiti, including programs to promote judicial independence, security, and capacity as
well as reduce pre-trial detention and eliminate inhumane prison conditions. Successful,
sustainable restoration of security in Haiti

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.050

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H868

requires an effective strategy for ensuring
justice, through appropriate legal channels
that respect human rights, for captured and
former gang members and, when feasible,
their peaceful reintegration into Haitian society.
Illicit Mining.—The agreement includes
$20,000,000 for programs to strengthen crossborder intelligence sharing for joint operations and investigations targeting criminal
networks involved in illegal mining in Colombia, Peru, and Ecuador. Such programs
shall enhance efforts to disrupt money laundering; train and equip regional prosecutors
and judges to prosecute organized crime for
such crimes; combat the supply chain of illegal mining inputs; and bolster asset forfeiture mechanisms to seize proceeds and
equipment tied to illicit mining. The Secretary of State shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations prior to the initial obligation of funds for such purposes.
Migration.—Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing opportunities to deter unlawful migration flows
from reaching the United States by assisting
partner governments in the Western Hemisphere with diplomatic efforts and assistance
programs that enable successful resettlement in host and transit countries. The Secretary shall consult with such committees
prior to the submission of such report regarding its contents.
Organization of American States.—The Secretary of State should consider voluntary
contributions to the Organization of American States for human rights and democracy
programs, consistent with the Organization’s
charter commitments to promote representative democracy and protect human rights.
Paraguay.—The agreement includes funds
under International Narcotics Control and
Law Enforcement to support capacity building efforts to counter cybercrime, including
technical assistance to support partner nation efforts to develop, revise, and implement national laws, policies, and procedures
that address cybercrime and strengthen law
enforcement and judicial capacity to hold
malign actors accountable.
Western Hemisphere Economic Integration.—
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees detailing how efforts
to increase regional economic integration in
the Western Hemisphere will: (1) benefit
United States national interests through opportunities for United States entities to pursue trade and investment; (2) increase trade
and investment between target countries;
and (3) counter efforts by United States adversaries, including the PRC, to expand influence in this region.
Section 7046. Europe and Eurasia (modified)
Abducted Children.—The agreement includes $15,000,000 under National Security Investment Programs to support ongoing efforts to collect, analyze, and preserve evidence related to the forcible abduction and
transfer of children to the Russian Federation. The Secretary of State shall update the
report required under this heading in House
Report 118–146, including amounts and status
of funding programmed for the documentation of Russia’s forcible abduction and deportation of children from neighboring countries.
Balkans.—Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on United
States policy to promote regional stability
and prosperity in the Western Balkans, including through efforts to improve govern-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

ance; oppose malign foreign interference,
promote vigorous United States commercial
diplomacy, including through infrastructure
and energy projects, and expand security cooperation activities, as appropriate. Such report shall include a strategy for the use of
funds made available by the Act and prior
Acts to further such objectives.
Europe, Eurasia, and Central Asia.—Funds
made available by the Act under National
Security Investment Programs for countries
in Europe, Eurasia, and Central Asia shall be
prioritized for countering threats from the
Russian Federation and PRC, including economic coercion and other gray zone tactics.
Security and Cooperation in Europe.—The
agreement includes funds for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) under titles III and IV of the Act to
support United States-led efforts to ensure
that the OSCE fulfills its mission of furthering security in Europe, in consultation
with the Committees on Appropriations.
South Caucasus.—Funds made available by
the Act and prior Acts for assistance for
countries in the South Caucasus shall be
prioritized to promote the strategic interests
of the United States by supporting engagement to enhance regional peace, stability,
integration and connectivity, as well as to
continue robust support for bilateral charters of strategic partnership active as of the
date of enactment of the Act. Such funds
shall be allocated based on the extent to
which the Secretary of State determines the
respective governments of such countries
demonstrate political will to pursue such efforts, and counter the malign influence of
the Russian Federation and other external
actors.
The Secretary of State shall consult with
the appropriate congressional committees
not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of the Act, and quarterly thereafter
until September 30, 2027, on the use of such
funds, and shall consult with the appropriate
congressional committees not less than 30
days prior to the obligation of funds made
available under title IV of the Act for countries in the South Caucasus region.
Funds appropriated by the Act shall be
made available to support civil society and
democracy programming in Georgia at not
less than the fiscal year 2024 level, and funds
appropriated by the Act should only be made
available for the Government of Georgia if
the Secretary determines that such assistance furthers such Government’s realignment toward the United States and European allies and partners.
Section 7047. Countering Russian Influence and
Aggression (modified)
Countering Russian Influence Fund Obligation and Expenditure Report.—Not later than
90 days after the date of enactment of the
Act, and every 90 days thereafter until September 30, 2027, the Secretary of State shall
submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations on obligations and expenditures of
the Countering Russian Influence Fund on a
country and project basis.
Section 7048. United Nations and Other International Organizations (modified)
Accountability Report.—In carrying out the
requirement of subsection (b), the Secretary
of State shall also consider and report on efforts to combat antisemitism.
Not later than 120 days after the date of
enactment of the Act, the Office of Inspector
General for the Department of State, the Office of Inspector General funded under title
II, and the Comptroller General of the
United States shall jointly consult with the
Committees on Appropriations on their collaboration with the investigative bodies at
international organizations and any challenges with information-sharing that has im-

PO 00000

Frm 00148

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

pacted OIG or Government Accountability
Office oversight of United States contributions pursuant to the requirements of this
section.
Briefing.—Not later than 30 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall brief the Committees on Appropriations on the strategy regarding
United States contributions to, and participation in, international organizations and
multilateral peacekeeping missions. The
briefing shall include: (1) a detailed spend
plan for all assessed United States contributions under Contributions to International
Organizations and Contributions for International Peacekeeping Activities; (2) an updated list of arrears and deferred payments
for all such entities and activities; (3) the
process, costs and benefits of a withdrawal
from any such entity or activities, on a caseby-case basis; (4) any penalties associated
with arrears, to include accumulation of arrears and the loss of voting rights; (5) the
impact of arrears on mission performance,
peacekeeping mandates, and United States
national security interests; and (6) a classified intelligence assessment detailing the
impact of arrears as it relates to strategic
competitors.
Oversight Access.—Not later than 60 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall submit a report to
the Committees on Appropriations justifying
any obligation of funds to an international
organization that has not entered into written agreements pursuant to section 7048(h) of
the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2024 (division F of Public Law 118–
47) and the policies and procedures in place
to provide enhanced oversight of such international organization in the absence of such
agreement.
Procurement Reforms and Restrictions.—
Funds appropriated by the Act may not be
obligated by the UN for the procurement of
goods or services from vendors with ties to
the Russian Federation, except when required for health and safety-related activities. Not later than 90 days after the date of
enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall brief the Committees on Appropriations on the plan to advance procurement reforms at the UN, including to eliminate reliance on such vendors.
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall submit
a report to the appropriate congressional
committees identifying each unit of the security forces of a foreign country that has
served in a United Nations peacekeeping operation and for which there is credible information of involvement in sexual exploitation
or abuse. The report shall also describe any
consideration of assistance provided by the
Secretary to the relevant government in support of holding the responsible members of
such unit accountable and preventing future
incidents.
UN Children’s Fund.—The agreement includes funds for the UN Children’s Fund consistent with prior year levels.
Section 7049. War Crimes Tribunal (unchanged)
Section 7050. Internet Freedom (modified)
Section 7051. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (unchanged)
Section 7052. Aircraft Transfer, Coordination,
and Use (modified)
Section 7053. Parking Fines and Real Property
Taxes Owed by Foreign Governments (unchanged)
Section 7054. International Monetary Fund (unchanged)
Section 7055. Extradition (modified)
Section 7056. Enterprise Funds (unchanged)
Enterprise Funds.—Pursuant to subsection
(a), the Secretary of State shall notify the

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.051

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

appropriate congressional committees not
later than 15 days prior to the obligation of
funds made available by the Act for Enterprise Funds. Such notification shall detail
how any such Funds will be managed,
prioritized, monitored and evaluated, and
shall only be submitted following consultation with such committees on such parameters not later than 30 days prior to the submission of such notification. The Secretary
is directed to ensure that any agreement entered into by the Department of State to
support any such Fund shall require the
leadership of such Fund to annually prepare,
and make available to the public on a
website administered by the Fund, a detailed
report on the Fund’s annual activities.
Section 7057. United Nations Population Fund
(unchanged)
Section 7058. Global Health Activities (modified)
Coordination.—The Secretary of State shall
ensure coordination with the United States
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) and other relevant Federal agencies on
HIV/AIDS, global health security, maternal
and child health, and other programs to
strengthen health systems and combat infectious diseases, including to delineate roles
and responsibilities and measure progress.
All partners implementing United States
global health programs shall ensure adequate monitoring and evaluation of all such
programs, including by making funds available for technical advisors, as appropriate.
Not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall consult with the Committees on Appropriations on the status of such coordination,
including details on the specific offices and
staff within the Bureau of Global Health Security and Diplomacy responsible for facilitating such efforts in Washington and at embassies overseas.
Health Workforce and Frontline Healthcare.—
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the Committees on
Appropriations that details: (1) efforts to
track funding for, and measure progress on,
activities to support health care workers in
a consistent and standardized way; (2) the
total funding made available, from all
sources including partner country funds, to
support frontline primary healthcare activities, including training and protection measures for health workers; and (3) a measurable
target for expanding funding for, and delivery of, such frontline healthcare services
within global health program funding in the
next two years.
HIV Positive Pregnant Women.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall submit
a report to the Committees on Appropriations on efforts made to prioritize treatment
for HIV-positive pregnant women to prevent
mother-to-child transmission, including an
estimated number of prevented transmissions supported by such efforts in recent
fiscal years and a description of the method
of estimation used.
Initiative.—Pursuant to subsection (e), the
Prevention, Treatment, and Response Initiative shall support the research, development,
and delivery of vaccines and other prevention technologies, including long-acting
injectable medicines for the prevention and
treatment of HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other
infectious diseases, in support of the September 2025 America First Global Health
Strategy. Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall consult with the Committees
on Appropriations on such Initiative.
Innovation.—The agreement includes funds
for programs and activities to utilize data
and new and emerging technologies, includ-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H869

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ing innovations in prevention and treatment
of malaria such as next-generation vaccines,
monoclonal
antibodies,
improved
diagnostics, and dual-ingredient bed nets, as
well as data-driven early warning systems
and AI-enabled tools to plan and tailor interventions for countries’ unique epidemiological settings in a cost-effective manner.
Medicine Supply Chain Security.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall submit
a report to the appropriate congressional
committees assessing United States dependency on foreign suppliers of pharmaceutical
ingredients, materials, and finished products,
including
identification
of
vulnerabilities and potential points of disruption. Concurrent with the submission of
the report, the Secretary shall submit specific recommendations to strengthen supply
chain transparency, reduce strategic reliance on adversarial nations, and enhance the
long-term security and resilience of the
United States medicine supply.
Multilateral Health Engagement.—Not later
than 90 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall brief
the Committees on Appropriations on the
Administration’s plans, as part of the September 2025 America First Global Health
Strategy, to maintain multilateral health
engagement. The briefing should cover: (1)
multilateral and bilateral frameworks for
sharing data; (2) efforts to ensure the ability
to detect, monitor, and respond to existing
and emerging global health threats, including in non-United States health assistance
countries; (3) efforts to maintain the role of
the United States, including United States
companies, in global supply chains; and (4)
plans to provide technical assistance to governments and other partners responding to
global health challenges.
Transition Strategy.—Pursuant to subsection (d), not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a comprehensive
strategy to guide the structured transition
of PEPFAR-supported programs to countryled ownership, while maintaining the integrity, quality, and outcomes of the global
HIV/AIDS response. Not later than 30 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary shall consult with such committees on the components of such strategy. The
strategy shall be developed in consultation
with: other relevant Federal agencies, including CDC; implementing partners; partner governments at the national and, where
possible, the subnational level; faith- and
community-based organizations; relevant
multilateral partners; and the private sector.
In developing such strategy, the Secretary
shall consider: (1) a phased approach for reducing reliance upon United States bilateral
funding in countries deemed ready for transition, informed by clearly defined, transparent economic and programmatic criteria
benchmarks; (2) the health system readiness
in each country, to be assessed on an annual
basis, including the degree to which partnerled public health systems have the capacity
to provide HIV services and based on jointly
developed agreements that define clear roles
and responsibilities, milestones, and projected
annual
funding
reductions
for
PEPFAR-supported activities; (3) a plan to
coordinate United States Government global
health investments including grants and
loans, the participation of United States development finance institutions, and engagement with multilateral development banks
and international partners to leverage co-financing mechanisms; (4) a framework to sustain the role of faith-based and communitybased service providers; (5) a plan to engage
the private sector as key actors within the

PO 00000

Frm 00149

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

transition strategy; (6) guidance for the
maintenance, integration, and nationalization of data systems used for performance
tracking, oversight, and accountability; (7) a
plan to safeguard personally identifiable information of patients within electronic medical records, laboratory systems, and surveillance systems required by new country
agreements; and (8) post-transition engagement plans outlining how the United States
will continue to partner with countries to
maintain HIV epidemic control, ensure uninterrupted service, safeguard populations at
risk, and protect gains made across health
areas.
In addition to the required strategy for
PEPFAR transition, and to be submitted
concurrent with the submission of such
strategy, the Secretary of State is directed
to submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees outlining the details
of the global health compacts and bilateral
agreements being developed in support of the
September 2025 America First Global Health
Strategy for all programs and activities
funded under Global Health Programs. Such
report shall include funding levels broken
down by disease area and function; transition benchmarks and milestones; government co-investment responsibilities; contingency plans should partner countries struggle to make progress towards agreed upon
health outcomes; and a description of how
the components of the PEPFAR transition
strategy will be applied to non-HIV health
program areas. The Secretary is further directed to submit copies of any new bilateral
global health agreement to the appropriate
congressional committees, including copies
of data sharing agreements and other accompanying documents, no later than 15 days
after any such agreement is signed by United
States and partner officials. Any agreements
signed prior to the date of enactment of the
Act shall be submitted to such committees
not later than 15 days after the date of such
enactment.
Section 7059. Women’s Equality and Empowerment (modified)
Section 7060. Sector Allocations (modified)
Funds for certain programs and activities
under this heading are allocated according to
the following table and subject to section
7019 of the Act:

SECTOR ALLOCATIONS
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Program
Amazon Programs ..........................................................
CARPE ............................................................................
Disability Programs ........................................................
Endangered species .......................................................
Global Crop Diversity Trust ............................................
Lead Exposure ................................................................

Budget
Authority
38,000
34,200
15,000
34,314
4,400
2,280

Conferences.—Funds appropriated by the
Act that are made available to organize or
host international conferences should not be
made available for such conferences in Tier 3
countries, as defined by section 104 of the
Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (Public Law 106–386), unless
the purpose of such conference is to combat
human trafficking or it is in the national interest of the United States, and any such use
of funds shall be subject to prior consultation with the Committees on Appropriations.
Data Collection.—The Department of State
shall ensure that data on suspected human
trafficking cases are disaggregated by sex,
age, geographic location and connectivity to
personnel under Chief of Mission authority
or United States-funded grants, contracts
and agreements, and are recorded to reasonable levels of detail to assist law enforcement, while being cognizant of the rights

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.052

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H870

and privacy of all individuals involved in
suspected cases. Not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State shall report to the appropriate congressional committees on implementation of this requirement.
Deviation Authority.—The deviation authority provided in subsection (i) should be exercised only to address unforeseen or exigent
circumstances, including opportunities to
advance United States foreign policy and development interests that are not aligned
with allocated funding sources.
Early Warning.—The agreement continues
funding to support early warning systems
aimed at preventing and mitigating emerging and emergency food insecurity.
Endangered Species.—Funds designated for
endangered species shall be allocated consistent with prior fiscal years.
Feed the Future Innovation Labs.—Consistent with subsection (e)(l), funds made
available by the Act for Feed the Future Innovation Labs shall be used to establish
partnerships focused on livestock innovation
capacity, research and development of coffee
and cacao crop productivity and their role in
associated supply chains, and biosecurity in
aquaculture, following consultation with the
Committees on Appropriations.
Feed the Future Target Countries.—Not later
than 120 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall submit
a report to the appropriate congressional
committees identifying Feed the Future target countries, consistent with the requirements of the Global Food Security Act of
2016 (Public Law 114–195). Such report shall
include a strategy detailing: how funds appropriated by the Act will be prioritized and
expended for such countries, including a description of planned programs in each country and staffing requirements for successful
implementation and oversight of such programs; and possible implementing partners
and private sector contributors in each country.
Such report shall also detail the ways in
which each country partnership seeks to: (1)
advance the strategic interests of the United
States, including long-term economic interests and private sector investment; (2) address poverty, instability, and child malnutrition;. (3) build on pre-existing partner
government commitment to agricultural investment and related policy reforms; and (4)
facilitate partner country ownership and
graduation from United States assistance.
Food Security Review.—Not later than 120
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Secretary of State, in coordination with
the heads of other relevant Federal agencies,
shall submit a report to the Committees on
Appropriations that assesses: (1) the impact
and effectiveness of coordination across
United States Government-funded emergency and non-emergency food assistance; (2)
gaps in coordination at the headquarters and
field level; and (3) proposed efforts to sequence such programs to enhance lasting
food security.
Higher Education in Countries Impacted by
Economic Crises.—The Secretary of State
shall implement the directive in the second
proviso under subsection (a)(2) in a manner
consistent with prior years.
Higher Education Partnerships.—Funds shall
be made available for new and ongoing partnerships between higher education institutions in the United States and developing
countries focused on building the capacity of
higher education institutions and systems in
such countries at levels consistent with prior
years.
Illegal Logging and Deforestation.—Pursuant
to subsection (b)(2)(C), not less than
$25,000,000 is made available for programs to
address illegal logging and to halt and re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

verse deforestation. Such funds shall be
prioritized for the disruption of illicit financing mechanisms that are utilized by
transnational criminal organizations, terrorist organizations, and other malign actors
to support illegal deforestation and timber
trade.
In addition to amounts provided in this
subsection, the agreement includes funds
under National Security Investment Programs for the improvement of traceability in
commodity supply chains and data collection pertaining to illegal logging and deforestation.
The Secretary of State shall consult with
the Committees on Appropriations not later
than 45 days after the date of enactment of
the Act on plans to address current gaps in
resources and data collection that hinder
traceable and deforestation-free commodity
supply chains and how the Department plans
to utilize funds made available by the Act to
enhance United States Government capacity
to disrupt illicit financing mechanisms pertaining to illegal logging and deforestation,
including the use of funds made available by
this subsection.
Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing.—The agreement includes continued
funding for programs to address IUU fishing,
consistent with fiscal year 2024 levels, including to build the capacity of countries to
comply with seafood import monitoring programs, promote the adoption of sustainable
fisheries management regimes, and continue
coordination with partner countries to expand maritime domain awareness and enforcement of legal fishing practices.
Interagency Partners.—The agreement includes funding for conservation and related
programs supported by interagency implementing partners, including the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service and United
States Forest Service, which shall be transferred to such partners consistent with prior
fiscal years.
Land Use, Management, and Protection.—
Funds made available pursuant to subsection
(b)(3) shall be made available for terrestrial
and marine resources, including to conserve
critical forests, prevent deforestation, and
counter illicit logging and associated economic impacts to global supply chains.
Lead.—The agreement includes funds for
programs to reduce lead poisoning in lowand middle-income countries. Not later than
90 days after the date of enactment of the
Act, the Secretary of State shall consult
with the Committees on Appropriations on
such programs.
Marine Partnerships.—The agreement supports efforts by United States research institutions to partner with marine science researchers in developing countries that are
highly dependent on ocean health and biodiversity.
Multilateral Education Programs.—Pursuant
to subsection (a)(l)(B), the agreement includes funding for the Global Partnership for
Education and Education Cannot Wait, recognizing that these organizations leverage
additional funding from other donors and
complement bilateral efforts to address
international basic education needs.
National Parks.—The Secretary of State
shall implement the directive regarding law
enforcement in national parks and protected
areas as described under this section in Senate Report 118–71.
Plastic Pollution.—Funds made available by
the agreement for marine conservation programs may include technical assistance for
waste management.
Report.—Not later than 120 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on access to
high-quality university education in Latin

PO 00000

Frm 00150

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

America and the Caribbean that includes an
assessment of opportunities for partnerships
to increase such access.
Research Institutions.—The agreement includes funding for programs conducted by
land grant institutions of higher learning,
and the Secretary of State shall continue to
partner with such institutions with specialized capability in agriculture research to assist countries to improve food production.
The Secretary shall establish a partnership
focused on crop improvement research, following consultation with the Committees on
Appropriations.
Scholar Rescue Programs.—Funds appropriated under National Security Investment
Programs shall be made available to support
projects that protect scholars at risk overseas.
Section 7061. Debt-for-Development (modified)
Section 7062. Budget Documents (modified)
Spend Plans.— The spend plans required
pursuant to subsection (b) shall apply to
funds appropriated by the Act, and not subsequent Acts making appropriations for the
Department of State, foreign operations, and
related programs for fiscal year 2026.
Section 7063. Reorganization (modified)
Section 7064. Department of State Matters
(modified)
Application.—Not later than 30 days after
the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the
heads of relevant Federal agencies, shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional
committees that lists any countries for
which assistance is impacted by sections 116
or 502B of the FAA. Such report shall include
a description of the intended purpose,
amount, and recipient of such assistance.
Such report shall further detail any ongoing
provision of such assistance, including a justification for continuing such assistance and
the specific authority utilized to do so. Such
report shall be updated semiannually until
September 30, 2027.
Loan Guarantees.—Not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of the Act, the
Secretary of State shall submit a plan to the
appropriate congressional committees identifying any gaps in capacity regarding administration of a loan guarantee authorized
by the Act and by prior Acts, and a plan to
remedy such gaps.
Personnel.—Not later than 30 days after the
date of enactment of the Act and at the start
of every quarter thereafter until September
30, 2027, the heads of Federal agencies funded
under titles I and II of the Act are each directed to submit a report to the appropriate
congressional committees on the on-board
personnel levels, hiring, and attrition of the
Civil Service, Foreign Service, Limited NonCareer Appointments, Personal Services
Contractors, eligible family members, and
Locally Employed staff workforce, on an operating unit-by-operating-unit basis, by domestic and overseas locations, and fund
source. The first report shall include the onboard personnel levels for the specified categories above as of the date of enactment of
the Act.
Report on Terminated Awards.—Not later
than 45 days after the date of enactment of
the Act, the Secretary of State shall submit
to the Committees on Appropriations a comprehensive report detailing all grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements terminated during the 2025 foreign assistance reviews that remained terminated on January
30, 2026. Such report shall be updated on a
quarterly basis, until September 30, 2027, for
any awards terminated during the prior reporting period. Additionally, each report
shall include for each terminated award the
amount and status of payment for any
amounts owed to the awardee and, as applicable, any impact of such termination on

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.053

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

congressional funding directives. The Secretary shall also include in the report a detailed plan for the closeout of such terminated awards.
Special Envoys and Strategic Missions.—Pursuant to subsection (c)(5) funds appropriated
by the Act shall be made available for operations, travel, and activities, as follows:
$20,000,000 for the Office of the Special Envoy
for the Middle East, of which not less than
$2,000,000 shall be made available for activities in Lebanon, following consultation with
the Committees on Appropriations; $4,500,000
for the Office of the Special Envoy for South
and Central Asian Affairs; and $7,000,000 for
the Office of the Special Envoy for Syria.
The uses of such funds shall be the responsibility of each respective Envoy and such responsibility may not be delegated.
Pursuant to subsection (c)(5), not less than
$15,000,000 of the funds appropriated by the
Act under National Security Investment
Programs shall be made available for a strategic mission fund for support of programs
and activities in targeted countries, including India, Lebanon, Panama, Pakistan, and
Rwanda. Not later than 45 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall consult on the allocation of
such funds, which shall include $5,000,000
each for India and Pakistan. The uses of such
funds shall be the responsibility of each respective Chief of Mission, and such responsibility may not be delegated.
Status of Funds Report.—Not later than 60
days after the date of enactment of the Act,
the Secretary of State shall submit to the
Committees on Appropriations a report on
the status of funds appropriated by the Act
under Educational and Cultural Exchange
Programs, The Asia Foundation, East-West
Center, National Endowment for Democracy,
Global Health Programs, International Humanitarian Assistance, National Security In-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H871

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

vestment Programs, Democracy Fund, Millennium Challenge Corporation, and International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement. Such report shall include for each account the amount that has been: (1) apportioned, including conditions and requirements applicable to the apportionment of
funds; (2) allocated to the applicable operating unit; (3) obligated; and (4) disbursed.
Such report shall be updated on a quarterly
basis until September 30, 2027.
Section 7065. Foreign Assistance Management
(modified)
Section 7066. Stabilization and Development
(modified)
Section 7067. Extension of Consular Fees and
Related Authorities (modified)
Section 7068. Prohibition on Censorship (new)
Requirements.—The agreement includes requirements on efforts to combat misinformation of foreign adversaries and authoritarian
regimes. Not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary
of State shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on how
such programs may affect United States entities and consult with such committees on
justifications for such programs.
Section 7069. Other Matters (modified)
Section 7070. Multilateral Development Banks
(new)
The agreement provides funds and language in the Act to enable a United States
contribution to the twenty-first replenishment of the International Development Association.
The agreement provides language in the
Act to enable the United States to subscribe
to the United States share of a capital increase for the Inter-American Investment
Corporation.
The agreement provides funds and language in the Act to enable the United States

PO 00000

Frm 00151

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

to participate in a general callable capital
increase for the African Development Bank.
The agreement provides language in the
Act to enable the United States to subscribe
to the fourteenth replenishment of the Asian
Development Fund.
Section 7071. America First Opportunity Fund
(new)
The agreement includes $850,000,000 for the
America First Opportunity Fund. Funds
under this section are allocated according to
the following table and subject to section
7019 of the Act:

AMERICA FIRST OPPORTUNITY FUND
[Budget authority in thousands of dollars]
Account
National Security Investment Programs ..........................
International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement ...
Peacekeeping Operations .................................................
Foreign Military Financing Program ................................

Budget
Authority
575,000
100,000
125,000
50,000

Section 7072. Rescissions (modified)
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of State
shall submit a report to the Committees on
Appropriations detailing any programs,
projects, and activities canceled as a result
of the rescission of unobligated balances directed by this section.
DISCLOSURE OF EARMARKS AND
CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING ITEMS

Pursuant to clause 9 of rule XXI of the
Rules of the House of Representatives and
rule XLIV of the Standing Rules of the Senate, neither the bill nor the explanatory
statement contains any congressional earmarks or congressionally directed spending
items, limited tax benefits or limited tariff
benefits as defined in the applicable House
and Senate rules.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.054

H14JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00152

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/194 here EH140126.022

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H872

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H873

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00153

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/195 here EH140126.023

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00154

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/196 here EH140126.024

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H874

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H875

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00155

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/197 here EH140126.025

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00156

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/198 here EH140126.026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H876

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H877

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00157

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/199 here EH140126.027

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00158

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/200 here EH140126.028

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H878

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H879

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00159

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/201 here EH140126.029

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00160

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/202 here EH140126.030

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H880

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H881

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00161

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/203 here EH140126.031

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00162

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/204 here EH140126.032

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H882

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H883

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00163

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/205 here EH140126.033

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00164

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/206 here EH140126.034

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H884

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H885

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00165

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/207 here EH140126.035

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00166

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/208 here EH140126.036

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H886

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H887

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00167

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/209 here EH140126.037

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00168

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/210 here EH140126.038

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H888

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H889

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00169

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/211 here EH140126.039

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00170

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

Insert offset folio 2901/212 here EH140126.040

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H890

January 14, 2026
DIVISION C—OTHER MATTERS
Sec. 101. A funding limitation provision.
f

BILLS PRESENTED TO THE
PRESIDENT
Kevin F. McCumber, Clerk of the
House, reported that on January 12,
2026, the following bills were presented
to the President of the United States
for approval:
H.R. 4446. To amend title 38, United States
Code, to modify the conditions under which
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs is required
to redevelop the individualized vocational
rehabilitation plan for a veteran, and for
other purposes.
H.R. 4323. To provide for the vacating of
certain convictions and expungement of certain arrests of victims of human trafficking.
H.R. 1823. To direct the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Comptroller General of
the United States to report on certain funding shortfalls in the Department of Veterans
Affairs.

Kevin F. McCumber, Clerk of the
House, further reported that on January 13, 2026, the following bill was presented to the President of the United
States for approval:
H.R. 224. To amend section 102(a)(20) of the
Housing and Community Development Act of
1974 to require the exclusion of service-connected disability compensation when determining whether a person is a person of low
and moderate income, a person of low income, or a person of moderate income, and
for other purposes.
f

ADJOURNMENT
Mr. GROTHMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
move that the House do now adjourn.
The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 7 o’clock and 10 minutes
p.m.), under its previous order, the
House adjourned until tomorrow,
Thursday, January 15, 2026, at 9 a.m.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS,
ETC.
Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive
communications were taken from the
Speaker’s table and referred as follows:
EC–2658. A letter from the Chief Regulatory Officer, USCIS, Department of Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Adjustment to Premium
Processing Fees [CIS No.: 2830-25] received
January 12, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on the Judiciary.
EC–2659. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Amendment of VOR Federal Airway V-300; Northcentral United
States [Docket No.: FAA-2025-1159; Airspace
Docket No.: 25-AGL-5] (RIN: 2120-AA66) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2660. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Establishment of United
States Area Navigation (RNAV) Routes Q-190
and T-497, and Amendment of Domestic Very
High Frequency Omnidirectional Range

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H891

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(VOR) Federal Airways V-1, V-70, and V-194;
Eastern United States [Docket No. FAA-20250668; Airspace Docket No.: 24-ASO-34] (RIN:
2120-AA66) received January 9, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2661. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Standard Instrument Approach Procedures, and Takeoff Minimums
and Obstacle Departure Procedures; Miscellaneous Amendments [Docket No.: 31641;
Amdt. No.: 4198] received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2662. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Standard Instrument Approach Procedures, and Takeoff Minimums
and Obstacle Departure Procedures; Miscellaneous Amendments [Docket No.: 31640;
Amdt. No.: 4197] received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2663. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; Airbus SAS Airplanes [Docket No.:
FAA-2025-5390; Project Identifier MCAI-202501470-T; Amendment 39-23220; AD 2025-25-12]
(RIN: 2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2664. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; Leonardo S.p.A. Helicopters [Docket
No.: FAA-2025-5392; Project Identifier MCAI2025-01494-R; Amendment 39-23221; AD 2025-2513] (RIN: 2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2665. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; Aerospace & Defense Oxygen Systems
SaS (Part of Safran Aerosystems) (Formerly
Known as Air Liquide) [Docket No.: FAA2025-5400; Project Identifier MCAI-2025-01832Q; Amendment 39-23228; AD 2025-26-06] (RIN:
2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2666. A letter from the Manger, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters [Docket No.: FAA2025-2273; Project Identifier MCAI-2024-00689R; Amendment 39-23216; AD 2025-25-08] (RIN:
2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2667. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters [Docket No.: FAA2025-0612; Project Identifier MCAI-2023-00935R; Amendment 39-23214; AD 2025-25-06] (RIN:
2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,

PO 00000

Frm 00171

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2668. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters Deutschland GmbH
Helicopters [Docket No.: FAA-2025-2274;
Project Identifier MCAI-2023-01244-R; Amendment 39-23219; AD 2025-25-11] (RIN: 2120-AA64)
received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2669. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; Airbus SAS Airplanes [Docket No.:
FAA-2025-1721; Project Identifier MCAI-202500268-T; Amendment 39-23217; AD 2025-25-09]
(RIN: 2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2670. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; General Electric Company Engines
[Docket No.: FAA-2025-1364; Project Identifier AD-2024-00613-E; Amendment 39-23215; AD
2025-25-07] (RIN: 2120-AA64) received January
9,2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2671. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; Airbus SAS Airplanes [Docket No.:
FAA-2025-5395; Project Identifier MCAI-202501770-T; Amendment 39-23223; AD 2025-24-51]
(RIN: 2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2672. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives;
ATR-GIE
Avions
de
Transport
Régional Airplanes [Docket No.: FAA-20252269; Project Identifier MCAI-2025-00188-T;
Amendment 39-23222; AD 2025-26-01] (RIN:
2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2673. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives;
ATR-GIE
Avions
de
Transport
Régional Airplanes [Docket No.: FAA-20252270; Project Identifier MCAI-2025-00013-T;
Amendment 39-23218; AD 2025-25-10] (RIN:
2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
f

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES ON
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XIII, reports of
committees were delivered to the Clerk
for printing and reference to the proper
calendar, as follows:
Mr. WALBERG: Committee on Education
and Workforce. H.R. 6359. A bill to require
institutions of higher education to disseminate information on the rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.055

H14JAPT1

H892

students, and for other purposes; with an
amendment (Rept. 119–447). Referred to the
Committee of the Whole House on the state
of the Union.
Mr. WALBERG: Committee on Education
and Workforce. H.R. 5169. A bill to amend the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974 to provide a clear definition of adequate consideration for certain closely held
stock, and for other purposes; with an
amendment (Rept. 119–448). Referred to the
Committee of the Whole House on the state
of the Union.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 681. A bill to amend the Act
of August 9, 1955 (commonly known as the
‘‘Long-Term Leasing Act’’), to authorize
leases of up to 99 years for land held in trust
for the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe and the
Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah),
and for other purposes (Rept. 119–449). Referred to the Committee of the Whole House
on the state of the Union.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 4386. A bill to amend the
Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act
to clarify entrance privileges for vehicles
with respect to the America the Beautiful
interagency pass, with an amendment (Rept.
119–450 Pt. 1). Referred to the Committee of
the Whole House on the state of the Union.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 3903. A bill to exchange nonFederal land held by the Chugach Alaska
Corporation for certain Federal Land in the
Chugach Region, and for other purposes;
with an amendment (Rept. 119–451). Referred
to the Committee of the Whole House on the
state of the Union.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 4467. A bill to modify the
boundary of the Vicksburg National Military
Park in the State of Mississippi, and for
other purposes, with an amendment (Rept.
119–452). Referred to the Committee of the
Whole House on the state of the Union.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 5910. A bill to authorize
leases of up to 99 years for land held in trust
for federally recognized Indian Tribes (Rept.
119–453). Referred to the Committee of the
Whole House on the state of the Union.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 4284. A bill to amend the
Small Tract Act of 1983 to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to convey, without
consideration, certain cemeteries, and for
other purposes (Rept. 119–454 Pt. 1). Referred
to the Committee of the Whole House on the
state of the Union.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 5103. A bill to establish a
program to Beautify the District of Columbia and establish the District of Columbia
Safe and Beautiful Commission, with an
amendment (Rept. 119–455 Pt. 1). Ordered to
be printed.
Mr. COMER: Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform. H.R. 5103. A bill to establish a program to Beautify the District of
Columbia and establish the District of Columbia Safe and Beautiful Commission, with
an amendment (Rept. 119–455 Pt. 2). Referred
to the Committee of the Whole House on the
state of the Union.
DISCHARGES OF COMMITTEE

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Pursuant to clause 2 of rule XIII, the
Committee on Agriculture discharged
from further consideration. H.R. 4284
referred to the Committee of the Whole
House on the state of the Union.
Pursuant to clause 2 of rule XIII, the
Committee on Agriculture discharged
from further consideration. H.R. 4386
referred to the Committee of the Whole
House on the state of the Union.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following
titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:
By Mr. SESSIONS (for himself, Mr.
KENNEDY of Utah, and Mr. JACKSON of
Illinois):
H.R. 7050. A bill to amend the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act with respect
to homeopathic drug products, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
By Mr. MCGUIRE (for himself, Mr.
Mr.
STAUBER,
Mr.
BARRETT,
STUTZMAN, Mr. SCHMIDT, Mr. MACKENZIE, Mr. HAMADEH of Arizona,
and
Mrs.
Mrs.
MILLER-MEEKS,
CAMMACK):
H.R. 7051. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to exclude from gross income gains on the sale of real property to
first-time homebuyers by individuals who
have attained age 65; to the Committee on
Ways and Means.
By Ms. JACOBS (for herself and Mr.
MCCAUL):
H.R. 7052. A bill to establish a Center for
Conflict Analysis, Planning, and Prevention
in the Department of State, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. GREEN of Texas (for himself,
Ms. CHU, and Ms. MENG):
H.R. 7053. A bill to preempt State prohibitions on real estate purchases by foreign
citizens, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. ISSA:
H.R. 7054. A bill to require the Secretary of
State to submit to Congress a notification of
certain construction projects using nonstandard designs; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. SMITH of New Jersey (for himself and Ms. SALAZAR):
H.R. 7055. A bill to reauthorize and amend
the Nicaraguan Investment Conditionality
Act of 2018 and the Reinforcing Nicaraguas
Adherence to Conditions for Electoral Reform Act of 2021, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and in addition to the Committees on Financial Services, the Judiciary, and Ways and Means, for
a period to be subsequently determined by
the Speaker, in each case for consideration
of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. BARR:
H.R. 7056. A bill to index statutory thresholds, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Ms. BARRAGÁN (for herself, Mr.
GOLDMAN of New York, Mr. KHANNA,
Ms. BONAMICI, Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN, Ms.
NORTON, Mrs. RAMIREZ, Mr. MCGOVERN, Ms. SIMON, Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois, and Mr. ESPAILLAT):
H.R. 7057. A bill to amend the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to
establish the Reentry Rental Assistance and
Housing Services Grant Program, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee on
Financial Services, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Mr. BAUMGARTNER (for himself,
Mr. HAMADEH of Arizona, Ms. SALAZAR, and Mr. EZELL):
H.R. 7058. A bill to require the Secretary of
State to conduct assessments of the risks
posed to the United States by foreign adver-

PO 00000

Frm 00172

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

saries who utilize generative artificial intelligence for malicious activities, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Foreign
Affairs.
By Mr. CASTRO of Texas (for himself,
Ms. JACOBS, and Mr. STANTON):
H.R. 7059. A bill to prohibit the use of funds
to use military force in or against Mexico,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Foreign Affairs, and in addition to the Committee on Armed Services, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. CROW (for himself, Ms.
HOULAHAN, Mr. FROST, Ms. OCASIOCORTEZ, Mr. CASAR, Mr. POCAN, Mr.
GOLDMAN of New York, Ms. SIMON,
Ms. CRAIG, Ms. NORTON, and Mr.
THANEDAR):
H.R. 7060. A bill to stop the Government
from attacking individuals and organizations for their political speech or participation; to the Committee on the Judiciary, and
in addition to the Committees on Oversight
and Government Reform, and Ways and
Means, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within
the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Ms. ELFRETH (for herself, Ms. CASTOR of Florida, Ms. SALAZAR, and Mr.
HUFFMAN):
H.R. 7061. A bill to amend the Natural Gas
Act to require that a certification issued by
the Secretary of Energy be in effect in order
to export natural gas to a covered nation; to
the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Ms. FRIEDMAN (for herself and Mr.
LAWLER):
H.R. 7062. A bill to amend titles 23 and 49,
United States Code, to modify the rules relating to eligible projects under the TIFIA
program and the railroad rehabilitation and
financing program, to establish a transit-oriented development financing program for
projects of a certain size, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Transportation
and Infrastructure.
By Mr. GILL of Texas (for himself, Mr.
NEHLS, and Mr. COLLINS):
H.R. 7063. A bill to improve student and exchange visitor visa programs; to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to
the Committee on Education and Workforce,
for a period to be subsequently determined
by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. HERNÁNDEZ (for himself and
Mr. LIEU):
H.R. 7064. A bill to require the Secretary of
Health and Human Services to conduct a
study on strategies for the application of artificial intelligence technologies that can be
used in the health care industry to improve
administrative and clerical work and preserve the privacy and security of patient
data, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. LANGWORTHY:
H.R. 7065. A bill to nullify the applicability
of the Act of July 2, 1948, with respect to the
reservations of the Seneca Nation of Indians
in New York; to the Committee on Natural
Resources.
By Mr. LEVIN (for himself, Ms. CASTOR
Mr.
of
Florida,
Mr.
QUIGLEY,
LANDSMAN, Mr. GOLDMAN of New
York, Mr. LATIMER, Mr. CASTEN, and
Ms. PINGREE):
H.R. 7066. A bill to amend the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 to add a
standard relating to the consideration of
large load facilities as a class of electric consumers, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.033

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 14, 2026

By Ms. MACE (for herself and Mr.
BURCHETT):
H.R. 7067. A bill to prohibit individuals
convicted of crimes of violence from Federal
employment and contracting with the Government, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
By Ms. MACE (for herself and Mr.
BURCHETT):
H.R. 7068. A bill to prohibit the District of
Columbia government from appointing individuals convicted of crimes of violence or
dangerous crimes as employees of the government or from entering into contracts
with vendors who employ individuals convicted of crimes of violence or dangerous
crimes, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
By Ms. MCDONALD RIVET:
H.R. 7069. A bill to amend the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 to expand benefits to
households eligible for Federal and State energy assistance programs, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture.
By Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia:
H.R. 7070. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to extend the credit period
for the production of refined coal, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Ways
and Means.
By Mr. MOULTON (for himself, Mr.
CARSON, Mr. SOTO, and Ms. GARCIA of
Texas):
H.R. 7071. A bill to repeal certain funding
increases provided under the One Big Beautiful Bill Act to Immigrations and Custom
Enforcement, and to reallocate those funds
to extend certain healthcare tax credits; to
the Committee on Ways and Means, and in
addition to the Committees on the Judiciary, and Homeland Security, for a period to
be subsequently determined by the Speaker,
in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. MOULTON:
H.R. 7072. A bill to prohibit politically motivated prosecutions and investigations, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on the
Judiciary.
By Mr. MOYLAN (for himself, Ms.
PLASKETT, Mr. HERNÁNDEZ, Ms. KINGHINDS, and Mrs. RADEWAGEN):
H.R. 7073. A bill to permit the territories
and commonwealths of the United States to
provide and furnish statues to the National
Statuary Hall Collection; to the Committee
on House Administration.
By Mr. NEWHOUSE (for himself, Mr.
HURD of Colorado, Mr. ROSE, Mrs.
HINSON, and Mr. EZELL):
H.R. 7074. A bill to amend the Defense Production Act of 1950 to include the Secretary
of the Interior on the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services, and in addition to the Committees on Energy and Commerce, and Foreign
Affairs, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. PERRY (for himself and Mr.
TIFFANY):
H.R. 7075. A bill to require the Secretary of
the Treasury to include any entity identified
as a Chinese military company on the NonSDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex
Companies List; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and in addition to the Committee on Financial Services, for a period to
be subsequently determined by the Speaker,
in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H893

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

By Ms. SCHOLTEN:
H.R. 7076. A bill to require the Secretary of
Defense to report on certain contracts and
awards to small business concerns, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Armed
Services.
By Ms. SCHOLTEN (for herself, Mr.
FITZPATRICK, and Ms. NORTON):
H.R. 7077. A bill to amend the Research and
Development, Competition, and Innovation
Act to require a plan for data collection and
analytical capability relating to the skilled
technical workforce, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology.
By Mr. SCHWEIKERT:
H.R. 7078. A bill to amend the Colorado
River Basin Project Act to provide for the
equitable distribution of Colorado River
water for the lower basin States, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Natural
Resources.
By Mr. THANEDAR:
H.R. 7079. A bill to facilitate non-motorized
border crossings across the Gordie Howe
International Bridge, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Homeland Security,
and in addition to the Committee on Ways
and Means, for a period to be subsequently
determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. VASQUEZ (for himself and Mr.
BAIRD):
H.R. 7080. A bill to amend the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 to include waste energy recovery as a source of
renewable energy, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Agriculture.
By Mr. WESTERMAN (for himself, Ms.
KAMLAGER-DOVE, Mr. CARTER of
Georgia, Mrs. WAGNER, Mr. VALADAO,
Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania, Ms. ROSS,
and Mrs. DINGELL):
H.R. 7081. A bill to authorize the court to
depart from a statutory minimum in the
case of a juvenile offender, youthful victim
offender, and certain other minors, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Ms. KELLY of Illinois (for herself,
Ms. CRAIG, Ms. MCCOLLUM, Ms. OMAR,
Mr. JACKSON of Illinois, Mr. QUIGLEY,
Mr. CASTEN, Ms. CLARKE of New
York, Mr. VARGAS, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY,
Mr. SORENSEN, Mr. GOMEZ, Mr.
FROST, Mr. VASQUEZ, Ms. VELÁZQUEZ,
Mr. TORRES of New York, Ms. ANSARI,
Ms. MATSUI, Ms. RANDALL, Mr.
Mr.
MULLIN,
Mr.
SWALWELL,
KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mr. SHERMAN, Mr.
MIN, Mr. LARSON of Connecticut, Ms.
MCBRIDE, Ms. TOKUDA, Mrs. MCCLAIN
DELANEY, Ms. TLAIB, Mr. BELL, Mrs.
FOUSHEE, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN,
Mrs. MCIVER, Ms. STANSBURY, Ms.
BONAMICI, Ms. DEXTER, Mr. COHEN,
Ms. JOHNSON of Texas, Mr. DOGGETT,
Ms. BALINT, Mr. THANEDAR, Ms.
CROCKETT, Ms. PETTERSEN, Ms. MORRISON, Ms. ADAMS, Mr. MOULTON, Mr.
THOMPSON of California, Ms. FRIEDMAN, Mr. TONKO, Ms. BUDZINSKI, Ms.
LEGER FERNANDEZ, Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania, Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Ms.
DEGETTE, Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin,
Ms. PINGREE, Mr. DESAULNIER, Mr.
POCAN, Mrs. TRAHAN, Ms. SÁNCHEZ,
Ms. HOYLE of Oregon, Ms. ELFRETH,
Ms. RIVAS, Ms. BROWN, Mr. MENENDEZ, Ms. JAYAPAL, Mr. AMO, Ms.
ESCOBAR, Mr. ESPAILLAT, Ms. SIMON,
Mr. KENNEDY of New York, Mr.
KEATING, Ms. JACOBS, Mr. MCGARVEY,
Ms. TITUS, Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE, Mrs.
TORRES of California, Ms. BROWNLEY,
Mr. MFUME, Ms. WILLIAMS of Georgia,
and Mr. CASAR):

PO 00000

Frm 00173

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

H. Res. 996. A resolution impeaching Kristi
Lynn Arnold Noem, Secretary of Homeland
Security, for high crimes and misdemeanors;
to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MCGOVERN:
H. Res. 997. A resolution enabling the
House of Representatives to be responsive to
its membership; to the Committee on House
Administration, and in addition to the Committees on Rules, and Ethics, for a period to
be subsequently determined by the Speaker,
in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. GIMENEZ (for himself, Mr.
PFLUGER, Ms. SALAZAR, Mr. FINE, Mr.
CARTER of Georgia, Mr. CARTER of
Texas, Mr. RULLI, Mr. HARIDOPOLOS,
Mr. CRAWFORD, Ms. TENNEY, Mr.
MOORE of Alabama, Mr. WEBSTER of
Florida, Mr. ROSE, Mr. DONALDS, Mr.
WILSON of South Carolina, Mr. RUTHERFORD, Mr. MCGUIRE, Mr. ONDER,
Mr. TIMMONS, Mr. STAUBER, Mr.
CRANK, Mr. COLLINS, Mr. BOST, Mr.
PALMER, Mr. FINSTAD, Mr. HUNT, Mr.
TONY GONZALES of Texas, Mr. OWENS,
Mr. ALFORD, and Mr. MOORE of North
Carolina):
H. Res. 998. A resolution commending
President Trump, his administration, and
the brave men and women of the Armed
Forces, Intelligence Community, and Justice
Department for the remarkable success of
‘‘Operation Absolute Resolve’’; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and in addition to
the Committees on Armed Services, Intelligence (Permanent Select), and the Judiciary, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within
the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. MCGOVERN:
H. Res. 999. A resolution providing for the
consideration of the resolution (H. Res. 997)
enabling the House of Representatives to be
responsive to its membership; to the Committee on Rules.
By Mrs. SYKES:
H. Res. 1000. A resolution commemorating
the Akron Urban League’s centennial; to the
Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Ms. TITUS (for herself, Mr. DOGGETT, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN, Ms.
KELLY of Illinois, Ms. ANSARI, Mr.
of
Pennsylvania,
Mr.
BOYLE
Mr.
LATIMER,
Mr.
GARAMENDI,
THOMPSON of California, Mr. AMO, Mr.
Ms.
LOFGREN,
Mr.
SWALWELL,
KEATING, Ms. HOYLE of Oregon, Mrs.
Ms.
MCCOLLUM,
Mr.
HAYES,
KRISHNAMOORTHI, Ms. JOHNSON of
Texas, Mr. COSTA, and Mrs. TORRES of
California):
H. Res. 1001. A resolution of inquiry requesting the President and directing the Secretary of State to transmit to the House of
Representatives certain documents in their
possession relating to the Administration’s
stance on Greenland; to the Committee on
Foreign Affairs.
f

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of
the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers granted to
Congress in the Constitution to enact
the accompanying bill or joint resolution.
By Mr. SESSIONS:
H.R. 7050.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:

E:\CR\FM\L14JA7.100

H14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H894

Article I, Section 8, clause 3
By Mr. MCGUIRE:
H.R. 7051.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. JACOBS:
H.R. 7052.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Section 8 of Article I of the Constitution
By Mr. GREEN of Texas:
H.R. 7053.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Necessary and Proper Clause (Art. 1, Sec. 8,
Cl. 18).
By Mr. ISSA:
H.R. 7054.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 of the United
States Constitution
By Mr. SMITH of New Jersey:
H.R. 7055.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. BARR:
H.R. 7056.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution.
By Ms. BARRAGÁN:
H.R. 7057.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Section 8 of Article 1 of the Constitution.
By Mr. BAUMGARTNER:
H.R. 7058.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. CASTRO of Texas:
H.R. 7059.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Constitutional Authority—Necessary and
Proper Clause (Art. I, Sec. 8, Clause 18)
THE U.S. CONSTITUTION ARTICLE I,
SECTION 8: POWERS OF CONGRESS
CLAUSE 18
The Congress shall have power . . . To
make all laws which shall be necessary and
proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by
this Constitution in the government of the
United States, or in any department or officer thereof.
By Mr. CROW:
H.R. 7060.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution of
the United States
By Ms. ELFRETH:
H.R. 7061.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Necessary and Proper Clause (Art. 1, Sec. 8,
Cl. 18)
By Ms. FRIEDMAN:
H.R. 7062.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. GILL of Texas:
H.R. 7063.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. HERNÁNDEZ:
H.R. 7064.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. LANGWORTHY:
H.R. 7065.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 3
By Mr. LEVIN:
H.R. 7066.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18
By Ms. MACE:
H.R. 7067.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution.
By Ms. MACE:
H.R. 7068.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution.
By Ms. MCDONALD RIVET:
H.R. 7069.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
U.S. Constitution, Article 1, Section 8
By Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia:
H.R. 7070.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. MOULTON:
H.R. 7071.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 1, 3, and 18
By Mr. MOULTON:
H.R. 7072.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. MOYIAN:
H.R. 7073.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Section 1 of article 1 of the Constitution
By Mr. NEWHOUSE:
H.R. 7074.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution
By Mr. PERRY:
H.R. 7075.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Ms. SCHOLTEN:
H.R. 7076.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8
By Ms. SCHOLTEN:
H.R. 7077.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8
By Mr. SCHWEIKERT:
H.R. 7078.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 3—To regulate
Commerce with foreign Nations, and among
the several States, and with the Indian
Tribes; . . .
Article IV, Section 3, Clause 2—The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and
make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States; and nothing
int his Constitution shall be so construed as
to Prejudice any Claims of the United
States, or of any particular State.
By Mr. THANEDAR:
H.R. 7079.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
This bill is enacted pursuant to the power
granted to Congress under Clause 18 of Article I, Section 8 of the United States Constitution.

PO 00000

Frm 00174

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

By Mr. VASQUEZ:
H.R. 7080.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, section 8, Clauses 1 and 18 of the
United States Constitution, to provide for
the general welfare and make all laws necessary and proper to carry out the powers of
the Congress.
By Mr. WESTERMAN:
H.R. 7081.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 of the United
States Constitution
f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H.R. 210: Ms. UNDERWOOD.
H.R. 404: Mr. MESSMER.
H.R. 588: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 1004: Mr. MANN and Mr. HAMADEH of
Arizona.
H.R. 1046: Mr. KILEY of California.
H.R. 1061: Mr. OLSZEWSKI.
H.R. 1065: Ms. SIMON and Mr. NEWHOUSE.
H.R. 1086: Mr. LARSEN of Washington.
H.R. 1094: Mr. EZELL.
H.R. 1163: Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia.
H.R. 1171: Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ of Texas.
H.R. 1232: Mr. DOWNING.
H.R. 1329: Ms. PETTERSEN.
H.R. 1330: Mr. CARBAJAL and Mr. FROST.
H.R. 1477: Ms. LOFGREN.
H.R. 1521: Ms. ROSS.
H.R. 1628: Mr. MFUME and Ms. STANSBURY.
H.R. 1970: Mrs. MCCLAIN.
H.R. 2079: Mr. COHEN.
H.R. 2089: Mr. RULLI.
H.R. 2126: Mr. ROSE.
H.R. 2189: Ms. CLARKE of New York.
H.R. 2231: Mr. HARRIGAN and Mr. BEAN of
Florida.
H.R. 2357: Mr. LEVIN.
H.R. 2837: Mr. GREEN of Texas.
H.R. 2853: Ms. ELFRETH.
H.R. 2864: Mrs. LUNA.
H.R. 3045: Ms. PELOSI.
H.R. 3305: Ms. MCDONALD RIVET.
H.R. 3350: Mr. VALADAO.
H.R. 3505: Ms. MCBRIDE.
H.R. 3649: Mr. BERA.
H.R. 3683: Ms. LOFGREN.
H.R. 3696: Mr. THOMPSON of California.
H.R. 3699: Mr. ADERHOLT.
H.R. 3757: Ms. OMAR and Mr. HIMES.
H.R. 3811: Mr. THOMPSON of California.
H.R. 3876: Mr. KEATING and Mr. HORSFORD.
H.R. 4176: Mr. TORRES of New York.
H.R. 4253: Ms. BONAMICI.
H.R. 4351: Mr. DAVIS of Illinois.
H.R. 4487: Mr. BOYLE of Pennsylvania, Mr.
CLEAVER, Mr. VARGAS, Mr. MOULTON, and
Mrs. CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK.
H.R. 4640: Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.R. 4696: Ms. RIVAS.
H.R. 4710: Mr. DUNN of Florida.
H.R. 4901: Ms. SCHAKOWSKY and Ms. STRICKLAND.
H.R. 4966: Mr. LEVIN.
H.R. 4967: Ms. SIMON.
H.R. 5096: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM.
H.R. 5106: Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY.
H.R. 5168: Ms. MCBRIDE and Ms. MCDONALD
RIVET.
H.R. 5222: Ms. CROCKETT.
H.R. 5267: Mr. MCCORMICK and Mr. DUNN of
Florida.
H.R. 5325: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM.
H.R. 5332: Mr. TRAN and Mr. VAN DREW.
H.R. 5343: Mr. BENTZ and Ms. ROSS.
H.R. 5434: Ms. SÁNCHEZ.
Mr.
H.R.
5438:
Mr.
DESJARLAIS,
LANGWORTHY, and Mr. COLLINS.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.035

H14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H.R. 5451: Ms. RANDALL.
H.R. 5461: Mr. LAWLER and Ms. SEWELL.
H.R. 5509: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 5549: Mr. HARRIGAN.
H.R. 5616: Mr. AMODEI of Nevada.
H.R. 5645: Mr. FLOOD and Mr. MOSKOWITZ.
H.R. 5653: Mr. DOGGETT and Mr. OLSZEWSKI.
H.R. 5710: Mr. KELLY of Mississippi, Mr.
AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia, and Mr. WEBER of
Texas.
H.R. 5944: Mr. STAUBER.
H.R. 5973: Mr. BERA, Mr. TRAN, Ms.
ELFRETH, and Ms. LOFGREN.
H.R. 6121: Mr. BACON and Mr. MIN.
H.R. 6137: Ms. MCBRIDE.
H.R. 6138: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6176: Ms. PINGREE.
H.R. 6184: Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI.
H.R. 6214: Ms. TENNEY.
H.R. 6257: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 6318: Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia.
H.R. 6357: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6364: Mrs. CAMMACK.
H.R. 6373: Mr. MOORE of Alabama and Mr.
GOLDMAN of Texas.
H.R. 6390: Ms. PLASKETT.
H.R. 6469: Mrs. BICE.
H.R. 6496: Ms. SCHRIER.
H.R. 6566: Mr. FULCHER.
H.R. 6574: Ms. CLARKE of New York.
H.R. 6597: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 6660: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6694: Mr. LAWLER, Mr. GOLDMAN of
New York, Ms. TENNEY, and Mr. LATIMER.
H.R. 6731: Ms. BARRAGÁN, Ms. DEXTER, Ms.
KELLY of Illinois, Mr. MCGOVERN, and Mr.
KRISHNAMOORTHI.
H.R. 6758: Mr. NORCROSS and Mr. FROST.
H.R. 6766: Ms. MCBRIDE, Mr. HIMES, Mr.
COURTNEY, and Mrs. HAYES.
H.R. 6806: Mr. MAGAZINER and Mr.
MOULTON.
H.R. 6832: Mr. MCDOWELL.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:41 Jan 15, 2026

H895

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

H.R. 6840: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6844: Mr. RUIZ and Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 6845: Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 6945: Mrs. BIGGS of South Carolina.
H.R. 6972: Mr. CLOUD and Mr. DONALDS.
H.R. 6985: Ms. LEE of Nevada and Mr.
SUOZZI.
H.R. 7003: Mr. WILSON of South Carolina.
H.R. 7004: Mr. VEASEY and Mr. MAGAZINER.
H.R. 7016: Mr. MASSIE, Mrs. TRAHAN, Mr.
SOTO, Ms. ELFRETH, Ms. ANSARI, Ms. STRICKLAND, Ms. HOULAHAN, Mr. MCGOVERN, Mr.
KRISHNAMOORTHI,
Mr.
GARAMENDI,
Mr.
MOULTON, Mrs. TORRES of California, Mr.
MAGAZINER, Ms. GOODLANDER, Mr. NEAL, Mr.
CARSON, and Mr. NORCROSS.
H.R. 7024: Mr. LIEU, Ms. MACE, Mr. MASSIE,
Ms. GARCIA of Texas, Mr. VEASEY, Mr. GRIFFITH, Mr. CRENSHAW, Ms. BOEBERT, Mr. CARTER of Georgia, Mr. LANGWORTHY, and Mr.
FRY.
H.R. 7038: Ms. DEXTER, Mr. CISNEROS, Mr.
JACKSON of Illinois, and Mr. QUIGLEY.
H.R. 7046: Ms. TLAIB, Mr. MCGOVERN, and
Mr. GREEN of Texas.
H.R. 7048: Mr. NEHLS.
H.J. Res. 12: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H. Con. Res. 68: Ms. WILLIAMS of Georgia,
Ms. PELOSI, Mrs. MCIVER, Ms. BARRAGÁN, Ms.
SÁNCHEZ, Mr. FROST, Mr. NEGUSE, Ms.
CLARKE of New York, and Mr. GOMEZ.
H. Res. 94: Mr. BELL.
H. Res. 116: Mr. FROST.
H. Res. 159: Mr. BELL.
H. Res. 973: Mr. GARAMENDI.
H. Res. 987: Ms. TENNEY.
H. Res. 993: Mr. AUCHINCLOSS, Ms. BALINT,
Ms. BARRAGÁN, Mr. BERA, Mr. BISHOP, Mrs.
CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK, Ms. CLARKE of New
York, Mr. COURTNEY, Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas,
Ms. DELBENE, Ms. ELFRETH, Mrs. FOUSHEE,
Mr. SCOTT FRANKLIN of Florida, Ms. FRIEDMAN, Ms. GARCIA of Texas, Mr. GARCIA of

PO 00000

Frm 00175

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

California, Ms. GILLEN, Mr. GOLDMAN of New
York, Mrs. HAYES, Ms. HOYLE of Oregon, Mr.
JACKSON of Illinois, Ms. JACOBS, Mr.
KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mr. LATIMER, Ms. LEE of
Nevada, Mr. LEVIN, Ms. LOFGREN, Mr. MIN,
Mr. MOSKOWITZ, Ms. NORTON, Mr. NUNN of
Iowa, Mr. OLSZEWSKI, Ms. RANDALL, Mr.
RASKIN, Ms. SCANLON, Mr. SOTO, Ms.
STANSBURY, Ms. STEVENS, Ms. STRICKLAND,
Mr. SUOZZI, Mr. SWALWELL, Ms. TENNEY, Ms.
TOKUDA, Mrs. TRAHAN, Mr. VASQUEZ, Mr.
WALKINSHAW, Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, and
Mr. MANNION.
f

CONGRESSIONAL EARMARKS, LIMITED TAX BENEFITS, OR LIMITED TARIFF BENEFITS
Under clause 9 of rule XXI, lists or
statements on congressional earmarks,
limited tax benefits, or limited tariff
benefits were submitted as follows:
OFFERED BY MR. WESTERMAN
The provisions that warranted a referral to
the Committee on Natural Resources in H.J.
Res. 140, do not contain any congressional
earmarks, limited tax benefits, or limited
tariff benefits as defined in clause 9 of rule
XXI.
f

DELETIONS OF SPONSORS FROM
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were deleted from public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H. Res. 932: Mr. JACKSON of Texas.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA7.057

H14JAPT1

UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 14, 2026

No. 10

Senate
The Senate met at 10 a.m. and was
called to order by the President pro
tempore (Mr. GRASSLEY).
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
Gracious God, You have blessed us
beyond our deserving, enabling our Nation to continue to strive to be the
land of the free and the home of the
brave. Remind us once more that freedom isn’t free.
Inspire our national leaders to be
people of diligence, integrity, and prayer. May they claim Your promise in II
Chronicles 7:14: that if they humble
themselves, pray, repent, and seek You
earnestly, You will hear their prayers,
forgive their transgressions, and heal
our land.
And, Lord, guide the fall 2025 page
class in all of their tomorrows.
We pray in Your magnificent Name.
Amen.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The President pro tempore led the
Pledge of Allegiance, as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MULLIN). Under the previous order, the
leadership time is reserved.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

CONCLUSION OF MORNING
BUSINESS
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Morning
business is closed.

LEGISLATIVE SESSION

MEDICAID

which you can probably figure out.
Otherwise, it will give the insurance
company money for a patient who is no
longer eligible for Medicaid or, in some
cases, no longer alive.
The Health and Human Services’ inspector general found that, since 2016,
Medicaid agencies improperly paid $289
million for deceased enrollees. In the
inspector general’s audit, the audit
sampled 100 payments. Of those payments, 49 percent were improperly paid
or the dollars were only clawed back
after the inspector general raised concerns to the respective State.
The report found that Medicaid agencies continued to pay for deceased enrollees because they didn’t have access
to death data, failed to check or use
the data, or didn’t check the data often
enough.
The Working Families Tax Cuts law,
signed by President Trump on July 4,
puts an end to this fraud, waste, and
abuse in the Medicaid Program. It establishes solutions to stop sending payments out for deceased enrollees and
providers.
I look forward to ensuring that HHS
implements this part of the law quickly and effectively so that we don’t read
more inspector general reports about
this issue.

Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, Medicaid is intended to provide healthcare
for the most vulnerable, including the
disabled, the elderly, and low-income
women and children.
Recently, the Department of Health
and Human Services’ inspector general
published an audit that found millions
of dollars were paid out from State
Medicaid Programs to managed care
organizations for deceased enrollees.
State Medicaid Programs hire insurance companies in the form of a managed care organization to manage the
claims and care of patients. States pay
the insurance company a per-member,
per-month fee. However, it is the responsibility of each of the 50 States to
have an accurate enrollment list,

Mr. President, I will just mention the
Working Families Tax Cuts law that
the President signed on July 4. I think
there is a lot of misunderstanding
about that law. So I want to say something in addition to Medicaid’s wasting
of money.
The Working Families Tax Cuts Act
prevented a $4.7 trillion tax increase
that would have automatically happened on December 31, when we would
have gone back to the old tax laws
prior to the 2017 tax bill.
For Iowans, I have seen two different
figures. One study showed that that
would have meant a $2,300 increase for
families in Iowa if we had not stopped
that tax increase. Another study

COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE;
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026—Resumed
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate will resume consideration of H.R. 6938, which
the clerk will report.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
A bill (H.R. 6938) making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.

Pending:
Thune amendment No. 4208, to change the
enactment date.
Thune amendment No. 4209 (to amendment
No. 4208), of a perfecting nature.
Thune motion to commit the bill to the
Committee on Appropriations, with instructions, amendment No. 4210, to change the enactment date.
Thune amendment No. 4211 (to the instructions (amendment No. 4210)), of a perfecting
nature.
Thune amendment No. 4212 (to amendment
No. 4211), of a perfecting nature.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The good
Senator from Iowa.

WORKING FAMILIES TAX CUTS ACT

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S185

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A14JA6.000

S14JAPT1

S186

showed that it saved Iowans $3,100. Either way, $2,000 or $3,000 is money that
Iowans could not afford to pay in additional taxes.
But this bill does not include just
taxes. It is a very comprehensive piece
of legislation that increases support for
family farmers. It has energy policy
that has brought down gas prices tremendously since President Trump
signed the bill. It has improvement in
education programs. It has health
issues in it. And it has law enforcement
issues in it.
I am not sure I have named all of the
parts of the bill, but I hope people who
are filling out their tax forms in 2026,
and who don’t have to pay additional
taxes, will understand that that tax
bill has done a lot for many segments
of the economy that the President
ought to be complimented for. Those of
us in the Senate who voted for it could,
likewise, let them know that we were
worried about the tax increase.
I yield the floor.
RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY LEADER

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority leader is recognized.
f

MEASURE PLACED ON THE
CALENDAR—S. 3627
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I understand there is a bill at the desk that is
due for a second reading.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The leader is correct.
The clerk will read the bill by title
for the second time.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
A bill (S. 3627) to require institutions of
higher education to disseminate information
on the rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for other
purposes.

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, in order
to place the bill on the calendar under
the provisions of rule XIV, I would object to further proceedings.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Objection having been heard, the bill will be
placed on the calendar under rule XIV.
f

COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE;
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

VENEZUELA

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, today, we
expect a vote on a resolution to direct
the removal of U.S. forces from hostilities in or against Venezuela, even
though—even
though—the
United
States is not currently engaged in hostilities in or against Venezuela. That is
right. We have no troops on the ground
in Venezuela. We are not currently
conducting military operations there.
But Democrats are taking up this bill
because their anti-Trump hysteria
knows no bounds.
Here are the facts. Nicolas Maduro is
a narcoterrorist who helped lead the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

so-called Cartel of the Suns. He advanced large-scale drug trafficking,
armed an illegitimate militia, solicited
arms for a terrorist organization, presided over unfree and unfair elections,
targeted political opponents, and
oversaw the killing of thousands, as a
U.N. report outlined, to name just a
few—just some of—his crimes. The
United States did not recognize him as
the legitimate leader of Venezuela.
Neither did the European Union. And
he was a fugitive of the U.S. justice
system.
Back during the first Trump administration, Democrats were calling for the
ouster of Maduro and for U.S. assistance in Venezuela and were criticizing
the President for not going far enough
in opposing the Maduro regime. President Biden raised the reward for information leading to the arrest or conviction of Maduro to $25 million. But then
President Trump directs an isolated
Special Forces raid in support of a
valid warrant to capture Maduro so
that he can be tried for drug crimes,
and Democrats are falling all over
themselves to criticize the seizure and
arrest of this international criminal.
Talk about Trump derangement syndrome.
It is funny; I don’t remember Democrats trying to tie the President’s
hands when Democrat Presidents took
far more extensive military action that
involved thousands of troops or airstrikes over weeks and months in
Libya, Bosnia, Serbia, and Haiti. Most
recently, in 2024, they locked arms and
voted to turn a blind eye toward a
monthslong deployment of troops for
President Biden’s disastrous floating
aid pier to Gaza, even while Biden’s
own Defense Department called it an
active war zone and the pier was fired
upon twice.
They said those troops were not engaged in hostilities and therefore not
subject to the War Powers Resolution,
and yet today they are claiming the
opposite for a couple hundred troops
who were in Venezuela for a matter of
mere hours and who have already returned to their bases in the United
States or on U.S. Navy ships in international waters. But with President
Trump, Democrats are incapable of deciding on the merits. They reflexively
oppose anything he does or says, even
when it contradicts or is in tension
with their own prior opinions.
Whatever the outcome of this process, I trust that the Trump administration will continue to work to combat
the terrible scourge of illegal drugs and
to keep our Nation and our communities safe.
SENATE ACCOMPLISHMENTS

Mr. President, 2025 was a year of hard
legislative work in the U.S. Senate. We
passed once-in-a-generation legislation, the Working Families Tax Cut
bill, which is currently putting more
money in hard-working Americans’
pockets. But we didn’t just make the
headlines legislatively. In addition to a
packed legislative schedule, we consid-

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ered and confirmed 417 civilian Presidential nominations—more than were
confirmed in the first year of President
Trump’s first term or President
Biden’s. And while 417 would be an impressive number all on its own, it is
particularly remarkable given the historic level of obstruction the President’s nominees faced. I said ‘‘historic,’’ and I mean historic.
When you look at this term, President Trump remains the only President
on record—the only President on
record—in American history not to
have had a single nominee confirmed
by unanimous consent or voice vote.
Compare that to Presidents George
H.W. Bush and Bill Clinton, who each
had 98 percent of their civilian nominees confirmed by unanimous consent
or voice vote in the first term of their
Presidencies—98 percent. George W.
Bush and Barack Obama each had 90
percent. And while Democrats substantially eroded this tradition of bipartisanship during President Trump’s first
term, both President Trump in his first
term and President Biden each had
more than half of their nominees confirmed by voice vote. So the Presiding
Officer can see what I mean by historic
obstruction.
Democrats, of course, attempted to
justify themselves by claiming, in the
words of the Democratic leader, that
‘‘historically bad nominees deserve a
historic level of scrutiny.’’ The only
problem with that argument, of course,
is that a lot of these supposedly historically bad nominees received Democrat votes. So either Democrats were
supporting historically bad nominees
or this wasn’t about historically bad
nominees at all, which, of course, it
wasn’t. The real reason Democrats
were dragging out nominations for Assistant Administrator for the Office of
Solid Waste and Director of the Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement was nothing more than
petty politics—because as we see with
Venezuela and as we have seen with
Presidential nominations, Democrats
are incapable of fairness or nuance
when it comes to President Trump.
They can’t deal with the fact that he
was elected President, and so they reflexively oppose anything he does or
says, even when it is something they
might otherwise support.
The virulent partisanship Democrats
have injected into our politics is deeply
regrettable, but Republicans, of course,
have not let it stop us from achieving
things for the American people, whether that is passing the Working Families Tax Cut bill or confirming 417
Presidential nominees in the face of
historic Democrat obstruction. And we
are right back at it this year, confirming four nominees the first week of
2026.
The American people elected President Trump, and Republicans remain
committed to ensuring that he has his
team in place so that he can do the
work the American people elected him
to do.

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.001

S14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
RECOGNITION OF THE MINORITY LEADER

The Democratic leader is recognized.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

FEDERAL RESERVE INVESTIGATION

Mr.
SCHUMER.
Mr.
President,
launching a criminal investigation to
coerce the Federal Reserve is a dangerous crossing of the Rubicon—even
for Donald Trump, who has crossed
many Rubicons already, to his detriment and to the country’s detriment.
America’s economic stability depends on impartial, stable monetary
policy. Our central bank must always
operate free of coercion, free of intimidation, and free from short-term political calculation. But what Donald
Trump is doing is the MAGA-fication
of monetary policy—one of the last
places we should have any kind of
MAGA influence.
Anyone with two eyes and half a
brain can see what this probe is—a brazen attempt to cannibalize the Fed’s
influence. It is monetary mob-boss
thuggery.
If you are an American worried about
costs—housing costs, car loan costs,
any interest rate costs—what Donald
Trump is doing should alarm you. If
you are worried about bringing your
mortgage rate down if you have a variable-rate mortgage, if you want to
keep the mortgage down, if you are a
new home buyer and want a lower
mortgage, Donald Trump’s assault on
the Fed should alarm you because
when there is chaos in the Fed, interest
rates go up.
The banks and financial institutions,
when they say ‘‘chaos,’’ they grab on
tightly and say ‘‘We better not lower
anything. We better keep things high
because we are not exactly sure what is
going to happen’’ because when there is
chaos in the Fed, there is chaos across
the economy, and rates go up.
That is what financial institutions do
in times of uncertainty. They rachet
rates up to avoid a pitfall of some kind
of downward decline that chaos often
brings. It becomes more expensive for
people to borrow. It makes it harder to
own a home. It makes it harder to
build more homes. It raises car payments and credit card payments. It
raises the price of almost anything.
So if Donald Trump is serious about
bringing costs down, about fighting inflation, about showing the American
people he cares about them, the last
thing he needs to be doing is launching
criminal investigations against members of the Federal Reserve Board. Congress should not—cannot—be silent in
the face of such naked political attacks.
Now Republicans are whispering in
the hallways to one another that they

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

S187

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

are troubled about what the DOJ is
doing against the Federal Reserve, but
actions speak louder than words. It is
not enough for Republicans to whisper
their worry; Senate Republicans should
act like they are in the majority and
use their oversight powers to bring the
DOJ to heel.
We must bring Department of Justice
officials here to the Senate to testify
in committee under oath and answer
for their reckless conduct. We must
hold the line against any Federal Reserve nominee from Donald Trump so
long as this dark cloud hangs over the
Fed.
If Senate Republicans are truly worried about the Fed’s independence, if
they are worried about what chaos at
the Fed means for rising housing costs,
rising borrowing costs, rising inflation,
then they ought to conduct some oversight. Otherwise, their concerns are little more than hot air.
POPULISM

Mr. President, now on Donald
Trump’s fake populism, yesterday, in
Michigan, Donald Trump once again
tried to gaslight the American people
about the affordability crisis in another rambling speech meant to prove
he cares about the struggles of ordinary Americans. He mocked the word
‘‘affordability’’ once again. He called it
a fake.
Maybe to Donald Trump, affordability is a fake because he is a billionaire. He doesn’t have to go out and buy
the groceries, by a car, sign up for a
healthcare proposal that doesn’t meet
your family’s needs. Donald Trump
doesn’t need to do those things; he
doesn’t have to worry. But tell that to
a teacher, to a truckdriver, to a bartender, to a nurse, that affordability is
fake. Tell it to anyone who actually
has to work for a living. Affordability
isn’t fake; it is a very real nightmare.
I am sure that last night, probably tens
of millions of families gathered to decide which bills they could afford to
pay and which bills they couldn’t for
necessities they need.
Like many Presidents before him,
Donald Trump is falling into a classic
trap. When times are tough, he ignores
reality and tries to convince people
that everything is actually going
great. This has never worked, and it is
not going to work now.
A year ago, Donald Trump stormed
into office on the promise to lower
costs, to fight for ordinary Americans,
to unrig a rigged system. He ran, in
other words, as a populist who promised to drain the swamp and end inflation.
But Donald Trump is not a populist;
he is a posturer. He throws out these
populist ideas to try to persuade people
he is on their side, but he never does
anything to get them done. He never
lifts a finger or a phone. And the American people see that he talks a good
game but never does anything to accomplish what he wants to do when it
comes to lowering their costs. And the
situation of the American people only
gets worse.

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

To Donald Trump: Your posturing,
your throwing out these ideas that people like and then doing nothing to actually make them happen, ain’t gonna
work, Donald Trump. Your posturing
ain’t gonna work when it comes to
costs, when it comes to populism. You
have to solve the problem.
What is Donald Trump doing now? He
is throwing spaghetti at the wall. He
throws a slew of half-baked proposals
that are thin on substance—throws
those out—in a desperate attempt to
show Americans he cares about rising
costs.
In the last week, he has talked about
housing, credit cards, the price of beef,
trade, and done nothing on any of
them, and costs keep rising. The American people don’t want a bunch of
words that have nothing of substance
behind them. They don’t want pandering. They don’t want posturing.
They want Donald Trump to take action.
This is exactly Donald Trump’s
Achilles heel when it comes to costs
and so much else. He talks about a lot
of things that may sound nice, but he
never follows through or delivers on
any of his promises. Whether it is costs
or Epstein or ending forever wars, the
pattern is the same. Donald Trump
talks about credit cards one day, food
prices the next, housing the day after,
but never actually follows through on
getting his Republican colleagues to
act.
So here is the reality for you, Donald
Trump: It is not enough for you, Donald Trump, to just talk about a bunch
of ideas to lower costs. You need to get
your Republican colleagues to actually
pass legislation, much of which we
Democrats have stood for, for a long
time.
Otherwise, what Trump is doing is
not populism; it is simply posturing.
Actions speak louder than words. If
Donald Trump is serious about costs,
he needs to put in the work to get Republicans to pass legislation that actually will lower costs for America.
HEALTHCARE

Mr. President, finally, on ACA legislation, when it comes to lowering
costs, Americans don’t want nicesounding statements; they want action.
Today, the Senate has a chance to
take action to lower the cost of
healthcare. In a few hours, I will come
to the floor to seek unanimous passage
of legislation passed by the House last
week to extend ACA premium tax credits for 3 years.
Senate Democrats unanimously supported extending these credits last
year. Some Republicans even joined us.
But Leader Thune led the way to block
this legislation, and it ensured that
people’s premiums are now skyrocketing.
Well, we have another chance to deliver relief for the American people,
Republicans, by passing the same bill
the House approved last week with bipartisan support. Time is of the essence.

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.002

S14JAPT1

S188

The New York Times reported that
nearly 1.5 million Americans already
have lost coverage. Americans are in
the middle of a healthcare emergency,
all because the tax credits are not
being extended.
The best, quickest, simplest thing
Congress can do to lower premiums is
to pass a clean restoration of the credits that expired last year.
So to my Republican colleagues: Do
not block this legislation. Do not get
in the way. The American people demand relief, and today, you have a
chance to deliver it.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Republican whip.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

THE ECONOMY

Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, you
know, Republicans have a simple message for the American people, and that
is, what we are doing here as Republicans is putting more money in your
pockets, creating more opportunities
for the American people, for American
families, and families all across America are feeling it today.
Americans are no longer seeing these
sky-high increases in prices like we experienced over the 4 years of the Biden
administration—not at all.
Five years ago, inflation began to
soar because of the Democrats’ reckless tax-and-spending plan. As a result,
we saw inflation hit 40-year highs, and
people suffered all across this country
as a result.
Well, over the last year, Republicans—now with President Trump and
a Republican House and Republican
Senate—have eliminated billions of
dollars of wasteful Washington spending, and we are seeing that the pressure on prices is easing.
Families in more than 40 States are
paying less than $3 a gallon for gasoline. In the Presiding Officer’s State of
Oklahoma and in my home State of
Wyoming, it is at $2 for gasoline right
now.
Lower gas prices, as the Presiding Officer knows, impact everything that a
family does. It impacts everything in
the country: the cost of groceries, the
cost of commuting to work, or keeping
going a ranch or family business. Energy prices affect all of it.
And lower prices are happening because Republicans are successfully
changing the direction of the country.
We promised to cut burdensome Biden
regulations—regulations
that
have
been punishing, penalizing—and we are
getting it done. We promised to unleash American energy and we have
done it. We have delivered on our
promises.
You know, under the Trump administration, permits to explore for energy
right here in America have gone way
up. It has been successful. The United
States has never produced more energy
than we are producing today. Energy
dominance is fueling our opportunity
economy. It is making a difference in
families and in their lives.
America is standing by our manufacturers and helping them. And, look,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

our Working Families Tax Cuts law
and the incentives in that are making
a real difference for our economy. It is
helping businesses build things, building them right here at home in America.
It allows for full expensing for factory improvements, new machinery,
and farm equipment. We are seeing
that in farms and ranches across Wyoming.
I heard it at the Farm Bureau. I
heard it from our stock growers. It is
encouraging businesses to innovate.
We have restored full and immediate
expensing for research, for development, done right here in America. And
we have made those savings permanent.
For businesses, that means it is more
affordable to build at home in America,
not 5 years from now but today, not
overseas but in places like Wyoming.
And people are responding. These
pro-growth policies are already driving
a surge of business investment. More
investment means more manufacturing
at home and more American jobs—jobs
that have been shipped overseas by the
Democrats in the past. More manufacturing leads to high-paying jobs at
home.
Construction sites are booming. You
are seeing it there in the construction
sites. You are also seeing it in the assembly line. More innovation, more
production means prices go down.
And small businesses are the engine
of Americans’ prosperity. The Working
Families Tax Cuts law helps small
businesses all across America.
The law makes permanent the 20 percent small business tax deduction.
Every Democrat voted against that.
Republicans are focused on helping
small businesses grow.
So American workers are the clear
winners in what we have done with the
Working Families Tax Cuts law.
You know, what we put in that law—
no tax on overtime—that means a lot
for the miners and the linemen in Wyoming. They are going to be able to keep
$1,400 more this year in their paychecks.
Now, the Democrat leader, Senator
SCHUMER, was just on the floor, and he
talked about firefighters. Well, firefighters work a lot of overtime. They
need to stay on the job. They do that.
No tax on overtime now—that means
more money in their pockets to take
home. Firefighters, the nurses in Wyoming—they are happy with what we
have done.
CHUCK SCHUMER, who was just talking about it, voted against it. The
Democrats wanted to raise taxes by $4
trillion. How is that going to help our
country? It is not.
And then I heard Senator SCHUMER
talk about bartenders. Well, we say no
tax on tips. Bartenders get tips as part
of their pay, so do waiters, waitresses.
Lots of people work with tips. No tax
on tips—every Democrat voted against
that. That was taking money—they
would rather just take that money for

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

themselves. They like the tips. They
want it to go to the tax so they can
spend more. We said: no tax on tips.
Look, this is money that our workers
in America have earned. They ought to
be able to benefit from it. It is not
going to be wasted away anymore by
these unaccountable, unelected, heavyhanded bureaucrats who think they
know better than the American people.
And it is certainly not going to continue to be stolen like it has been by
these fraudsters in Minnesota, while
the Democrats look the other way.
In all, American workers are going to
see higher take-home pay, more money
in their pockets, thanks to what we
passed with the Working Families Tax
Cuts law.
Republicans are creating an economy
that works for working Americans. We
are creating a prosperous America, an
America where citizens are free to use
their money. If they want to save it, if
they want to spend it, if they want to
invest it, they get to decide.
They want to use it to build a small
business, good. They want it to control
their family’s future, perfect.
It is no wonder that the University of
Michigan found that consumer sentiment continues to go up. That confidence rose the most among blue-collar workers—the workers who were hit
the
hardest
by
the
Democrats’
unaffordable economy.
Republicans were successful in stopping the Democrats’ $4 trillion tax increase. We eliminated burdensome regulations. We unleashed American energy. We are getting America back on
track. So that is why, today, Americans are seeing more money in their
pockets. They are going to see bigger
tax refunds. They are going to see more
opportunities in their future.
That is what Americans voted for
last November, and that is what Republicans have delivered. And this economic progress is just the start of the
prosperity to come.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
Democratic whip.
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, my
friend and colleague from Wyoming
mentioned many things about the Republican tax bill, but he failed to mention the most important part of it: It
ended up giving tax breaks to the
wealthiest people in America. It ended
up cutting $1 trillion from the Medicaid Program. Wait until that cut
works its way through the economy to
your local hospital and clinic, and
watch what happens.
They have already warned us: Unless
something is done, there is going to be
a lot of closures and a lot of reductions
of services in these hospitals in rural
areas, in small towns, and the inner
city. That is a fact.
If you want to give tax breaks to the
wealthiest people and you don’t care
about the impact on the regular families of America, that is exactly what
happened with the Republican tax bill,
and that is the reason why Democrats

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.004

S14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

did not support it. We believe that tax
cuts should be geared toward working
families who are struggling with affordability.
President Trump gave a speech yesterday in Michigan and choked on the
word ‘‘affordability.’’ He hates it. It is
a Democratic word. It is a hoax. It is a
fake.
It is reality. It is reality.
I don’t know how often the President
of the United States—and I am sure he
never has a chance—gets to go shopping at the local grocery store. I do so
almost every weekend I am home. I see
what has happened to prices. My wife
reminds me; other families remind me.
The cost of living has gone up, and you
give tax breaks here and there and the
other place and primarily to wealthy
people. It is not going to provide the
kind of relief that working families
desperately need. That is one of the
issues that will be decided by the voters in the next election.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

IMMIGRATION

Mr. President, the year was 1939, and
there was a ship that sailed from Germany destined for Cuba. It was bringing Jewish refugees from Europe,
which was falling into Nazi control, to
a free place to live in Cuba.
Unfortunately, as that ship, the St.
Louis, approached Havana, Cuba, it was
turned away. They wouldn’t allow
those Jewish passengers to find freedom in Cuba at the time. They then appealed to the United States, to President Roosevelt and his administration,
and they too turned them away. The
ship got so close, according to press reports, that they could actually hear
the bands playing in the nightclubs in
Miami. But they couldn’t land the ship.
And so they took the St. Louis back
to Europe with a thousand Jewish refugees. Many of them became victims of
the Holocaust. It was a bitter lesson
learned, particularly in time of war
and strife, that there is a need for
countries, where there is peaceful situation, to step up and do their part to
try to help refugees, those seeking asylum.
After World War II, the United States
decided that the St. Louis was a valuable lesson. We started leading the nations of the world in accepting refugees. It was an act of mercy, a humanitarian response to the reality that
these people were facing. And we were
proudly leading that effort for decades,
until very recently.
Under this President, the whole situation and policy have changed. This administration, unfortunately, is highlighting a policy that turns away refugees. The Trump administration has diverted resources from law enforcement
and national security efforts to focus
on arresting immigrants who pose no
threat to public safety. We have seen it
in Chicago. We have seen it in Minneapolis and in other cities. This administration is targeting legal immigrants who followed every rule and regulation.
Over the past few months, the Trump
administration has issued a flurry of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:06 Jan 15, 2026

S189

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

new policies effectively ending lawful—
lawful—immigration for individuals
from 39 countries. It harkens back to
the bitter experience of the St. Louis.
In November last year, President
Trump used the tragic shooting of two
National Guard members to justify a
freeze on all new visas of Afghan nationals. Many of these visa applicants
fought against the Taliban, alongside
American forces, and now must flee Afghanistan to avoid punishment or
death for the crime of working for us.
President
Trump
has
abandoned
them—so much for loyalty.
These men and women in Afghanistan decided they would risk their lives
to stand by our soldiers during that
conflict. They survived, and now they
are asking us to protect them from the
Taliban’s excesses. The President has
decided: No, thanks.
He slammed the door on Afghan nationals who risked their lives to save
the lives of American soldiers, and he
didn’t stop there. In addition to suspending these applications for Afghan
nationals, the Trump administration
paused all asylum refugee decisions.
The Trump administration has extended broad immigration bans to anyone from 39 different countries, including individuals from those countries
who are already in the United States.
Going through an asylee claim, a refugee claim, playing by the book, takes
months and sometimes years in refugee
camps. People go through extensive
background checks before they are
even considered to come to the United
States.
In this situation, those who have successfully made that journey are once
again in jeopardy with the new Trump
policy.
The administration is reviewing
again all legal immigration cases already approved for individuals from the
banned nations. To be clear, this expansion is not limited to nationals of
countries on the list. It also includes
anyone who has been born in any one of
those countries, even if they lived the
majority of their life somewhere else.
My office has received reports that
Canadians—Canadians—born in Iran
have been impacted by this new Trump
ban. There have even been reports of
the ban to stop parents who have completed every step of the adoption process from bringing their new babies to
the United States.
The administration has claimed this
is about vetting immigrants to protect
public safety. But tell me: Does it
make sense to deny entry for a baby
for vetting reasons?
What the President has done to bring
down the hammer on those who are legally immigrating from what he calls
‘‘s-hole countries’’—remember that
phrase, when the President, in his first
term, referred to those from Africa and
Haiti in profane and racist terms in the
Oval Office? At the time, the White
House denied having said that. But I
was there, physically present, when the
President made those statements, not

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

once but twice. I was in that meeting,
and I confirm that he used those vulgar
terms referring to people from other
countries.
Two Republican Senators publicly
accused me of lying. Well, in a rally in
Pennsylvania, last month, President
Trump bragged that he had indeed used
that slur that I referred to earlier.
And at a Cabinet meeting, last
month, he publicly called Somali immigrants ‘‘garbage.’’ The President of
the United States referred to people
from Somalia as ‘‘garbage.’’
Just yesterday, the administration
announced the termination of Somalis’
designation for temporary protected
status. TPS allows immigrants from a
country that is unsafe to temporarily
remain in the United States.
Does the President really think Somalia is a safe or stable place for these
individuals to return? I think not. He
just doesn’t care.
These racist comments and policies
have confirmed what we have known
all along. The President has deep-seated animus for immigrants who are not
White. Throughout this past year, he
has harnessed tragedies to justify his
anti-immigrant crusade, first with the
National Guard shootings and now with
many of his fraud allegations we heard
here on the floor of the Senate day
after day.
Last Friday, in the midst of Federal
immigration agents’ assault on Minneapolis, Department of Homeland Security began arresting recently arrived
refugees in Minnesota. These refugees
have already gone through intense vetting, sometimes for years, before they
have been allowed to come to the
United States. They followed our laws,
came here in the ‘‘right way.’’ Now
their lives will be turned upside down
again to serve the President’s political
agenda.
The fraud in Minnesota is serious and
warrants continued investigation, but
punishing thousands of refugees because of crimes they had nothing to do
with is just plain wrong and inhumane.
The Trump administration has tried
to politicize this fraud investigation,
but the first prosecutions for this fraud
began in 2022 during the previous Biden
administration.
The administration says their immigration policies are intended to protect
America. I am calling their bluff. What
they have done instead is to effectively
halt legal immigration for a long list
of countries, all of which have majority
non-White populations. This was their
real intention all along.
Already, the lives of people in our
immigration system, particularly people of color, have been unfairly upended. Immigrants are seeing their longscheduled green card interview canceled. Naturalization candidates have
been pulled from their scheduled citizenship ceremonies.
I know this to be true because it happened to my constituents who reached
out to our office. They are rightfully
upset that the administration has

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.006

S14JAPT1

S190

stopped them, these individuals, after
already approving them for citizenship.
They can’t take the oath of allegiance
to our country, and they don’t know
where this process is going to end.
My mother was a naturalized citizen
to the United States. I keep her certificate framed in my office in the U.S.
Capitol. Those who are willing to take
the oath of allegiance to our country
become some of our most loyal citizens. My mom was one of them. We
cannot abandon them.
We must not allow America to turn
its back on immigrants who followed
every rule and make America stronger.
It would be an affront to the Constitution and a retreat from our values and
heritage as a nation of immigrants.
This is an awful situation where
helpless people are being exploited for
political reasons. It is time for both political parties to step aside from the
campaign for a moment and speak to
the values that make America a better
country than most. I am proud to be
part of this country, but we are a nation of immigrants and should never
forget it.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SHEEHY). The Senator from Michigan.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

UNANIMOUS CONSENT REQUEST—H.R. 6019

Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, I am
once again asking my colleagues to do
the right thing and to unanimously
agree to repeal a provision that was included in the government funding legislation in November.
You will recall that the funding bill
included a provision that many Senators were simply not made aware of.
It came in at the last minute. It set up
a special payday of $500,000, paid for by
the taxpayers, for a select—a select—
group of eight Senators. That policy is
simply wrong. It goes against everything that we are supposed to be doing
as elected representatives to make life
better for the people who live in our
States and in the country.
We have all heard a lot of excuses
trying to justify why a handful of Senators deserves a big financial windfall.
Let me remind you why they are
wrong.
This all began when President Trump
and his political allies cooked up a
scheme to try to overturn the result of
the 2020 Presidential election, all so he
could stay in power. You will remember that he lost the election, but instead of respecting our Nation’s nearly
250-year history of peaceful transfers of
power, President Trump and his allies
launched a pressure campaign to try to
install slates of fake electors to overturn the election results in several key
States.
While Senators were here in this
Chamber pushing back on those false
efforts, President Trump instigated a
riot, urged his supporters to come here
and try to stop Congress from carrying
out our sworn democratic responsibilities.
We just observed the fifth anniversary of that attack last week, where so

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

many Members came to the floor—I
was here—and shared their memories
of the horror and violence of that day.
Those actions, led by President
Trump and his allies, were criminal—
simply criminal. Those crimes were exactly what the Department of Justice
was investigating when subpoenas were
issued for certain phone call logs.
These logs weren’t being targeted for
political reasons; they were part of a
legitimate and serious investigation
into criminal activity. The Justice Department followed standard legal practice in seeking those phone logs. This
should be just common sense.
But, unfortunately, there are those
who believe a select group of Senators
have the right to profit from being
caught up in a legitimate criminal investigation, and they are OK with
American taxpayers footing the bill.
They have claimed that this provision was never meant to enrich Senators, but the reality is, there is nothing in the law to prevent that from actually happening.
They have claimed that the special
counsel and the judge overseeing this
matter acted in bad faith, but in reality, there was no departure—absolutely no departure—from established
Department of Justice and judicial
practice.
I am not opposed to debating the
merits of this matter and determining
whether there needs to be forwardlooking changes. In fact, I would support some of those forward-looking
changes. But that is not what is happening right here. Instead, without any
thoughtful consideration, this body approved a provision to retroactively rewrite the law and set up the opportunity for special financial payments
to a select group of Senators.
When our House colleagues learned of
this, they were as surprised as most all
of us that were here in this Chamber.
Our House colleagues did the right
thing. They quickly and unanimously—
that is right, the House unanimously—
that doesn’t happen a lot—the House
unanimously, 426 to 0, passed a bipartisan bill to repeal this provision because they knew it was wrong.
We should be here working to lower
costs for our constituents and not
using taxpayer dollars irresponsibly. I
hope my colleagues will join me in
righting this wrong today.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to the immediate consideration of H.R. 6019,
which was received from the House and
is at the desk. Further, I ask unanimous consent that the bill be considered read a third time and passed and
the motion to reconsider be considered
made and laid upon the table.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there
objection?
The Senator from South Carolina.
Mr. GRAHAM. Reserving the right to
object, as a matter of fact, I have been
here a while. I can’t think of a time
that I felt the need to object.
You are entitled to your opinion of
me.

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

How do you get in this group of eight
people? Jack Smith went after my
phone records. I am the chairman of
the Judiciary Committee. We found out
later that this politically motivated
hit job against President Trump by
Jack Smith got eight of us, and there
are probably more.
What did I do to deserve this, Senator? I will just tell you. I don’t know
where you were at January 6. I was
here. I was probably the leading voice
on this side of the aisle to say the election is over; Biden won; Trump lost.
But you keep talking about Trump because—if there is a case of Trump derangement syndrome, I think it has
spread throughout the building.
I didn’t riot. I didn’t give cover to
the idea that the election was stolen—
quite the opposite. What was my big offense? Being a friend of Trump’s.
What are you trying to do here? Do
the right thing? The right thing is to
continue to investigate Jack Smith for
turning the law upside down, for creating a precedent that should scare
every Senator in this body.
The law is pretty clear—there is a
statute on point—that the Senate, even
with a nondisclosure order, is supposed
to notify the Members when somebody
wants our phone records. We are a separate branch of the government.
You don’t seem to be upset at all because they are coming after Trump and
a friend of Trump’s.
Now, when we do something, you
know, we are out to destroy Trump.
And anytime we look at what you all
did, you know, we are, I guess, a bunch
of crooks.
Now let’s talk about me and enrichment. The Democratic majority leader,
Senator SCHUMER, signed off on this. I
want the world to know—and the world
is paying no attention because it is
blowing up right now—that this provision was coordinated between Senators
THUNE and SCHUMER because a lot of
people worried that if they can do it to
Republicans, maybe they can do it to
Democrats.
So the idea that eight of us cooked
something up is ridiculous. We talked
to your Democratic leadership. The
fact that they didn’t talk to you is
your problem with them.
What happened? We sent to the Ethics Committee what we are doing, and
they didn’t send anything back. Now
they have.
So the bottom line is, Mr. President,
this provision was a result of ‘‘We are
not going to take it anymore.’’ The law
was flagrantly violated, I believe, but
he has already made a decision—Senator PETERS has—that Jack Smith was
lawfully in the right here. Have a hearing. He has already decided that Jack
Smith was right—right—to find my
phone records. Based on what? Being a
friend of Trump’s?
I will take this to the court. If your
goal is to intimidate me, boy, you
don’t know anything about me. If your
goal is to try to cover up a valid inquiry and stop Jack Smith from being

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.007

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

looked at, it ain’t happening. I am
more determined than ever to find out
how Arctic Frost got so off the rails.
Within 3 days of Trump’s announcing
‘‘I am going to run again,’’ the process
started, and within 6 months, he had 91
felony charges in Manhattan; in Atlanta, GA; in Washington, DC; and in
Florida. I had to spend $1.2 million to
go down to Georgia for the Fani Willis
debacle. So this will be looked at.
Was there a coordinated effort between Jack Smith—the special counsel—and the most liberal jurisdictions
in the country to knock Trump out of
the race by throwing everything you
could at him, whether it made sense or
not, and his friends? See, I don’t know,
but we are going to find this out, Senator PETERS. We are moving forward.
You have made up your mind. If it
were up to you, we would not be looking at Jack Smith. You made a mistake there by defending somebody
when you had no idea, actually, what
he did.
I think I pretty well know where you
are coming from, so I object. I object
because we did it in coordination with
the Democrats. I object because we let
the Ethics Committee know.
The House? The House did it quickly.
There are provisions in this bill from
the House that his amendment would
strip out—the notification requirement. Every Member should want to be
notified if anybody in the government,
in the executive branch, is looking at
your phone records. This provision
would strip that out. A private cause of
action would strip it out.
I live in America. We all live in
America. If you cannot hold your government accountable for violating your
rights or potentially violating your
rights, you have a very dangerous government. I am no better than anybody
else, but I am certainly—hell—no
worse than anybody else. So I want to
know why the government made a subpoena request that if you tell me about
what is going on here, that I am likely
to taint the witnesses and act irresponsibly. What have I ever done as a Senator to make you think that is me?
There was no factual foundation that I
would do anything illegal if you told
me. I did nothing illegal except to be
Trump’s friend, apparently. I inquired
as to whether or not I should vote to
certify the election on January 6, and I
did. I did not know this had happened,
but if it can happen to me, then, to my
colleagues over there, it can happen to
you.
So this unanimous consent request
would strip the notification out, and it
would strip the private cause of action
out. I think that is the wrong signal to
send to a government out of control.
With the private cause of action, the
$500,000 is to try to deter people from
doing this again. The bottom line is
the private cause of action needs to
stay if anybody else in the future gets
hurt like this or a private citizen.
There are a bunch of groups out
there—all conservative—that have had

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

S191

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

their phone records looked at, too, but
we are not going to give up. No matter
what Senator PETERS says, we are
going to look at it. There is Turning
Point USA. There are a lot of shenanigans going on out there with Jack
Smith, and we are going to look at it,
whether you want us to or not. So I
hope they can sue.
As to me, I am a Senator. If this provision—the private cause of action—is
seen out of line with what the Senate
rules now, I will gladly fix that. But
you are off base if you think I am doing
this for $1 million. I am going to sue
for much more than that, not just to
try to make my life whole but to make
people pay for trying to—you know,
forget my phone records, for God’s
sake. That will be in court. I will have
to prove that. I will make sure—and I
will have that in just a minute. There
is a provision to change the law so that
there is no doubt that I and the eight
others won’t get a benefit from the
$500,000. It won’t be personal. But we do
want to proceed with our case, and I
want other people to proceed with their
cases. If we do this right now, Turning
Point USA and a bunch of other groups
will not have a private cause of action.
I want to preserve that private cause of
action for a lot of other people who are
not Senators.
As to me, I don’t know. You are implying that I did something to benefit
me in the dark of night. You know, I
will remember that, but life goes on.
So I object. I object to what you are
doing. I object to the fact that you
think Jack Smith was legal when you
have no idea what he did.
I object.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The objection is heard.
The Senator from South Carolina.
Mr. GRAHAM. Therefore, I ask unanimous consent that the unanimous consent request be modified to include the
adoption of my substitute amendment,
which is at the desk.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there
an objection to the modification?
The Senator from Michigan.
Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, reserving the right to object, I want to say
that I greatly appreciate Senator GRAHAM’s proposal that he has put forward
just now. We received this last night,
but I think it is against the most critical issue here, which is the retroactive
rewarding or awarding of $500,000 per
violation of damages to a handful of
Senators. I very much appreciate Senator GRAHAM for doing that, but I don’t
believe that it gets to the full bipartisan-bicameral solution that we need.
Senator GRAHAM, I am sympathetic
to the arguments you have made here.
I can rebut some of them, but I don’t
want to get into that debate right
now—back and forth—to do it. But I
understand where you are coming from
on a lot of those issues.
I think there are other concerns in
this statute that were enacted in November that need to be addressed, including some potential for abuse for

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

the target of a criminal investigation
provision that is in the statute that remains retroactive. That could create a
lot of problems for Senators here on
the floor, to Senator GRAHAM’s point.
Certainly, dealing with the damages
provision, as my colleague proposes in
this proposal that he put forward just
now, is a significant part of the solution, but it is not the whole solution.
Senator GRAHAM, I just hope that
this can be a very positive starting
point. Thank you for making this offer
here today. I would ask if we could get
together and try to find some common
ground here to make sure that some of
the concerns that you have are addressed because I think those are reasonable. As to the part that you are
pulling out, which I think is unreasonable, I appreciate that you now agree
that that, too, is unreasonable. But
let’s have an honest, frank discussion
about the rest because, certainly, the
points you have raised are ones that I
want to have the opportunity to talk
about. I understand where you are
coming from, and I think we can find a
solution that will work for this body
and for the American people.
With that, I object.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The objection is heard.
Senators are reminded to address
each other through the Chair.
The Senator from South Carolina.
Mr. GRAHAM. OK. Sorry about that.
So, Mr. President, the objection is
heard.
Here is what the Ethics Committee
said about my proposal, about my
modification: that the amendment
cures the Senate 37.4 issue previously
identified in a letter sent to you.
So I asked the Ethics Committee:
Will this amendment cure any concerns
that people have about this provision
regarding me or any other Senator? It
does.
So, if that is what you want to do, I
think we have fixed it.
However, with all due respect to my
colleague, I am never going to agree to
drop the notification requirement. I
have had a ton of House Members say:
Please, don’t do that. All of us here
should want to be notified if someone
in the executive branch is looking at
our phone records. That would be terrible.
The private cause of action goes
away. I am never going to agree to
drop that. Why? There are a bunch of
people caught up in Jack Smith who
are not Senators, who may have a
cause of action, and they deserve their
day in court. As to my cause of action
under the statute, I am going to pursue
it but in a way that is compliant with
Senate rules.
I just want to put everybody on notice: The statute is just one avenue to
finding out what happened. There will
be others. I will go to the phone company. I will sue Jack Smith’s and
Biden’s DOJ—that is where I am headed—but I will do it in a fashion that is
consistent with the rules of the Senate.

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.009

S14JAPT1

S192

But I am not going to drop the private
right of action because there are a
bunch of people out there other than
me.
As to the notification requirement,
given the environment in which we are
all living, whether you are a Republican or a Democrat, I think we need to
be notified if the executive branch is
maybe doing something it shouldn’t do.
So I look forward to working with
you, and I appreciate ending this thing
the way we have ended it. I will be pursuing my legal rights consistent with
the ethics of the Senate, and maybe we
could work something out. But, Senator PETERS, we live in pretty dangerous times now, and I can see it
going bad on our side or on your side.
We need to protect these institutions
the best we can from things that may
come our way. It is me today, but it
could be you all tomorrow. And I love
the institution. People want to change
the rules, you know, to make it like
the House. I don’t.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Michigan.
Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, just in
response to Senator GRAHAM, I appreciate the offer.
As for the notification requirement
that you bring up, I believe in that. I
think it is absolutely critical that we
have that for the reasons that you cite.
There are some problems in the provision in that we think there are some
glaring exceptions to that that would
allow folks to say: No, we are not going
to notify you. That is unacceptable. We
should make sure that that notification requirement applies without the
abuse of the administration, regardless
of who is there, on what side, because
you are right.
Ultimately, our job is to protect this
institution as a coequal branch of government, and you and I share that sincere belief. I think these are just some
technical aspects we could work out,
and I look forward to that opportunity.
Mr. GRAHAM. Mr. President, I do,
too, and we will start it here soon.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant executive clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

H.R. 6938

Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, today, I
have the opportunity to rise here on
the Senate floor and speak in support
of the appropriations package that is
currently before the U.S. Senate, which
happens to include funding for Commerce, Justice, Science.
I chair the Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice,
Science, and I am pleased that this legislation provides significant and important resources to support our Nation’s
Federal, State, and local law enforce-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

ment in their shared mission to keep
America safe.
The package that we will debate and
discuss and vote on this week makes
targeted investments in the Federal
Agencies and Departments that conduct critical scientific research, bolster economic growth, promote U.S.
energy independence, and strengthen
our Nation’s national security. These
priorities are achieved while also making thoughtful reductions in spending
to ensure that taxpayer dollars are
being wisely spent.
Many rural and local law enforcement agencies continue to face resource and equipment gaps that limit
their ability to respond effectively and
keep their communities safe, and the
fiscal year 2026 CJS appropriations bill
addresses these needs by investing in
crime-fighting technology and equipment for sheriff’s offices and police departments in Kansas and across the
country. The legislation also equips
the Drug Enforcement Agency and the
FBI with resources necessary to dismantle drug trafficking networks that
have gained, unfortunately, a stronghold and a foothold in the United
States and to combat the fentanyl crisis that continues to claim way too
many American lives.
This bill contains funding for the national security and counterintelligence
missions that counter foreign threats
and protect U.S. interests. By investing in the Office of the United States
Trade
Representative,
this
bill
strengthens its capacity to enforce
trade agreements and expand markets
so that American producers like my
farmers back home in Kansas and manufacturers in my State can compete
and sell their goods around the world.
Finally, this bill invests in our Nation’s science Agencies—NASA, NOAA,
and the National Science Foundation—
to advance U.S. leadership in scientific
discovery and space exploration. At
NASA, it bolsters American leadership
in human spaceflight, space science,
and aeronautics at a very critical moment. This week, in fact, NASA is rolling out Artemis II, the next consequential step toward sending astronauts
around the Moon for the first time in
more than 50 years. That mission and
future missions depend upon a strong
U.S. aerospace industrial base made up
of engineers, machinists, suppliers, and
researchers. This bill makes certain
that America remains on course to lead
in space and does not cede ground to
our competitors.
Through NSF, the bill prioritizes
critical research and advanced manufacturing that bolster private sector
innovation, strengthen university-industry partnerships, and train the next
generation of scientists and engineers
right here at home—investments that
are essential to our long-term economic growth, to our national competitiveness, and to our national security.
At NOAA, this legislation bolsters
critical weather monitoring services,
increases resources for lifesaving func-

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

tions of the National Weather Service,
and makes certain that the National
Weather Service offices are staffed 24/7
to provide reliable forecasts to help
keep America safe.
As a senior appropriator, I have long
advocated for Congress to return to
regular order in the appropriations
process: debating, amending, and passing 12 separate appropriations bills
that fund the Federal Government. I
continue to be an advocate for that.
This package reflects that work, and I
commend Chairwoman COLLINS, Vice
Chairman MURRAY, and my colleagues
on the Appropriations Committee for
their efforts. I also thank my colleagues in the Senate more broadly
who have been so willing to allow us to
proceed to get to this point today.
I want to thank the CJS Subcommittee staff for their hard work,
dedication, and long hours. A lot of
work has gone on throughout the year
but with especially challenging time
constraints within the last few weeks.
This package would not be possible
without those staff members.
I thank my staff: Kevin Wheeler,
Brian Daner, and Rachel Taylor. I also
thank as well the minority staff: Jessica Berry, Blaise Sheridan, Lindsay
Erickson, and T.J. Lowdermilk.
This legislation that is Commerce,
Justice, Science Appropriations Subcommittee work product strikes a
careful balance, funding critical resources while also protecting limited
taxpayer dollars. The spending that we
always worry about being too much is
addressed in this legislation to make
sure that we are on a different path
than continued borrowing and spending.
I strongly urge my colleagues to support this package to provide these
Agencies with the resources they need
to keep our Nation safe, promote U.S.
leadership, and make certain that
America remains a leader in space.
This bill funds the Department of
Commerce, the Department of Justice,
and a number of science Agencies, such
as NASA and NSF. It is important to
the country that this bill occur. It is
also important to the country that we
avoid a shutdown at the end of the
month, and the bills that we pass this
week go a long way in making that
shutdown much less likely.
I thank the Presiding Officer for the
opportunity to speak to you and my
colleagues.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant executive clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
AFGHAN PAROLE PROGRAM

Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, we all
remember the tragic murder of SPC
Sarah Beckstrom on the eve of Thanksgiving. She was, as we all will recall,

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.010

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

one of the National Guard servicemembers working here in the District of Columbia. We are continuing to pray for
the recovery of Staff Sgt. Andrew
Wolfe, who was injured in the shooting.
But, of course, Specialist Beckstrom
lost her life.
The news cycle moves very quickly,
and it seems like while something happens today, tomorrow, it is something
new. But it is important that we not
allow the mistakes that were made by
the Biden administration when it came
to vetting Afghan nationals to be forgotten. We cannot ignore the reality
that Sarah Beckstrom was another victim—an unnecessary victim—of President Biden’s careless immigration policies.
The man who committed this heinous
act was an Afghan national whom
President Biden allowed to enter the
country after our disastrous withdrawal from Afghanistan. Unfortunately, it is too late to bring Sarah’s
life back, but her death should not be
meaningless, relegated to headlines
with no action. It is not too late to
look back on the flawed decisions that
allowed her killer to enter the United
States in order to correct these mistakes and to prevent future harm.
Furthermore, this crime at the hands
of an Afghan national parolee was not
a one-off occurrence. The following
week, another parolee—and I will define that further, but this is not pursuant to any law actually passed by Congress, like the Special Immigrant Visa
Program. This was done outside of that
program, with even fewer protections
and less vetting.
But the following week after Thanksgiving, another parolee nearly committed a terrorist attack in Fort
Worth, TX. Thanks to the Federal and
local law enforcement, they were able
to apprehend him and prevent him
from carrying out that attack.
I am grateful to the Department of
Justice, including the FBI, and our
State and local law enforcement officials who prevented this attack from
happening. But the fact that the perpetrator is here in the United States in
the first place underscores yet again
the failure to vet the individuals who
came into this country via the Biden
administration’s parole.
The repeated incidents—and there
are many more—committed or attempted by Afghan nationals demonstrate that something has gone terribly wrong with the way government
has been vetting or failing to vet aliens
who have entered the country, and I
believe that these questions deserve
answers.
For that reason, I am chairing a Judiciary Committee subcommittee this
afternoon, alongside our colleague Senator HAWLEY from Missouri, entitled
‘‘Biden’s Afghan Parole Program—A
Trojan Horse with Flawed Vetting and
Deadly Consequences.’’
At this hearing, we will carefully examine the policies implemented or
those failed to be implemented by the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

S193

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Biden administration that led to these
tragic events, particularly the flaws in
President Biden’s mass immigration
and parole programs that were not just
limited to Afghan nationals. As I have
said, ‘‘parole’’ is a unique term under
immigration law. But it is worth revisiting exactly how this happened, because, again, this happened not because
of any program passed by the Congress
but unilaterally by President Biden.
Under U.S. immigration law, ‘‘parole’’ in laymen’s terms is kind of like
an E-ZPass, like speeding through a
toll booth. U.S. immigration service
defines ‘‘parole’’ as ‘‘the discretionary
decision that allows inadmissible
aliens . . . [who] are not admitted to
the United States . . . to be physically
present in the United States.’’ It is sort
of like a permission slip.
Parole is an authority that allows
the Department of Homeland Security
Secretary to waive people into the
country who otherwise would not be allowed in.
Under Operation Allies Welcome,
President Biden extended this immigration E-ZPass to hundreds of thousands of aliens who weren’t eligible to
come to the United States. This discretionary authority was only supposed to
be used on a case-by-case basis. It is an
authority that President Biden repeatedly abused not only in this program
but at the southern border as well to
admit hundreds of thousands, even millions of individuals into the country
during the Biden years and their open
border policies.
But even though this authority is
supposed to be used only on a case-bycase basis, the Biden administration
turned this exception into the rule.
Now we also know that when it came
to the Afghan parole program, Operation Allies Welcome, the Biden administration allowed in many aliens
who had not been fully vetted, including the man who drove across the country to murder this young National
Guardsman and the man who threatened to carry out the suicide bombing
in Fort Worth, TX, who were not eligible to enter the United States but for
this discretionary E-ZPass issued by
the Biden administration without adequate protections for the American
people.
As we will learn at the hearing, in
most, if not all, cases, the Biden administration did not know exactly who
these people were. Many of them could
not say when they were born or even
their own last name.
I think we sort of fail to recognize
that the population we are dealing
with, the individuals in Afghanistan—
many of them are functionally illiterate. And, of course, many of them are
coming from this country that was
war-torn and literally run by the
Taliban, which is an international terrorist
organization.
Consequently,
many of these aliens have likely committed acts of terror or have ties to
terror groups.
In some cases, the U.S. Government
was asking the Taliban to verify infor-

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

mation on these individuals. Now, that
strikes me as rather bizarre. The
Taliban, a terrorist organization that
would kill many of the Afghans who
cooperated with the U.S. military—we
are actually asking them to verify the
identity and eligibility of these individuals to enter the United States. In
any event, the Taliban is hardly a reliable source of information.
The lack of information on these parolees also raises the possibility of a
preliminary background check coming
back clean because there simply wasn’t
enough information available to determine whether this person was safe or
not.
Essentially, the policy of the Biden
administration was—the default was,
come on into the country, in the absence of derogatory information. But
the fact of the matter is, in war-torn
Afghanistan, now run by a terrorist organization, where you have literally
functionally illiterate individuals, the
absence of derogatory information is
not any proof that these individuals
could safely be allowed into the United
States. So the default was, let them in,
even in the absence of any information
whatsoever.
At today’s hearing, we will learn
more about this and other problems
with the Biden administration’s mass
parole of Afghan nationals into the
United States.
Once again, let me just reiterate that
tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, even millions of individuals
were admitted into the United States
due to President Biden’s open border
policies, using this same claimed discretionary authority, which should be
used only on a case-by-case basis. But
the Biden administration opened its
arms and allowed hundreds of thousands of individuals—indeed, more
likely, a million or more individuals—
to come in on the parole program.
So the Afghan parole program was
simply a subset of the larger policy of
the Biden administration to welcome
foreign nationals with open arms into
our country without our knowing
enough about them to know whether
they would be a threat to public safety.
We will hear from two panels of experts who will help shine a light on the
missteps of the Biden administration.
Our first panel will include Mr. Craig
Adelman, deputy inspector general at
the Department of Homeland Security;
Michael Roark, deputy inspector general with the Department of Defense,
and Mr. Arne Baker from the Office of
Inspector General at the Department of
State. We have a second panel where
we will hear from researchers and policy experts who will speak to the nuances of the vetting—or the lack of
vetting—that the Afghan parolees underwent.
While it is important to treat our
friends and allies with proper consideration, assuming that they are not a
threat to the American people, if we
want the cooperation of other foreign
nationals in the future in some of our

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.011

S14JAPT1

S194

conflicts, the bottom line is the nonnegotiable demand has to be the American people being able to sleep safe at
night knowing they are safe from
criminal aliens and terrorist sympathizers. That is the nonnegotiable bottom line.
They deserve to know—we all deserve
to know what actions the Biden administration took or did not take that
risked their safety. At this afternoon’s
hearing, we will give the American people the answers or at least begin to
give them the answers that they and
we deserve.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The bill clerk proceeded to call the
roll.
Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

REMEMBERING HORACE ‘‘JIM’’ SHARP

Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, today, I
rise to honor the passing of a 101-yearold Kansan, World War II veteran, and
American hero, Horace ‘‘Jim’’ Sharp.
Mr. Sharp was born in Morris County, KS, and he spent his early years
tending to the family farm—not an unusual thing in Kansas, certainly not in
his generation.
At age 19, Jim surrendered his farm
deferment, courageously volunteering
to serve his nation in the U.S. Army
during World War II.
Through his service, Jim fought in
the Battle of the Bulge as part of Company B, 18th Infantry Regiment, 1st Infantry Division. It was during that battle that Jim earned three Battle Stars
and a Bronze Star. Although injured by
shrapnel during battle, Jim never received treatment, thus never receiving
the Purple Heart.
Following Jim’s combat service, he
served as a guard during the Nuremberg trials.
Shortly after returning home to Kansas following the war’s end, Jim would
marry his wife Marilyn, with whom he
would raise their three children and
enjoy 69 years of marriage.
Following the passage of the GI Bill,
Jim attended Kansas State University,
where he graduated with a bachelor’s
degree in business administration. Jim
then applied his degree by building a
career in data processing, eventually
retiring as the information systems
manager for the Kansas Farm Bureau
while also teaching information systems classes at Kansas State University and at Fort Riley.
Jim’s life of service continued well
after his time in the military. His dedication to his faith and his community
showed itself in so many ways. Jim was
an active member at his local Methodist church. His accolades also include
being a founding member and the first
president of the Northeast Kansas Battle of the Bulge Organization where he
raised funds to support the preserva-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

tion of the Manhattan, KS, Peace Memorial Auditorium and the K-State
World War II Memorial.
Jim’s World War II service is also
featured at Fort Riley’s 1st Infantry
Division Museum, honoring his story
and his service in the Nuremberg exhibit there.
Jim was an active member of the
Kiwanis, his local VFW and American
Legion, and many other local organizations focused on improving his community and aiding those in need.
Living to be 101 is remarkable in and
of itself, but Jim used that long life
that he was given to accomplish so
much more. His life of courage, sacrifice, and compassion served as an inspiration to all who knew him, and he
is dearly, dearly missed.
My prayers and concerns and care are
with his children Janet, Doug, and
Brian, his many grandchildren, greatgrandchildren, and great-great-grandchildren—the entire Sharp family. It
was my honor to see them as we celebrated Jim’s 100 birthday at the American Legion in Manhattan, KS, now
just about a year ago.
Jim was an authentic American hero.
Sometimes, I think we look for heroes,
and we can’t seem to find them. You do
not have to look past Jim Sharp. He
was a hero to his Nation, to his community, to his family, and to his
friends.
May Jim’s legacy not be forgotten,
his service honored. And we say to him
in these days: Thank you for your service. We respect you, and we are grateful.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
RICKETTS). The clerk will call the roll.
The bill clerk proceeded to call the
roll.
Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. MORAN. I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
Democratic leader.
UNANIMOUS CONSENT REQUEST—H.R. 1834

Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, Americans across the country—they could
be Democrats; they could be Independents; they could be Republicans; they
could live in the north, the south, the
east, or the west—agree on one thing:
The cost of healthcare is at crisis levels, and families are struggling to pay
for healthcare, such a necessity for
their families and themselves.
Now, on January 1, as just about everybody knows, the ACA premium tax
credits that lowered premiums for millions of Americans expired because Republicans chose to let them die. Republicans knew the crisis was coming;
they knew the consequences, and they
deliberately blocked relief from the
American people.
Already because of the callous actions of our Republican colleagues,
ACA enrollment has already dropped

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

by nearly a million and a half people.
The average American with an ACA
plan has seen their premiums double,
and many have seen them much worse
than that. It is outrageous; it is wrong,
and Republicans know it.
There is a demand from one end of
the country to the other to undo the
crisis by very simple—there is a very
simple way to do it. All Republicans
have to do is join Democrats in voting
for legislation that expands the credits
by 3 years. It will be done. It passed the
House. But mark my words, if Republicans don’t do it, America will know,
and the political price they pay will be
severe.
And so to rectify this injustice, to
rectify the fact that families are deciding whether to even have healthcare or
not or to cut back on something else
very important to pay for the increased
costs of healthcare, families are deciding that right now.
Every night, millions of American
families are talking about what to do
with these new healthcare bills that
have come through, which have doubled or tripled what they have to pay
each month, which will cut back in so
many instances on the kind of
healthcare
they
get—make
them
switch hospitals, switch doctors, not
afford the prescription drug that is desperately needed by their child who has
cancer.
Every night, Americans are grappling
with this horrible problem because
there is nothing more important to a
family than the health of its members;
yet Republicans blocked it. But my fellow Americans, the fight to lower
healthcare costs is not over. Today I
bring to the floor a very simple request, that when this Chamber receives
the bipartisan legislation that passed
the House last week, providing a simple 3-year reinstatement of the ACA
premium tax credits, that it be immediately agreed to in the Senate.
The Republican leader of the Senate
could put this on the floor, and it
would pass in the blink of an eye. Most
Republicans would vote for it because
they know how much the public wants
to renew these credits. So there is no
reason under Heaven for us to delay.
The House passed this bill last week by
230 to 196, and 17 Republicans joined
Democrats. That is not a fluke. That is
a glaring signal to Republicans that
Americans are demanding relief.
Fifty percent—55 percent of Trump
voters want the tax credits extended,
but the Republican Senate is blind, is
in a bubble, is not even understanding
the anguish of America about these increased healthcare costs. And they sit
there and come up with one excuse
after the other why they shouldn’t do
this. The House, fortunately, listened
to the American people and acted, and
the Senate should now do the same.
Leader THUNE knows that people
back home are suffering. He knows
that he can fix the problem by just putting the bill on the floor because it will
pass. There is a lot to discuss and debate when it comes to fixing our

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.012

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

healthcare system, but right now,
there is an immediate concern. Premiums are spiking across the country,
so the most immediate thing we can do
to lower healthcare costs for the American people is pass a clean restoration
of these credits.
We offered the Republicans the
chance during the so-called Big Beautiful Bill; they rejected it three times
unanimously. But they went home over
the summer and the fall and now into
the winter and they hear their constituents clamoring for relief. Open
your ears, open your minds, Republicans, listen to the American people.
There is no doubt, you know it, that
the majority of Americans, the overwhelming majority of Americans, even
the majority of Republicans and Trump
voters, want us to do this.
And frankly, to Americans back
home, it is not a Democratic or a Republican issue. The only thing they
care about is getting those costs lower.
And they want to know who is going to
step up and bring premiums down. Who
is going to lower costs?
Senate Democrats say in one voice to
Americans: We hear you. We have a
plan to bring your premiums down. We
can pass it through the Senate today,
right now, if only the Republicans get
out of the way.
We are going to keep at this. This
issue isn’t going away. We are going to
fight and fight and fight until we
achieve this for the American people
because it is so important. There are
other issues Republicans have out
there. Some want to block it because
they want to extend provisions that
hurt women on the issue of abortion.
Some want to block it because they
want to privatize the system, which
would only make it worse. But it
doesn’t matter; we can debate all those
things down the road. The opportunity
is now, right now, to allow this body to
unanimously pass this much-needed
proposal to extend the credits by 3
years.
I urge my Republican colleagues, let
this bill pass. Let’s give the American
people what they so fiercely and rightfully demand. Most of all, let’s give
millions of Americans relief from the
sky-high price of these premiums now
that the 3-year extension has expired.
Americans need it. Americans want
it. Americans demand it. It is the only
humane and right thing to do. This is
another chance for my colleagues
across the aisle to rectify their mistake and help the American people
with an issue that is at the top of the
list for them.
And so I ask unanimous consent that
when the Senate receives H.R. 1834 as
passed by the House on January 8, 2026,
that the Senate proceed to its immediate consideration; that the bill be
considered read three times and passed;
and that the motion to reconsider be
considered made and laid upon the
table.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there
objection?

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

S195

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

The Senator from Idaho.
Mr. CRAPO. Mr. President, reserving
the right to object.
My colleague’s proposal offers nothing new. The Senate has already rejected a so-called clean 3-year extension of the enhanced COVID credits in
December. None of the reasons we rejected this measure then have changed.
Perpetuating a fraudulent, failed system without reforms is not a solution.
Declining to offer consumers more
choice
and
control
over
their
healthcare is not a solution. Handing
insurers an additional $80 billion of
taxpayer money is not a solution.
Both sides agree that the costs of
healthcare are too high. We knew that
years ago when these credits were created and again when they were extended, but rather than fix that problem, the credits only exacerbated the
underlying issues that are driving up
the costs. We cannot continue to rely
on the same broken policies to fix
those systemic problems.
In December, Senator CASSIDY and I
proposed to begin the process of true
healthcare reform. Directing funds to
HSAs controlled by patients instead of
insurers would spur competition, prevent fraud, and reduce costs. Unfortunately, my colleagues on the other side
of the aisle rejected this proposal. Each
side knows what the other side cannot
accept. A real solution must respect
those boundaries and chart a new path
forward.
Unfortunately,
today’s
repetitive
proposal fails to do so, and for those
reasons, I object to the request.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The objection is heard.
The Senator from New Hampshire.
HEALTHCARE

Mrs. SHAHEEN. Mr. President, I
come to the floor today to join Leader
SCHUMER and others in requesting that
this body address the healthcare disaster that is facing millions of American families. It is a disaster, sadly,
that we have seen coming for more
than a year. And if we are serious
about protecting both the physical and
financial health of Americans, we must
restore the enhanced premium tax
credits that expired on December 31.
Congress has not fulfilled its duty to
protect
Americans
from
rising
healthcare costs. And at a time when
so many Americans are worried about
the cost of living, inaction is causing
health insurance premiums to skyrocket for millions of Americans. More
than 22 million Americans have already been affected by the expiration
of the enhanced premium tax credits.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services reported earlier this
week that more than 1.4 million people,
including tens of thousands in New
Hampshire, have already lost their
healthcare coverage because of the
unaffordable
cost
increases
of
healthcare premiums without the enhanced premium tax credits. And unfortunately, that is just the beginning.

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Insurers have told us higher prices and
more losses are coming, as families realize they can’t continue to pay their
monthly premiums. The Urban Institute predicted almost 5 million people
could lose their healthcare coverage.
Families are being forced to reduce the
quality of their coverage, and they are
facing higher out-of-pocket costs.
Back in October, one of my constituents from New Boston, NH, Darla, contacted me with serious concerns about
whether she and her husband would be
able to afford healthcare coverage
without the enhanced premium tax
credits. This is what is so disturbing.
Last month, she reported that her
family’s monthly premium would go
from $100 a month to $1,200 a month, so
more than $15,000 a year. She and her
husband can’t afford that kind of an increase. They are in their fifties; so they
can’t afford to go without healthcare
coverage.
If we fail to act, we have failed
Darla’s family and millions of other
Americans.
The crisis was avoidable. We knew
that this would happen if the enhanced
premium tax credits expired.
One year ago, on January 9, I introduced the Health Care Affordability
Act, which would have made the enhanced premium tax credits permanent. There are 44 Democratic cosponsors on my bill.
Last week, we saw the House pass an
extension with strong bipartisan support, and I applaud all those Members
of the House who supported that 3-year
extension and who worked hard to
make it bipartisan.
I know many of our Republican colleagues agree that we need to restore
the enhanced premium tax credits so
people like Darla and her family can
afford healthcare coverage. They know
that Americans want Congress to act
to bring down costs. And what Leader
SCHUMER asked for today is straightforward: that the Senate allow an immediate extension of the enhanced premium tax credits to move forward
without delay.
I am not surprised at the objection
because we saw what the vote was back
in December on extending the premium
tax credits in this body.
I am hopeful that the bipartisan efforts that have been ongoing to try and
find a compromise to address some of
the reforms that Senator CRAPO referenced, but also to ensure that we
can, both, lower the cost of healthcare
and make sure we don’t have millions
of families who lose their health insurance—I am hopeful that bipartisan effort can continue, that we can reach a
compromise, and that we can do what
is in the best interest of the people of
this country and the millions of Americans who are faced with losing their
health insurance coverage.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon.
Mr. WYDEN. Tomorrow is the final
day for Americans to sign up for health

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.014

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S196

insurance through the Affordable Care
Act Marketplace. After that, the doors
slam shut, high premiums are locked
in, and millions of families all across
the land will be unable to afford essential care.
On this side of the aisle, we have
been working for more than a year to
develop bipartisan support to prevent
this from happening. We told our Republican colleagues we wanted to work
with them, long before Donald Trump
was sworn in. Democrats spent the
summer warning about the dangers of
higher premiums, while Republicans
were forcing through the largest cut in
history.
We pressed for action before the
signup period began. At every turn,
Donald Trump and congressional Republicans slammed the door in the face
of millions of Americans seeking premium relief.
This morning, it is clear why. Yesterday, the Republican Study Committee,
which constitutes a majority of the
House Republican conference, released
yet another new plan to unleash another set of harmful partisan changes
to Americans’ healthcare. This is being
done when millions are already reeling
from the cuts that we saw to Medicaid
and the Affordable Care Act in the last
bill.
The new draft plan contains yet another trillion dollars in cuts to
healthcare which, if passed, would represent a knockout blow to the American healthcare system. It is, once
again, another hacksaw to Medicaid,
targeting blue States and cities in yet
another attempt to weaponize the Federal Government against the Republicans’ political opponents. This new
Republican plan would unleash insurance companies and shady brokers to
push more junk plans that I can tell
you aren’t worth the paper they are
written on.
Americans are fed up with high
healthcare costs, and yet Republicans
now want to double down on misery
and, once again, allow these Swiss
cheese health plans that don’t cover
healthcare like chemotherapy or prescription drugs.
This morning, the mask is off. It is
clear Republicans haven’t been serious
about holding premiums down from the
start. All the hemming and hawing
about healthcare premiums and taking
on big insurance has been for show, and
the American people are fed up with
excuses.
Today is an opportunity, finally, to
do the right thing. Senator SCHUMER
has made it clear that extending the
tax credits for middle-class healthcare
is a key first step—a first step—toward
moving America toward a healthcare
system that puts our families first.
That is the priority, not helping giant
corporations looking to do another
stock buyback.
Unfortunately, it seems like Republicans, on healthcare, are focused on
doubling down in the wrong direction.
That is what this morning’s developments say.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Kentucky.
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION

Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, for
years, the most pressing concern about
the future of NATO was whether and
when European allies would take the
obligations of collective defense more
seriously.
But today, the biggest questions
about the most successful military alliance in the history of the world would
have to do with us, the United States:
whether America still recognizes our
country as an anchor of transatlantic
security, an arsenal of democracy, and
a global leader, not just a regional
power.
I need to make a number of points
here, and it would be useful to talk a
little bit about its history.
The Second World War claimed tens
of millions of lives, displaced tens of
millions more, and left the old world
crippled by food shortages and hyperinflation.
After defeating Hitler’s genocidal bid
for world domination, American leaders understood that our interests and
those of our European allies were
linked, whether we liked it or not. As
George Marshall put it, back in 1947,
‘‘the United States should do whatever
it is able to do to assist in the return
of normal economic health in the
world, without which there can be no
political stability and no assured
peace.’’
American security and stability depended on European security and stability, not least because conflict with
Nazi Germany was succeeded immediately by the threat of conflict with
the Soviet Union. Millions in Eastern
Europe had gone from living under
Nazi tyranny to living under Soviet
tyranny.
The American people understood the
stakes. Back in 1947, more than threequarters of Americans rejected the idea
that the Soviet Union was merely
building its defenses against future attack. Instead, they thought that Russia was bent on conquest.
In 1948, two-thirds of Americans said
America and Western European friends
should join together for a mutual defense pact. By 1949, with the North Atlantic Treaty in the works, the question actually got more specific: Would
the American people support ‘‘a promise of mutual aid from all the members
of the alliance if any single member
nation is attacked’’—‘‘if any single
member is attacked’’?
That was a higher bar—the commitment that would become article 5—and
yet an even bigger majority of recipients again said yes.
Of course, there was some controversy and opposition. There were
still isolationists ignoring lessons of
the decade. But after years of neglect
for the national defense, after the folly
of appeasement and the failure of deterrence, after pouring the equivalent
of 37 percent of America’s GDP into the

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

‘‘Arsenal of Democracy’’ and burying
400,000 Americans, the American people
still knew the costs of war, and they
knew they would rather preserve the
peace.
Of course, they didn’t intend to do it
alone. Americans told pollsters that
their early skepticism toward post-war
alliance commitments stemmed from a
fear that allies would rely too heavily
on American leadership.
This would be a recurring theme.
But, importantly, for much of NATO’s
history, the U.S. leaders most concerned about burden-sharing were also
fierce defenders of the alliance. They
criticized allies because they wanted
NATO to work, not because they wanted to score political points here at
home.
Let’s just take, for example, our
former colleague Sam Nunn. On multiple occasions, including the 1974 and
1985 NDAAs, he pushed to force allies
to carry more of the costs of U.S. forward deployment.
And yet, when a majority leader of
his own party tried to force a phaseout
of U.S. troops from Europe, our former
colleague from Georgia fought back because he understood the value of American leadership and the importance of
European security to our own.
The strength of the transatlantic alliance is contingent on its leaders taking collective defense seriously—taking collective defense seriously. That is
why I have always called out laggards
and urged European allies to share
more of the burden.
But I have also given credit where it
is due, and the simple truth is that our
allies have undertaken a profound—
profound—transformation. This year,
Poland will spend 4.8 percent of its
GDP on defense. Estonia and Lithuania
will spend 5 percent, and Latvia will
hit that goal in 2027.
Alongside Nordic neighbors like Norway and Denmark, which have deployed to harm’s way alongside their
American comrades, NATO’s newest
members, Sweden and Finland, are
each on track to meet the alliance’s
new spending target years ahead of
schedule.
Germany has dramatically increased
defense spending, and the Germans
have even amended their Constitution—amended their Constitution—to
allow for deficit spending on defense.
Whether Europe’s largest economy is
serious about its defense transformation is really no longer up for debate. That debate is over.
Not every ally is making such impressive progress, but no one can claim
ignorance of what is at stake. As Poland’s Prime Minister put it bluntly,
the choice facing Europe is this:
‘‘money today or blood tomorrow’’—
‘‘money today or blood tomorrow.’’
Perhaps that is why, in addition to
investing heavily in their own defenses,
European allies are continuing to
dwarf America’s assistance to Ukraine
by a factor of 10 to 1. Let me repeat
that. European allies are continuing to

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.016

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

dwarf—dwarf—America’s assistance to
Ukraine by a factor of 10 to 1.
Our allies’ long holiday from history
is over. That is good news, and it must
continue.
Well, what about us—the Americans?
European allies continue to grow
their defense budgets, but ours have
stayed flat across successive administrations. We are the ones leaving capacity unused and political will untapped. We are talking, but we are not
doing—talking but not doing.
The President was right to call for a
major increase in defense spending, but
the annual defense budget request from
OMB this year doesn’t even keep up
with inflation. The fiscal year 2026 top
line won’t come close—close—to covering growing costs and requirements,
like the multiyear munitions contracts
the Department of Defense rightly
wants to actually sign.
We should keep the cost and value of
America’s own commitment to the
transatlantic alliance actually in perspective. Take the year 1982—right in
the thick of the Reagan buildup that
won the Cold War. In fiscal 1982, sustaining U.S. military operations in Europe accounted for less than 6.5 percent
of defense outlays.
Now, remember: Winning World War
II meant surging defense spending to 37
percent of our GDP. But at the climax
of the Cold War, when we were spending only 6 percent, sustaining a deterrent military presence in Russia’s
backyard took up less than 6.5 percent
of our annual defense budget. Now,
that sounds a lot less like an entangling alliance than a smart investment
in preventing catastrophic war.
Well, what did the American people
say? How did they feel about that?
In 1989, with the Soviets on the ropes,
75 percent said that NATO ought to be
maintained
beyond
victory—maintained beyond victory. Thirty years
later, in 2019, an even greater majority
gave the very same response, even before Putin’s escalation in Ukraine.
What about now? With Russia waging
a war of conquest and with China, Iran,
and North Korea pitching in to help
them, has NATO outlived its useful
life?
Is the notion of U.S. interests in Europe just a relic from the Cold War?
Or, to paraphrase some of Moscow’s
most useful idiots, has NATO’s existence and growth provoked Putin’s aggression?
Let’s get a few things straight.
For decades, America and our allies
bent over backward to welcome Russian participation at NATO, including
through the Partnership for Peace program, and to integrate Russia into the
global economy. America sent billions
of dollars in economic assistance and
encouraged massive investment of private capital in the hopes that Russia
would choose to live in peace with the
nations it formerly enslaved and with
the West.
In other words, the invitation was
open to join us and be a part in what

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

S197

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

we were doing. Putin has repeatedly rejected such peaceful coexistence. Instead, what he has done is he has chosen bloody, neo-Soviet empire-building
instead.
To the extent that NATO has grown,
it has been in response to Russian aggression. If Putin is looking for someone to blame for Sweden’s and Finland’s accessions to the alliance, he
can simply look in the mirror. His own
brutality has validated the decisions of
sovereign nations to join NATO and
align with the West.
As for the utility of the alliance for
our interests, America’s adversaries
are choosing to work together. Responding by going it alone would be
strategic malpractice.
We are courting Russia and its GDP
of $2.5 trillion at the expense of longstanding bonds with Europe and its
GDP of—listen to this—$27 trillion?
Europe collectively has a GDP of $27
trillion. Russia’s is only $2.5 trillion.
That doesn’t even align with U.S. economic interests, let alone our values.
Last year, Europe invested $3.5 trillion directly in the United States—
here. In recent years, two-thirds of our
European allies’ growing investments
in foreign military technologies have
been in American-made systems. Together, we make up nearly half of the
global economy. Europe plus America
make up about half of the global economy.
If we are serious about global competition with China, these are relationships worth tending. These are allies
we ought to be working with, not
against, which brings me to the matter
of Greenland.
The President is right that Arctic security is a central concern in our strategic competition with major adversaries, and he will find similar interest
in Arctic security among allies like
Denmark, which is investing billions of
dollars in its own capabilities in the region.
America’s recognition of Denmark’s
political and economic interests in
Greenland dates all the way back to
World War I. The Danes have been
close partners in the Arctic since
World War II, and brave Danish soldiers fought and died in America’s wars
in Afghanistan and Iraq. There is no
ambiguity here—no ambiguity. Close
ties with our northernmost allies are
what make America’s extensive reach
in the Arctic actually possible. And I
have yet to hear from this administration a single thing we need from Greenland that this sovereign people is not
already willing to grant us.
Unless and until the President can
demonstrate otherwise, then the proposition at hand today is very straightforward: incinerating the hard-won
trust of loyal allies in exchange for no
meaningful change in U.S. access to
the Arctic.
That is the definition of ‘‘allies’’—
plural—because this is about more
than Greenland. It is about more than
America’s relationship with its highly

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

capable Nordic allies. It is about
whether the United States intends to
face a constellation of strategic adversaries with capable friends or to commit an unprecedented act of strategic
self-harm if we choose to go it alone.
So let’s make no mistake. All of the
good progress the President has made
in pushing allies to spend more on defense, the increased burden-sharing,
the demand for American-made capabilities—all of it would be for nothing
if his administration’s ill-advised
threats about Greenland were to shatter the trust of our allies. Following
through on this provocation would be
more disastrous for the President’s legacy than withdrawing from Afghanistan was for his predecessor.
The American people know this. Just
17 percent think trying to take control
of Greenland is a good idea. Seventeen
percent think our taking Greenland is
a good idea. Instead, they understand
intuitively that strong alliances make
America more secure—more secure.
The Reagan National Defense Survey, conducted late last year, found
that 68 percent of Americans hold a favorable view of the transatlantic alliance—68 percent—and 76 percent support article 5 and a U.S. military response in the event of an attack on a
NATO ally. In just 6 months, that
measure grew by 5 percent.
Here is the most interesting finding.
Among Americans who initially said
they would support a U.S. withdrawal
from NATO, nearly one in five changed
their mind when they learned how our
European allies are stepping up their
commitments to collective defense.
I am happy to provide these findings
to anyone in Washington who still bets
against the future of the transatlantic
alliance, but the American people, who
already understand the stakes, may
not be so patient. They are telling anyone who will listen that when they say
‘‘peace through strength’’—when the
American people say ‘‘peace through
strength,’’ they mean what President
Reagan meant: leading with moral
clarity, distinguishing clearly between
aggressors and victims, investing in
the arsenal of democracy, equipping
friends—friends—who fight for themselves, preparing to win wars, and upholding the alliances that deter them.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Mississippi.
UKRAINE

Mr. WICKER. Mr. President, we live
in a dangerous time. There are a number of flash points all around the
globe—in this hemisphere, in Europe,
in the Indo-Pacific—but I want to remind my colleagues today that, still,
the most dangerous thing going on
around the world today is Vladimir
Putin’s war against freedom and the
West in Ukraine.
I would point out that for the past
year, Vladimir Putin has mocked the
Ukraine peace process by steadily escalating his attacks on his neighboring
country. He has recently launched the

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.018

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S198

biggest air attack the conflict has ever
seen and shown repeatedly that he is
not interested in peace talks. He gives
lipservice to peace talks, but his acts
show that he is not interested.
Now, by contrast, in the last few
weeks, the United States, Ukraine, and
our European friends have come together on a common negotiating position centered on several key principles.
Here are the key points: Ukraine
should not be forced to give up the sovereign territory it deserves and it currently controls. Also, Putin should not
achieve through negotiation what he
has not managed to achieve on the battlefield, and there have been great disappointments to Putin on the battlefield. In addition, the United States
should play a role in Ukraine’s security
guarantees on a permanent basis. The
Senate should ratify these guarantees
if they are ever agreed to.
In the meantime, the Ukrainian people should be assisted in continuing to
fight for their freedom.
I commend President Trump, President Zelenskyy, and European leaders
for continuing to come together to
reach a consensus. As we seek a just
end to this brutal, unprovoked war, I
urge everyone in Washington, in Kyiv,
and in the great capitals of Europe to
remain united and to remember who we
are dealing with in the form and person
of Vladimir Putin.
Vladimir Putin is unrepentant. He is
ever and will always be the KGB agent.
He is a dictator with decades of bloodshed on his hands. He is the biggest
thief in the history of the world, a war
criminal who should be behind bars at
this moment. And, of course, Putin is a
liar.
When Vladimir Putin smiles to
American negotiators, he acts as our
friend and he acts as if we believe he is
our friend. We have no reason to smile
back at Vladimir Putin or trust him
with anything but caution and contempt.
After 4 years, Putin knows a Russian
victory is not inevitable. More and
more, the American people see and
know this. A November poll found that
70 percent of Americans do not trust
Putin to honor any peace agreement
with Ukraine.
He is cut from the same cloth as terrorists all over the world and terrorists
down through history. In Putin’s attack on civilians, for example, we see
parallels with the Hamas terrorists
who rampaged through Israeli neighborhoods on October 7. The terrorists
are Putin’s friends. And don’t forget
this, and sometimes it is not publicized
as it ought to be: Putin has abducted
20,000 Ukrainian children and subjected
many to brainwashing schemes. In
these horrors, we see the likes of Xi
Jinping and his Uighur reeducation
camps. Putin routinely locks dissidents
in jail, just like his kindred spirits in
other censorship regimes.
This tyrant who wants to be treated
as a peer in the world’s great halls of
democracy should be known by the
company he keeps.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

When the brutal Syrian dictator
Bashar al-Assad was toppled, thankfully, where did Bashar al-Assad run?
He ran for safe haven to Moscow—that
is where he went—to be under the protection of Vladimir Putin, who seeks to
make us believe that he is an honest
negotiator. Nicolas Maduro was wisely
counseled to flee Venezuela. If he had
run, where would he have run? He
would have run straight to Moscow.
For decades, Russia has been a friend
to the murderous Cuban regime. And
now, as the Supreme Leader in Iran
considers his options, where might he
go for refuge? The only place he could
go is Moscow. So that is the company
Vladimir Putin keeps in current day.
But Putin even echoes the likes of
Adolf Hitler. Putin routinely talks
about ‘‘liberating’’ the Russian-speaking Ukrainians living in the Donbas
and other areas of Ukraine. This is the
same vile, absurd pretext that Adolf
Hitler used when he invaded the German-speaking regions of neighboring
countries in Europe, including Poland.
That is who Vladimir Putin is.
Regrettably, the people of Russia are
led brutally by Putin, this world-historical villain.
Ukrainians will continue fighting
against his unprovoked attacks but not
because they hate peace. The Ukrainians will continue to fight because
their alternative is the extinction of
their country.
The West needs to stand with them.
We need to stand with Ukraine, and we
must keep assisting our friends. We
need to send a clear message that
Putin cannot wait us out.
In December, I am grateful to say to
my colleagues that Congress overwhelmingly passed and President Donald Trump enthusiastically signed the
National Defense Authorization Act.
That law extends Ukraine’s Security
Assistance Initiative and our commitment to sharing intelligence with
Ukraine. Good for the President, and
good for our friends in the House and
Senate.
Our allies across the Atlantic are
taking the lead now, as my colleague
from Kentucky just pointed out, in financing
security
assistance
for
Ukraine. NATO allies are buying equipment from us in the United States and
giving it to Ukraine. I certainly applaud that, as all Americans should.
The United States should increase
the air defenses and long-range strike
capabilities that we are sending to
Kyiv. More than any other capabilities,
these will help show Putin his military
aims are not achievable.
For nearly 4 years, Ukrainians have
demonstrated their resolve, as they
will continue to do. The West must
continue to stand resolved with them.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant executive clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SHEEHY). Without objection, it is so ordered.
IMMIGRATION

Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President,
many times, under both Republicans
and Democrats, I have come to the
Senate floor to raise concerns and
warnings about how immigrant children called unaccompanied children
are handled by Republican and Democrat Departments of Health and Human
Services. When immigration people
don’t have the capabilities or probably
the legal right to determine where unaccompanied children should be handled, they are turned over to a division
in the Department of Health and
Human Services to do it.
In the recent 4 or 5 years, we have
had lots of cases where the lives of
these children aren’t protected because
the Department of Health and Human
Services isn’t properly vetting the
adults these children are placed with.
So once again, I am here to give you
some updates on my concern about
that and an update today on investigations that I have followed up on.
As we start a new congressional session, I am here to discuss, as I have
just said, an oversight topic of significant importance.
For over a decade, I have investigated the government’s mismanagement of migrant children and related
matters. My work covers both Republican and Democrat administrations.
During the Biden administration, the
vetting process to safeguard these children barely existed, putting them in
harm’s way. Today, I am making public records obtained from the Trump
Department of Health and Human
Services which illustrate the dire consequences of weak Biden administration vetting policies. These records
show terrible cases of fraud and exploitation involving vulnerable children,
and the public needs to know that this
is probably just the tip of the iceberg.
I will give you three examples.
One sponsor allegedly applied to take
in two migrant children as their father—and as I will show you today, I
have two other examples of a person
pretending to be a father who was not
a father.
Later, this first father I am telling
you about allegedly assaulted these
brothers on a regular basis. He reportedly didn’t allow the brothers to contact their mother, and he didn’t enroll
them in school. Instead, the brothers
lived in a trailer without heating or
cooling. The brothers worked 7 days a
week until 10 p.m. and lived on one
meal a day. The brothers’ sponsor also
reportedly withheld the wages that the
brothers earned so that smuggling fees
to get into this country could be paid.
The brothers’ sponsor reportedly had
a violent criminal history, which could
have
been
revealed
through
fingerprinting background checks, and
these background checks are now required by the Trump administration.
They were assumed to be followed by

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.019

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

the Biden administration and obviously were not.
The Trump Health and Human Services told my office that they sent this
evidence to law enforcement for, hopefully, prosecution.
My second case describes the mistreatment of two other migrant children placed into the care of another
sponsor who applied to take them in as
their father. One of the children was
reportedly forced to sell drugs.
The records show this sponsor was
later known to have used multiple
aliases as far back as 2015. In addition,
records show this sponsor has past convictions for fraud, which should have
been caught by fingerprinting checks.
This sponsor reportedly later kidnapped his wife for 24 hours and threatened to kill her.
Thankfully, the Health and Human
Services Department told my office the
children have been removed, and HHS
has transmitted this evidence to law
enforcement.
The final case I am going to bring to
you today concerns a 4-year-old boy
who was released to someone who
claimed, as you could expect, to be his
father. According to Health and Human
Services’ records, nearly 6 months
later, the boy’s sponsor called to say
that he had taken another job and that
his mother would take care of the 4year-old.
Approximately 1 month later, the
sponsor’s mother allegedly confessed
that her son was not actually the boy’s
real father. Instead, it was later revealed that the sponsor allegedly
colluded with the boy’s biological
mother to obtain a fraudulent birth
certificate to get the boy into the
United States.
Health and Human Services told my
office they have sent evidence of this
fraud to law enforcement.
As these records indicate, the Trump
administration has created new DNA
testing policies to verify sponsor parents. Now any sponsor of a migrant
child claiming to be a biological parent
should undergo DNA testing to confirm
they are actually related.
Sadly, these stories were all but inevitable
because
the
Biden
HHS
prioritized speed—getting these people
out of the immigration system, getting
them out of the authority and the responsibility of HHS. That speed was all
prioritized over the safety of the children. Thankfully, the Trump administration put new policies in place.
I greatly appreciate the cooperation
with my oversight from Health and
Human Services. Specifically, I appreciate the cooperation of Secretary Kennedy, Assistant Secretary Adams, and
Director Salazar of the Office of Refugee Resettlement.
As the record states, this administration has made efforts to expand DNA
testing to help ensure sponsors are, in
fact, who they claim to be. In addition,
fingerprinting checks should reveal if
new sponsors have a criminal or a violent past.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

S199

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

It is pretty simple: Get the background work done to protect these
kids.
Together, these new policies represent important steps needed to correct the mistakes of the Biden administration.
More can always be done to safeguard
the welfare of vulnerable children. For
these reasons, my oversight will continue.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Ohio.
MARCH FOR LIFE

Mr. HUSTED. Mr. President, as we
approach the March for Life, an annual
celebration of life held in cities across
America, I want to share what choosing life means to me and, for the many
others who share my similar story,
what it means to them.
When my birth mother became pregnant with me, she faced an incredibly
difficult choice—a choice that I know
thousands of women across our Nation
are facing even as I speak today. Her
husband had passed away, and she was
already raising two young boys. After
starting a new relationship, she found
herself pregnant with me. Money was
tight. She had little support. And she
soon found herself being pressured to
have an abortion.
Over the years, I have reflected on
just how tough and courageous that decision must have been for her. I always
try to think about what it would have
been like to have been in her shoes and
how difficult that must have been. Fortunately, she chose life and the path of
adoption for me, which was just an
amazing blessing.
After a brief stay in foster care, I received the greatest blessing of my life.
I was adopted by my loving parents,
Jim and Judy Husted.
I spoke with my mom and dad last
night. My dad is amazing, and he is
about to turn 88 years old. He and my
mom have always given me the gift of
unconditional love—the greatest gift
any parent could give to their child.
I share my story because I want
women to know this: You are not
alone. Others have walked the road
that you are on, if you find yourself
pregnant and without the support you
need—you think you need—to make it,
and there is a grateful child, one day,
who will, hopefully, tell you that.
You don’t have to walk that road by
yourself. There is support out there for
you. In Ohio alone, women have access
to nearly 200 pregnancy help centers
and maternity homes that serve expectant mothers. I have visited many
of them. They want you to go see
them, if you are in need, if you are
scared, if you need someone to talk to.
They are there to help, not to pressure,
not to judge but to provide love, care,
and support. Many of the women who
staff these pregnancy resource centers
have faced the very same challenges
that you are facing right now.
I know that my birth mother somehow found her way to Catholic Social

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Services and had that support. I hope,
if you are struggling and you feel that
aloneness out there, that you know
there are people out there who want to
help and that you won’t feel alone. I
know being alone in a tough situation
is the worst thing that you could possibly feel, but there are people out
there who want to help you.
So, as we prepare for another March
for Life this year, I hope we can remember a few simple truths.
First, the March for Life reminds the
country that this cause is ever-present;
that laws may change but that culture
only changes when people are willing
to stand up publicly and peacefully for
the cause of life.
Second, unborn children cannot
march. They cannot vote. They cannot
advocate for themselves. They rely on
you to do that. So thank you for continuing to be a voice for them.
And, third, the pro-life movement is
not just about opposing abortion. It is
about supporting mothers, families,
and children with real help and real
hope. The March for Life shines the national spotlight on that lifesaving
work that people at pregnancy resource centers and places like that are
doing across our country every single
day.
So, as I reflect on my own good fortune and the courageous strength of
my birth mother and the gratitude I
have for my mom and dad, who adopted
me and gave me a great life—full of
love, full of support—and as we prepare
for the March for Life, I hope that we
will remember those sacrifices, will remember the challenges, and do all we
can to support those expectant mothers and the children of our Nation.
Thank you for the opportunity to
share my story, and may God bless
America.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
BANKS). The Senator from Oklahoma.
50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE HYDE AMENDMENT

Mr. LANKFORD. Mr. President, this
year, 2026, is the 50th anniversary of
the Hyde amendment. Now, that may
not mean a lot to a lot of people, but 50
years ago, the U.S. Senate and the U.S.
House and the President of the United
States came to a compromise agreement over the issue of abortion. It was
a long, drawn-out process. At the end
of that long, drawn-out debate, they
came to a compromise agreement that
Americans would not have to pay for
elective abortions. It didn’t outlaw
abortion in America, but it said: We
have disagreements on abortion as
Americans, but at a minimum, we
should agree American tax dollars
should not pay for the taking of human
life; that healthcare is about protecting life, not taking life; that in a
controversial issue like abortion, at
least we should all agree we don’t use
tax dollars to pay for abortion. That
was 50 years ago this year.
It is amazing to think about how
many things have changed in American
attitudes in 50 years. But what hasn’t
changed is we still haven’t come to an

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.020

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S200

agreement about abortion. We still
haven’t been able to resolve that issue.
Now, science has resolved that issue,
but we in American values and culture
have not. Science would say that a
child’s life begins at conception, that
that is the moment the DNA is different than the mom’s DNA. Every single cell in the mom’s body has the
same DNA except for those cells. Those
cells are different. They have a unique
DNA in the world because that is a different person that is there. The cells
are dividing and growing. There is no
difference between a child in the womb
and a child outside the womb other
than time. That is a separate child.
Science has settled that issue, but,
culturally, we haven’t been able to settle this issue: Are some children valuable and are some children disposable?
Our culture still believes there are
some children that are disposable. I
don’t. I think every child is valuable.
Whether you are a child born in a
wealthy household or in poverty, that
child has opportunity in America if
they are allowed to live.
It is this ongoing dialogue that we
have as a country: Do we value the
most vulnerable in our society? It is a
conversation that has been going on
now five decades, and next week, there
will be tens of thousands—probably, actually, hundreds of thousands—of students and adults that will all come to
Washington, DC. I am sure, as it always is on that January day, it will be
cold outside. And they will walk down
the Mall and gather for a rally that is
simply called the March for Life. They
will talk about the beauty of life. They
will talk about the value of every
child. There will be testimonies of people that their family has personally experienced abortion. There will be testimonies of folks that they directly have
experienced the pain of abortion. There
will be folks who will stand up as physicians and talk about the medical
issues. But, ultimately, there will be
conversations about every single child
being valuable and beautiful.
There will be people in the crowd
that were born in poverty, people in
the crowd that were born in wealth—
just like every other child in America
that is in the womb—except those folks
that will be at the rally will be celebrating the fact that they were born,
No. 1, and that they had an opportunity to be able to speak out for the
next generation of people that so much
desires to be born and to have the same
opportunities all of us in this room
have: to grow, to learn, to love. That is
all that child wants, and they had the
opportunity to be able to have that.
As I mentioned, 50 years ago, the
Hyde amendment was put in place.
Every single part of our healthcare operation with Federal dollars is all covered by the Hyde amendment. Whether
it
be
Department
of
Defense
healthcare, whether it be Veterans’ Administration, whether it be Indian
healthcare services, whether it be
CHIPS services for children, all of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

those are covered by Hyde protections
with this basic compromise agreement
that we will not fund abortions with
American taxpayer dollars—well, except for one area, and that is actually
ObamaCare.
When the Affordable Care Act was
passed, there was an attempt to be able
to have the Hyde amendment actually
included in that. That was actually put
in in the House of Representatives
when they sent it over to the Senate to
say: No, let’s include the Hyde amendment in this like we do every other
part of our healthcare agreement.
When it came to this body, though,
my Democratic colleagues stripped
that out, and they included in a different section saying: No, we are actually going to create a workaround
around the Hyde amendment so that
we can quietly fund elective abortion,
for the first time, with Federal tax dollars. That workaround still exists
today.
The original agreement and the conversation was that every State would
allow some options that would have
elective abortions for your healthcare
coverage and some options that you
could choose without that—except now
that there are 12, maybe 13 States
working that don’t allow any option of
the Affordable Care Act, of ObamaCare,
to be in their State that doesn’t also
require abortion coverage. So even people that are morally opposed to abortion and the taking of human life don’t
have an option to buy coverage in their
State for healthcare without having
abortion coverage built into it.
Now, the issue became, well, there
will be some kind of set-aside dollars
that will be separate, that you will
have a separate premium that you will
have to pay, and that separate premium will pay for the abortion coverage—except the insurance companies
can’t actually show where that separate premium is. In fact, after the law
passed that required a separate payment for abortion coverage there so
there would be a type of Hyde, is what
they called it, the Obama administration immediately came out and said:
Actually, the word ‘‘separate’’ actually
means ‘‘together’’—I am not making
this up—and so you now have your premiums together, but it is defined as
being separate.
Only in government can you define
‘‘separate’’ as meaning ‘‘together.’’
So we still have this one form of
healthcare in America that violates
this 50-year-old compromise: We don’t
use taxpayer dollars and compel Americans who actually value children to
pay for the taking of the life of a child.
We are still working on that. Ironically enough, there is still an ongoing
debate on the Affordable Care Act—on
ObamaCare—still raging in this body,
even this week, and much of it circles
around ‘‘Is this going to be about
healthcare or is this going to be about
the taking of human life?’’
I have no issue if we are working on
a healthcare policy. I have a big issue

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

if we are working on taking the life of
an innocent child.
There is also an ongoing debate that
is happening right now over chemical
abortions—‘‘mifepristone’’ if you want
to use the medical term, and there are
several generics that are out there as
well. This is an abortion drug that is
literally now mailed to you without
seeing a physician. Now, that didn’t
used to be so. It is a prescription drug;
it is not an over-the-counter drug. It is
a prescription drug for a reason—because it has very, very serious side effects.
But this prescription drug—during
the COVID time period, the Biden administration said: You know, there is a
COVID crisis. People can’t get in to see
their doctor right now, so we will allow
them to call in, and there will be this
medicine mailed to them.
So for the first time, suddenly
mifepristone, which actually causes an
abortion for a woman—that drug is
now being mailed without ever seeing a
doctor.
Now, some folks have alleged ‘‘Oh,
that is no big deal. It is used all the
time, so it must be completely safe.’’
In fact, my favorite term that I hear—
I hear it even from some folks in this
body—is that mifepristone is as safe as
Tylenol. I have heard that so many
times: It is as safe as Tylenol. It is as
safe as Tylenol. It is as safe as Tylenol.
Let me start with some basics. When
you take Tylenol, it doesn’t take a
child’s life. Mifepristone, by design on
the label, takes the life of a child. So
let’s just start there.
The second issue, though, is also interesting. If you follow the label instructions for mifepristone and take it
exactly as it is labeled and if you take
a Tylenol and take that exactly as it is
labeled—if you take mifepristone,
though, you are 8,000 times more likely
to end up in the hospital than taking a
Tylenol.
Let me run that past you again. For
all the folks that say it is as safe as
Tylenol, mifepristone, according to the
stats that we have that are public—you
are 8,000 times more likely to end up in
the hospital taking mifepristone than
you are taking a Tylenol.
Stop saying it is as safe as Tylenol.
The facts do not bear that out. It is
not.
Mifepristone also has a strong likelihood of and a side effect of causing infertility among women. If the baby has
a different blood type than the mom
and if the combination is not correct,
the mom then suffers from infertility
the rest of her life. Now, if you go see
a doctor, they can tell you that, but if
you just get it in the mail, you have no
idea.
How about this issue: If you have an
ectopic pregnancy, which you don’t
know unless you have an ultrasound,
taking mifepristone can not only kill
the baby but could also kill the mom.
This is a big issue. The Biden administration became flippant about this
chemical abortion drug because the

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.022

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

Biden administration was focused on
having more abortions in America.
They weren’t just pro-choice; they
were pro-abortion, trying to increase
the number of abortions in America,
but to do that, they did not take into
account the health and life of the mom
because they were so eager to increase
the number of abortions.
Even in my State—in my State, we
made a decision based on the Dobbs decision from the Supreme Court that
now each State can make their own decisions about what they are going to do
about this issue of life. After decades
under Roe v. Wade, the Court has now
said that this is up to every State.
So in my State, we would say this is
a settled issue, except for doctors out
of State now were mailing abortion
pills to women my State, intentionally
going around our State laws—intentionally.
This morning, the Health, Education,
Labor,
and
Pensions
Committee,
chaired by my friend Dr. BILL CASSIDY,
held
a
hearing
talking
about
mifepristone.
One of the witnesses that was there
was the attorney general from Louisiana talking about the number of
women who have experienced coercive
abortions, where a parent or a boyfriend or some other loved one compelled them to be able to take these
chemical abortion drugs against their
will—compelled them to do that—or
slipped it into their food or into a
drink to be able to sneak it into their
system, literally taking the life of that
child.
Do you know how they could do that?
Because you don’t have to see a doctor
to get access to these drugs. They can
just be mailed to you as if they are a
Tylenol when they are not.
We have to have an ongoing conversation here. Decades into this dialogue about the value of children, we
are still talking about this issue. Are
children valuable? Let’s keep talking
about it because at some point, as a
country, we have to resolve this most
simple, scientific, ethical decision: Are
some children valuable and some children disposable or is each child valuable?
I am going to stand with the marchers that are coming in next week to
joyfully celebrate the beauty of every
child.
Yesterday, I was emailed the photo of
a longtime friend of mine who just had
her first child. It has been a long process for her and her husband. I got a
beautiful picture of baby Benjamin
yesterday, and he is adorable. I know
you are not supposed to say that about
a boy, but he is adorable, and we are
excited to see him.
Last year, there were a million abortions that were done in America—a
million. We will never see their faces.
Those children either were thrown
away in the trash or ended up in a toilet after a chemical abortion. What is
the difference between those two children? Not a thing. Not a thing.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

S201

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

All children are valuable, all of them,
and I pray for the day when all of them
have an opportunity to live, to experience this glorious Nation that we get
to experience the freedom of every day.
Thanks to the marchers who will
speak out next week for life and for all
those around the country that continue
to look at the science and continue to
look at the face of a child and say: You
are beautiful.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Maryland.
APPROPRIATIONS

Mr. VAN HOLLEN. Mr. President, I
rise as the ranking member of the
Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Subcommittee—known around here as
CJS—to discuss the funding for critical
national programs provided to those
Agencies for fiscal year 2026.
This is one of the appropriations bills
that is before the Senate right now.
I want to thank Senator MORAN, the
chairman and my partner on the CJS
Subcommittee, and his staff Brian
Daner, Kevin Wheeler, and Rachel Taylor, for working closely with me and
my team to produce this important
final bill for consideration of the Senate. I want to thank House CJS chairman HAL ROGERS and ranking member
GRACE MENG and their staffs as well.
This bill is the result of many long
days and nights of tough negotiations
over the holidays, including a very productive call among the four of us on
New Year’s Eve to broker a final deal
on the bill’s remaining and outstanding
items.
This bill has already overwhelmingly
passed the House of Representatives.
The CJS appropriations agreement
meets the allocation that was given to
our subcommittee of $78 billion in discretionary spending. It rejects the very
deep and reckless cuts proposed in the
President’s budget. At the same time,
it is not much higher than the 2025 continuing resolution—so basically flat
funding even as needs have grown in
these important programs.
We had to make tough decisions
when it came to what programs to cut
and what to protect. Senator MORAN
and I were able to work together with
our House colleagues in a bipartisan
way to do our best to make those decisions.
I must say this is not the bill I would
have written if I were doing it on my
own, but it is the result of negotiations. Republicans currently control
every branch of government—majorities in the House and Senate and, of
course, control of the White House. But
this bill, while not what I would have
written alone, will ensure that Congress—and not Donald Trump or Russ
Vought—decides how taxpayer dollars
get spent for the Agencies covered in
this bill.
So I am happy to report to my colleagues that the CJS conference bill
before us is a strong bipartisan one
that rejects the very devastating, mis-

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

guided funding cuts and program eliminations that had been advanced and
suggested by President Trump, and it
rejects dozens and dozens of extreme
poison pill riders that had been proposed by our House Republican colleagues.
It makes smart and targeted investments in a wide range of critical initiatives that affect the lives of all of our
fellow Americans. It prioritizes keeping our communities safe. It advances
American leadership in science and innovation. It boosts economic opportunities around the country, including
through the Manufacturing Extension
Partnership Program. It funds vital
initiatives at Federal Agencies in my
home State of Maryland, from scientific research at NASA Goddard, to
operations at NOAA and NIST, to preparations for the next census.
Through the Department of Commerce, we maintain the current generation of NOAA weather and climate
satellites, and we invest in next-generation satellites that will track severe
weather. We also promote American
businesses and exports through Department of Commerce efforts. We also
help Agencies like NIST that are creating cybersecurity and AI standards
for the future. Through NOAA, we are
also enabling sustainable management
of ocean resources that are so vital to
our fisheries and to commerce throughout our country.
To promote American innovation and
scientific discovery, the bill provides
$8.75 billion for the National Science
Foundation, sparing it from the 57-percent cut sought by President Trump.
Colleagues, we cannot expect to
maintain our cutting edge in science
and discovery and stay ahead of our
competitors if we are not making the
vital investments in research through
the National Science Foundation.
The bill funds NASA at $24.4 billion
to explore the solar system, to advance
our understanding of climate change,
to promote innovation and sustainability in aeronautics, and to protect
our planet. This is another area where
we rejected very deep cuts proposed by
the Trump administration, including
the 47-percent cut they had proposed to
NASA’s Science budget.
Colleagues, we won’t have a space
program if we don’t understand what is
happening in space and get to the fundamentals of science in space. You cannot have one without the other. So we
reject those cuts.
The President’s budget would have
wrecked the exciting work being done
right now at Maryland’s Goddard Space
Flight Center, where they are completing what is known as the Nancy
Grace Roman Space Telescope. It is on
time—in fact, ahead of schedule—and,
right now, under budget, and is expected to launch later this year to investigate dark energy and the formation of galaxies and stars—all things
that will add to the body of human
knowledge and help the United States
remain a leader when it comes to space
discovery exploration.

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.023

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S202

The next step will be the development of the Habitable Worlds Observatory that can answer the fundamental
question of whether we are alone in the
universe.
That is another exciting project
where America will take the lead, but
only if we provide the resources to get
it done, and that is another important
program led by NASA Goddard.
I also included language directing
NASA to preserve all the technical and
scientific world-class capabilities at
Goddard during any consolidation of
the campus and calling for a National
Academy of Sciences study to make
sure that NASA Goddard is set up for
long-term success. It is a national
treasure, and we need to preserve it.
Reform, yes, but let’s make sure we
reform it in a way that can allow it to
continue to be a leader when it comes
to space science, Earth science, and the
American enterprise.
Funding in this bill will also help
better protect American communities.
It invests in lifesaving grant programs
from State, local, and Tribal law enforcement, to advancing criminal justice initiatives, to providing the highest level of funding ever for the Office
on Violence Against Women.
In addition to these funding priorities, the bill also includes language I
worked on to address the Trump administration’s ongoing efforts to set
aside and ignore the decades-long site
selection process for a new FBI headquarters. The language in this bill requires that prior to spending any reprogrammed construction funds on a
new headquarters, the FBI must submit the contracted and completed architectural and engineering plan for
any new building, including the security plan, for review by the Appropriations Committee.
I think we would all agree that it is
essential that the men and women who
work at the FBI have a headquarters
that meets the security requirements
that have been set out for it over the
last 15 years to two decades, which is
Level 5 Security. It is the highest level
of security and needed given the very
sensitive work that the FBI does on behalf of our country.
This language is important to reasserting Congress’ oversight role in a
large and expensive project and ensuring that the new headquarters meets
the mission and security needs of the
men and women of the FBI. And I want
to thank Senator MORAN for working
with me on this provision.
As I said earlier, this bill is not perfect. It does, however, include guardrails to safeguard the Congress’ powers
when it comes to spending the taxpayer dollars, at least within the domain of the Agencies in this particular
appropriations bill. And that is one of
the very important features of this legislation compared to what we would
otherwise see in a straight continuing
resolution. In this bill, we make sure
that congressional prerogatives are
protected, not just in report language,
but in the statute itself.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

As I said, the bill is not perfect.
There are many things that I would
have chosen to do differently if I was
doing this on my own. I will say one
problem with the bill before us is that
a provision that had been unanimously
adopted in the Senate Appropriations
Committee regarding the Epstein files
was taken out of this bill. That provision would have required the Department of Justice to retain those records.
It also required them to submit not
just the files, but a report that provided information and analysis on various aspects of the Epstein files, from
financial questions to links regarding
foreign intelligence, anything that the
documents reflected. And I will say, at
a time when we have seen just a small
percentage of those files actually released to the public and to the Congress, we need to do much better,
which is why I have filed an amendment to this conference bill to restore
the identical language that the Senate
Appropriations
Committee
unanimously adopted.
Despite those shortcomings, I do
think if you look at its full scope, that
this bill is something that is worthy of
bipartisan support. I think it will advance very important national interests, both when it comes to science and
discovery, when it comes to law enforcement, and when it comes to other
major national priorities.
The funding in this bill and the resources it has provided will, in my
view, strengthen our country, especially at a time when we are facing so
many challenges around the world
from competitors and adversaries, including China and others. We need to
make sure that the United States invests in the future of our people and
the future of our country. This bill is a
positive step in that direction, and I
urge my colleagues to adopt it.
If I could, I did want to thank some
of the folks on my team. And I want to
thank them for all of the work that
they did, including Jessica Berry, who
is the lead Democratic clerk on the
committee, as well as other members
of our committee, Lindsay Erickson,
TJ Lowdermilk, and Blaise Sheridan. I
thanked the Republican staff members,
Senator MORAN’s staff, who worked
with us, and I want to thank my own
team as well.
And in closing, I also do want to
thank the chair and vice chair of the
Appropriations
Committee—Senator
SUSAN COLLINS and Senator PATTY
MURRAY—for their work in getting us
to this point, and, again, I urge adoption of this legislation.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from North Carolina.
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION

Mr. TILLIS. Mr. President, I will get
to the primary reason that I asked for
time on the floor today. I did want to
say that, if it was within the rules and
I would be able to acknowledge people
in the Gallery who happen to be my
great staff who have done extraor-

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

dinary casework for years and years,
and they are visiting here—if it was
within the rules for me to recognize
them—I would. I understand the rules,
and I will not. But I do welcome them,
nevertheless.
I am here because yesterday, the
President had a tour up in Michigan, I
believe, and a reporter asked him a
question about me in particular. He
said: How do you feel about Senator
TILLIS saying that the potential indictment of the Fed Chair seems a bit excessive?
I didn’t use those words, but that was
how the question was postured.
The response to that was the President said: That is why THOM is not running for office anymore.
He went on to say very nice things,
that he likes me and we work together.
I like the President. As a matter of
fact, I know many people would be
shocked to hear this, but I never had a
cross word with the President. We
never had an elevated discussion in either direction. I suppose if it came
from one direction, it would have ended
up that way, but it never has.
As a matter of fact, the President has
a quality to him that I find really endearing. When I called him out of the
blue because my mom was talking
about him—she is a big fan of the
President. So I called him out of the
blue on a Saturday afternoon, and he
picked up the phone, and I said: Mr.
President, would you speak to my
mom? She loves you.
He got on the phone and graciously
spoke to her for about 5 minutes.
A few months later, I was down in
Florida. I had an aunt and uncle—the
same thing. I called him up—the same
thing. He can be a gracious person.
The President, though, got it wrong.
He was right in saying that I am not
running anymore. But the reason that
I made the decision not to run again—
and I decided it was just easier to do it
here versus answer the callous questions out in the hallway—is because in
the moment where he and I had a disagreement, I had to make a decision
about how I could be most helpful to
him.
If I ran for reelection, I would necessarily always have to think about
what boundaries I should have in expressing my concern, and that created
complications for my campaign. There
are redlines. There are just certain
things I would disagree with and would
have to take the heat in a campaign.
But I thought, in the moment, I
would be far better equipped to give
the President my advice on policy matters. So I removed any doubt, whatsoever, that my decisions would be based
upon the consequences of either getting his support or not having his support in a campaign.
When I did my announcement and
said I was wanting to put myself in a
position where I could call balls and
strikes, it was so that I could do something that I believe some people in the
White House are not particularly concerned about.

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.024

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

The night that I told the President
he should find a replacement—the press
has gotten this wrong. The President
did not ask for people to replace me,
and then I decided to retire. The President and I were having a dialogue that
night. I told the President that I
thought it was time for him to look for
a replacement; that I had decided not
to run for reelection.
My last communication that night
with the President—this is not verbatim, but pretty close—I said: Mr.
President, if I prove anything else to
you in the next year and a half, I hope
that I can prove to you that I care
about your legacy, and you have people
around you who don’t.
There are people who are surfing his
wave until they go to the next one.
They are young people who have never
served in office and don’t understand
the consequences of looking around
corners and protecting this President.
There are people that are more concerned with their next job and the next
Presidential campaign they may be
able to get on than making sure this
President is as successful as possible.
So I decided, by just making the decision not to run for reelection, I can
speak truth to a President that, I hope,
goes down in history as the most successful Republican President in the history of this country. He has that potential, if he starts to recognize advice
that he is getting that I think is bad
advice and won’t age well.
I will get to a few. I am going to keep
my temperature down. I told everybody, this isn’t cranky THOM; this is
THOM trying to explain a very serious
subject.
Ladies and gentlemen, the thought of
the United States taking the position
that we would take Greenland, an independent territory within the Kingdom
of Denmark, is absurd. Somebody needs
to tell the President that the people of
Greenland, up until these current
times, were actually very, very proAmerican and very, very pro-American
presence. We had as many as 17 military installations in Greenland at our
height.
Frankly, I bet that once we get
through this tension we have today,
they would be willing to accept us. We
have the power to project some capability in Greenland, and we haven’t
necessarily put a 75-year alliance in
NATO and dissolving it in the mix.
That is the smart, sustainable way to
achieve the President’s goal of securing
the Arctic.
The not smart, unachievable way is
whoever told the President that this
was a viable path. It doesn’t make
sense.
I will give you another example. Over
the weekend, the President—the question yesterday had to do with Chair
Powell. I made the statement that I
felt like now that the Fed Chair is potentially under indictment, I will not
support any vote for any Fed Board
member until this matter is decided.
Why? Well, because the whole argu-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:13 Jan 15, 2026

S203

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

ment about Fed independence comes
into question, right? If all of a sudden,
the Justice Department, apparently—
according to the President, unknown
to him—he reported it was a surprise
to him. Since then, he has been briefed.
He is standing by the Justice Department on this indictment.
Ladies and gentlemen, unless there is
a really compelling reason, unless the
prosecution succeeds—and I think it is
unlikely, virtually impossible, that
Chair Powell will be found guilty of
anything. This is all about the testimony in a Banking Committee hearing.
That is all it is. If they succeed, then
they have created a device that really
will put the Fed’s independence in
question and can cause serious problems for us in the future.
I think one of the reasons why the financial markets did not react precipitously in a negative way with the revelation of Chair Powell is because
many people stood up in Congress and
said this seems to be crossing a line.
I believe, if the financial markets
thought it was almost certain that Jay
Powell was going to resign or be prosecuted, I believe we would have a very
different reaction.
This is another example of where—
Jay Powell, I think, has made decisions
that I disagreed with, similar to decisions that have been made by conservative Justices that I disagreed with,
but I think they did it for the right
reasons. It is just another example of
where—in this case, according to the
President’s public comments, he was
surprised about the indictment. It is
another example of who in there
thought this was a good idea?
Now, because it is a current investigation, we will just have to wait and
figure it out after they either proceed
with an indictment or they decide to
dismiss it.
Then the final thing is, I am in a position now, without question, to say
that anyone who thinks that President
Trump adopting ELIZABETH WARREN’s
idea on capping credit card interest
rates—it is literally what the President
said over the past week. They are not
the conservatives that I thought they
were. Anybody that thinks this is a
good idea will not speak truth to this
President to say: You can’t do that. If
you want to unbank or underbank people, then not allow interest rates to be
set based on the risk, and you will see
what will happen.
I told Senator WARREN on the floor
yesterday: Good on you.
Senator WARREN and I have a good
relationship. We don’t hardly ever vote
on the same stuff, but I said: Good on
you. You convinced the President of
the United States to actually embrace
something you have been pitching for
as long as I have been here.
She said: Are you going to set the
policy?
I said: No, I will work hard to kill it.
I like good execution, even when it is
not policy I like. And that was good
execution. You convinced the President
to embrace your policy.

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Then, finally, there is the Credit
Card Competition Act, which is another example, ladies and gentlemen,
that other countries have tried, and it
has failed. The industry is trying to
come up with a compromise that
works, but once again, somebody in the
President’s orbit thought capping interest rates was a good idea and told
him. I don’t expect him to be an expert
in the consequences of that. Somebody
thought to do the Credit Card Competition Act after it was unsuccessful here
because Republicans thought it was a
good idea, but it is still a bad idea.
So, to the President: Mr. President, I
am going to live up to my promise. I
am going to do everything I can to
point out advice that you are being
given by people who are not thinking
about your legacy, who are not thinking about good policy, and from time
to time, they are fading far out of the
realm of what I consider to be good,
conservative, free-market ideology.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Tennessee.
FRAUD ACCOUNTABILITY ACT

Mrs. BLACKBURN. Mr. President,
with all of this upheaval in Minnesota
and certainly with some other States,
Tennesseans are learning a whole lot
more about what is happening in this
country with fraud and how people are
defrauding not only the Federal Government but many State and local governments as well.
The calls that are coming into our office and the emails that we are getting
show that this is an issue that has really grabbed the attention of Tennesseans. I think that one of the reasons is that people have seen fraud play
out in their local communities. They
have seen title theft, where forgers go
in and steal properties. Then someone
finds out their property is going to be
sold on the courthouse steps. They all
know of contractors who take deposits.
They are fly-by-night, and they never
show up to do the work. They know
senior citizens who are being defrauded
out of life savings. They have seen
kickback schemes in their local counties and cities, where local officials go
hire a friend and make a contract there
at these enormous rates.
I do think that what has happened in
Minnesota has caused the American
people to look more closely at what is
happening with their hard-earned taxpayer dollars and how these are being
stolen through fraud.
We know that this issue goes far
from Minnesota and into every corner
of the country. The Government Accountability Office—and this report, I
think, is significant—estimates that
each year, each and every year, our
government is losing between $233 billion and $521 billion to fraud—fraudulent programs, fraudulent claims.
So think about that. You have individuals and entities which willfully
misrepresent themselves so that they
can get taxpayer benefits—taxpayer
dollars. They are stealing up to $521
billion a year of your money, and that

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.026

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S204

$521 billion could be an underestimation. We have a former Assistant Director for the Government Accountability Office who believes the number
is actually closer to $750 billion a year.
For context, that $750 billion is more
than the entire amount of money we
spent on Medicaid in fiscal year 2024.
That is $750 billion—estimate—that
is going to fraud that would have more
than funded everything we spend on
Medicaid, and it is just shy of the $850
billion that we spend on defense. Those
are some of the biggest components of
our Nation’s budget—Medicaid and defense—yet the estimate is that money
is being spent via fraud.
Now, these figures don’t include the
taxpayer dollars that are lost through
improper payments. These are payments that go to the wrong person or
that maybe exceed the correct amount.
Since fiscal year 2003, the GAO estimates that the Federal Government
has lost $2.8 trillion to improper payments.
So you have to say ‘‘Where is the
money going?’’ when you look at these
numbers. According to the GAO, in fiscal year 2024, more than half—$85 billion—were improper payments under
Medicare and Medicaid. That is called
sloppy bookkeeping. And this should
come as no surprise: In Minnesota, this
is where much of the fraud has been occurring, including through the Medicaid housing program. This fraud
could help explain why Minnesota saw
the second highest in per-enrollee Medicaid spending under the ObamaCare
expansion, where Federal dollars are
underwriting nonexistent services and
treatments. So Minnesota, with all of
the fraud going on there, has the second highest cost per enrollee, and it
shot up during the ObamaCare expansion.
We learned even more about the
fraud occurring in blue State Medicaid
Programs and in ObamaCare during the
Schumer shutdown. Last month, the
GAO released findings that showed just
how easy it was to commit fraud with
the
Biden
bonus
credits
under
ObamaCare. It is the same program
that the Democrats fought to bankroll
with another 450 billion taxpayer dollars.
To test the program’s safeguards
against fraud, the GAO said: We are
going to conduct an experiment. So
they decided to make up 24 fictitious
applications, and they did these quite
sloppily. They made up names, addresses, information. They left out some required information on these 24 applications. So they are all false, and they
are all missing information.
How many of those applications do
you
think
were
approved
for
ObamaCare? There were 23 of the 24
that were approved. They were fake,
but they got approved anyway. So the
Federal Government was paying more
than $10,000 a month each and every
month to insurance companies to provide coverage for enrollees who did not
exist. That is a lot of money being
wasted.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

It gets worse. A preliminary analysis
by the GAO found that there were at
least 190,000 applications between 2023
and 2024—that is that fiscal year—that
had unauthorized changes by agents or
brokers. That means the individual—of
course, we now know that many of
these are fake—they didn’t approve
this or submit it or ask for it; it was
the agent or the broker, without permission, who made that change.
Over the same period, there were
close to 100,000 duplicate Social Security numbers enrolled in the program.
In 1 case, there was 1 Social Security
number that was used to apply for
more than 125 policies. And guess what.
They got approved. And guess what.
All fake.
It is the insurance companies making
the money every month, and it is your
tax dollars at work for what is a fraud
scheme.
Despite all of this fraud, the Democrats this week demanded a vote to
overturn the Trump administration’s
Marketplace integrity rule, which protects consumers from the fraud that
plagued the system under President
Biden and his administration. I can’t
believe they wanted to overturn Marketplace integrity, but, oh, they did.
This is just one part of the puzzle.
Every year, we spend more than $4 trillion on more than 2,400 aid and subsidy
programs. Get that? More than 2,400
aid and subsidy programs. And almost
all are vulnerable to fraud—housing
subsidies, student loans, childcare programs, food stamps, unemployment insurance, and the list goes on.
We should be grateful that President
Trump is working to root out this
widespread fraud. The American people
expect the government to work for lawabiding citizens, not criminals, and ensuring these scammers face justice is
crucial to restoring trust and accountability.
To support his efforts, I recently introduced the Fraud Accountability
Act. This legislation would amend the
Immigration and Nationality Act to
explicitly make clear that fraud is a
deportable offense. This will provide
another tool for the President to deport or denaturalize scammers who
have come to our country to steal from
the American people—to steal from the
U.S. taxpayer; to steal from the Federal Government—and pad their pockets.
Hard-working taxpayers deserve to
know their money goes to those who
truly need it. It should not be going to
criminals who are choosing to game
the system. I know the Fraud Accountability Act will help and assist in holding these individuals to account.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Connecticut.
MINNESOTA ICE SHOOTING

Mr. BLUMENTHAL. Mr. President,
the American people can be forgiven
for wanting to turn off their computers
or TVs and feeling a sense of abhorrence and repulsion at what they are
seeing again and again and again as the

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

video of Renee Good’s killing is replayed for them.
What it shows is a horrific tragedy—
a mother who was 37 years old, an
American citizen, subjected to alleged
murder. I use the word ‘‘alleged’’ because I have spent most of my career in
law enforcement, and the word ‘‘alleged’’ before a conviction is always
mandatory. But what is on that tape is
there for everyone to see—the absolutely needless, reckless use of excessive force with a firearm, without any
apparent need for self-defense.
We are seeing a surge of violence in
this country that is not only from private individuals but now from supposed
law enforcement—ICE—which has a responsibility to uphold the law and respect norms that protect everyday citizens.
We are a country built on due process
and the rule of law, and we were founded on the idea that we resist tyrannical
monarchs; that we fought a war, in
fact, against a tyranny that used totalitarian, Gestapo-type tactics. And
now we see them on the streets of our
own country.
Yes, Americans have a right to be repulsed by these videos and outraged,
angry, but also saddened and griefstricken because the killing of Renee
Nicole Good last week at the hands of
an ICE agent showed the tragic outcome of abuse of power. This death was
preventable and predictable. It was preventable. It needn’t have happened.
But it was also predictable because it
is only an example of the rising tide of
lawlessness and recklessness on the
part of ICE that has been documented,
in fact, by my report on the investigation we did, as ranking member of the
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, and the report that was the
result of that investigation. We released it several weeks ago, and it can
be
found
at
https://
www.hsgac.senate.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2025.12.8-ICE-Report-revisedFINAL.pdf.
I released this report, which documents firsthand accounts of 22 U.S.
citizens in 10 different States who were
physically assaulted, pepper-sprayed,
denied medical treatment, detained,
sometimes for days, by Federal immigration agents. And we did a hearing
with a number of those American citizens who were injured, denied medical
care, prevented from contacting their
families or lawyers, some of them for
days on end, while detained under very
harsh conditions. And it was graphic; it
was gripping. But it was only 4 or 5 examples of 22 individuals we interviewed
who themselves were only a subset of
hundreds of American citizens who
were physically assaulted, detained,
and many of them injured.
This pattern and practice is not coincidental. It is the result of an apparent
policy on the part of this government
Agency that involves agents who are
masked, unidentifiable, who turn violent without provocation, crashing
their government vehicles into citizens’ cars, dragging them from those

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.028

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

cars, slamming them to the ground,
violently assaulting them, often leading to lasting injuries, including trauma.
One of the individuals who appeared
at our hearing was a veteran who
served and sacrificed for this country
in the belief that he was helping to preserve the very liberties that he was denied when he was arrested.
Now, every one of these people
sought to tell the agents that they
were an American citizen. They offered
their passports or their driver’s license
or other identification to show they
were American citizens. There was no
reason to assault them in this way.
In California, they beat a 79-year-old
man so badly that they broke his ribs,
and they slammed another man’s head
into the ground so hard that he was
concussed. In Illinois, a woman was
shot five times, while, in Indiana, a
man was punched in the face and
dragged outside his family home in the
early morning hours. It didn’t matter
whether children were present; agents
acted with reckless disregard for their
safety and well-being. In Idaho, children were taken from a car at gunpoint
and later zip-tied. In Massachusetts, an
autistic child was deliberately taken
from her parents and used as bait by
law enforcement to try to lure their
parents out of the house.
These detentions were not limited to
one State or a few States. They
spanned the Nation—from Idaho to
Alabama, from California to Illinois.
And we know there are so many stories
that haven’t been told because people
fear retaliation and retribution—American citizens fearing their own government retaliating against them for
speaking truth to power about physical
assaults by their own government.
These ICE agents have been trained
and they have been recruited by the
Department of Homeland Security,
which is complicit in this misconduct—
complicit because it has failed to provide the right training and perhaps has
recruited people who are wrongly in
these roles, and it has failed to either
provide protocols or to enforce them.
What became clear through our
interviews and across the stories that
keep emerging is that the Department
of Homeland Security does not have
just a few rogue agents. It has become
a lawless force as an Agency of the government. It is engaged in a coordinated, nationwide effort using the
same tactics, the same violence wherever they are deploying.
So after months of investigating
these kinds of lawless abuses, I am
really saddened to say that Renee
Good’s death came as no surprise. It
was predictable, and it was preventable. And also preventable are the injuries and the deaths and the lawlessness
that are happening every day, right
now, in the streets of America, in the
neighborhoods of our great country.
They are a betrayal of the rule of law
that is the foundation of our Nation. It
should shock America’s conscience,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

S205

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

and I believe it has, as it has shocked
mine. These kinds of brazen, abusive,
lawless tactics do not represent our
Nation. Americans will have a hard
time—and they should—recognizing
our great Nation in what they are seeing hour after hour, day after day—
right now, in realtime—in those abuses
and in so frequently used Gestapo-type
tactics.
I initially thought: I don’t want to go
there. My father escaped Germany in
1935 and came to America after seeing
what was to come in those same Gestapo-type tactics in Germany. He
came here speaking no English, having
not much more than the shirt on his
back and knowing virtually no one. If
he had stayed in Germany, he would
have seen a paramilitary force going
door to door, rounding up people just
like him, exactly the kinds of tactics
we now see unfolding: ICE as a paramilitary force going business to business, door to door, church to church,
school to school, seizing people, dragging them out of their cars or homes
without much more cause than the fact
that they are people of color or they
speak a different language or they are
working in a place where undocumented immigrants are thought to be
working.
In this country, now, decades after
that time in the 1930s, in the pinnacle
of democracy, what we are seeing is a
paramilitary force stopping people in
this same way, searching them and assaulting them. And the parallels are
unmistakable and frightening. We cannot, in this body or anywhere in our
great country, stand idly while our fellow citizens are rounded up and subjected to this treatment. We should not
be standing idly as any human being,
whatever their status, is subjected to
this kind of abuse.
I will continue, on my subcommittee,
the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, the work that we have
done, the investigation that is ongoing
right now. We will press for accountability. We will press for the facts, the
truth. And we have a lot of it already.
We will not sit idly and watch as the
Nation I love—all of us in this body
do—demeans and betrays our Constitution. We have all taken an oath to uphold it. So have those ICE agents that
are betraying it. Our Constitution will
crumble unless we fight for it.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Nebraska.
IRAN

Mrs. FISCHER. Mr. President, since
December 28, Iranian civilians have
taken to the streets to protest the
bleak economic conditions and the
daily hardships imposed on their families by the Iranian regime. Local protests have spread across the country to
all 31 Provinces, drawing tens of thousands of citizens into the streets. These
men and women are rightfully calling
for accountability, freedom, and an end
to authoritarian rule.
I stand in solidarity with the people
of Iran. They have endured decades of

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

brutal oppression, corruption, and economic mismanagement. They want to
live with dignity, to provide for their
families, and to secure a better future
for the next generation. These are universal aspirations, and they deserve
the support of the international community. And the people of Iran deserve
liberty.
The regime’s response has been swift
and ruthless. In an attempt to silence
dissent and conceal its abuses, Iranian
authorities have shut down the internet and the phone service. They have
cut citizens off from one another and
from the outside world. Peaceful protesters have been met with lethal
force.
Although the regime has shut down
nearly all communications, we are seeing reports estimating that over 12,000
innocent civilians have been killed.
More than 18,000 individuals have been
arrested. This level of violence against
Iran’s own people is indefensible.
I commend President Trump for imposing economic pressure on those who
continue to support and sustain that
regime. These measures send a clear
message: The United States will not ignore the suffering of the Iranian people, and the exploitation of the Iranian
people must end.
The newly imposed 25-percent tariffs
on countries doing business with Iran
are designed to strike at the economic
lifelines that enable this repression.
Some of Iran’s largest trading partners
unsurprisingly are our adversaries. It
is both in the interest of our national
security and in the interest of the Iranian people to hold these enablers accountable. The courage of the Iranian
people deserves nothing less.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Arizona.
CAMPAIGN FINANCE

Mr. KELLY. Mr. President, 16 years
after the Supreme Court’s disastrous
Citizens United decision, families
across Arizona are paying more for groceries, rent, gas, and healthcare. And
they are wondering why the people
they elect to represent them always
seem to have time for the priorities of
billionaires and big corporations but
not enough time for them.
That question did not come out of
nowhere; it came from lived experience. Hard-working Americans are
doing everything right. They are working longer hours. They are budgeting
carefully. They are raising their families. And they are just trying to stay
afloat, but they are still falling behind.
That is why we are here today.
In 2010, the Supreme Court handed
down a decision that put a ‘‘for sale’’
sign on our democracy. The Citizens
United ruling opened the door for corporations and billionaires to spend unlimited amounts of money to influence
our elections, often without the public
ever knowing who is behind it.
The Court decided that spending
money on elections is the same thing
as political speech and that corporations should have the same political

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.030

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S206

rights as individual Americans. Does
that make any sense?
The results of this were somewhat
predictable, and it wasn’t limited to a
courtroom. It changed how this place,
the U.S. Senate, works. The loudest
voices in Washington became billionaires and not everyday Americans.
It led to the rise of super PACs and
dark money groups. These groups come
out of nowhere, and they spend millions and millions of dollars attacking
one candidate or cause or supporting
another. They organize around what
benefits them financially, and they
pour massive, massive amounts of
money into securing a specific outcome
that benefits them. They aren’t subject
to the same transparency or accountability of the campaign that a candidate runs.
It created a system where power
shifts away from everyday Americans
and towards the people who can write
the big, giant checks. That shows up in
the policies politicians fight for and
the ones they block. It is no surprise.
Right now, under Donald Trump and
Republicans in Washington, we are seeing this dynamic play out very clearly.
Last year, Republicans passed a bill
to hand out massive tax breaks to billionaires and giant corporations, paid
for by throwing 300,000 Arizonans off of
their healthcare and slashing food assistance for families who need it.
He has stacked his Cabinet with billionaire friends who are completely out
of touch with everyday, working Americans who are often living paycheck to
paycheck.
Early in his term, he tapped an unqualified person, Elon Musk—the
wealthiest man in the world—who
spent more money than anybody else
to get Donald Trump elected. He hired
him to oversee an effort to recklessly
fire thousands of hard-working Federal
employees and shut down entire Agencies, undermining our national security.
Americans are living through a serious cost-of-living crisis right now.
Families are struggling with rising expenses for healthcare, for housing, for
utilities, for groceries, just about everything. What I hear from my constituents is that they want relief. They
want their government to help bring
down costs and help make their lives
more affordable, but time and again,
the policies that would do exactly that
stall or they just die right here in this
Chamber and down the road at the
White House.
Sixteen years after Citizens United,
this is not about relitigating a court
case; it is about recognizing how deeply
money and politics affect people’s lives
and about drawing a clear line between
a political system that serves billionaires and one that serves people.
Americans see this clearly. They are
demanding transparency. They are demanding accountability. They are demanding a government that answers to
voters, not to the billionaires and not
to the special interests.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

That is why from day one I have approached this job differently. I have
never taken a dime of corporate PAC
money, and I never will, and I have introduced legislation to ban corporate
PACs.
I publish my schedule online so that
everybody can see what I am working
on, who I am meeting with, and how I
am spending my time in this job, and I
have introduced legislation to require
all Senators to do the same exact
thing.
I have also led on legislation to ban
Members of Congress from trading
stocks. Let me be clear. Nobody should
be able to use this job to profit personally. It is horrendous, and it is a huge
problem. One of the first things I did
after being elected was move all of my
assets and those of my wife Gabby Giffords to a qualified blind trust—the
best standard identified by Senate ethics—and I think all Members of Congress need to do that.
These are not radical ideas; they are
about restoring trust and making sure
that this place works for people who
don’t have lobbyists, who don’t have
super PACs, who can’t write a sevenfigure check.
These shouldn’t be radical demands.
They are basic expectations. And here
is why this matters so much right now.
As long as big money and billionaires
dominate our politics, it will continue
to block progress on the issues that
people care about most: lowering skyrocketing healthcare costs, making
housing more affordable, increasing
competition so families aren’t left paying more every single month. Those
fights all run straight through the influence of corporate money. It is very
clear.
So let me be clear. Money is not
speech. I mean, who came up with
that? And corporations are not people.
So this moment isn’t just about looking backward at a Court decision. That
is not what we are getting at. It is
about deciding what kind of Congress
we want to be moving forward. Do we
accept a system where access is bought
and outcomes are shaped by the
wealthiest members in our society or
do we set a higher bar and say that democracy should work for the people
who vote, not the people who spend
millions of dollars of their own money
in elections? That is the choice right in
front of us.
I am proud to be joined by my colleagues today, as we mark 16 years
since the Citizens United ruling, to
make clear that the damage from that
decision is real, and it is ongoing, and
it is standing in the way of progress on
the issues that people care most about.
This conversation should not end
here. It should continue with action,
with accountability, and with a commitment to put people back at the center of our democracy.
Thank you, Mr. President.
With that, I want to welcome my
good friend and colleague the Senator
from Rhode Island, SHELDON WHITEHOUSE.

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SCHMITT). The Senator from Rhode Island.
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President,
let me first thank Senator KELLY for
coordinating this unfortunate commemoration of a truly disgraceful decision by the Republican appointees of
the Supreme Court 16 years ago.
This decision opened the floodgates
of our politics to billions and billions
of dollars in dark money, and those billions and billions in dark money have
distorted our political process in ways
that are obvious and evident to everybody who works in this building. Some
are winners from that dark money
spent, and some are losers from that
dark money spending, but everybody
sees it.
Billionaire spending in our elections
is up 160 times. That is 160 times more
billionaire spending in our elections
now that billionaires can pump money
in by the millions. Just 100 families
poured a recordbreaking $2.6 billion
into Federal elections in 2024. I don’t
know how democracy survives in an environment in which 100 superwealthy
families are dumping $2.6 billion in special interest spending, influence spending, into our elections.
This is not a hypothetical problem.
I care a lot about climate change,
and I see what is happening to our
coasts, particularly in Rhode Island. I
was here before the Citizens United decision, when robust, meaningful, bipartisan climate legislation was constant
here in the Senate. I can think of four
major bipartisan bills here in the Senate. And I remember my friend John
McCain running for President, carrying
the Republican banner into that Presidential election with a completely
solid and respectable climate platform.
Well, right after Citizens United, all
of that stopped. The barrage of fossil
fuel dark money into our politics
killed
bipartisanship
on
climate
change instantly.
It is still a problem today. Just yesterday, I asked to move a resolution
that declared that climate change is
not a hoax, that climate science is
sound science, and that research into
the effects of climate change should
continue, and Republicans objected to
that simple resolution.
The fossil fuel industry bought that
obstruction of climate legislation for
16 years now with money. They poured
$450 million into political influence
spending during the 2024 cycle, and
that is only the identifiable money.
Then there is the dark money, and we
don’t know how big that number was.
We are already seeing the climate
problem cascade into a homeowners insurance crisis, cascade into a crisis of
mortgage unavailability and ultimately home value losses. It is already
happening in Florida, for instance. So
this is real, with real consequences for
regular Americans.
There was a big flaw in the Citizens
United decision. The Citizens United
decision hung on two assertions of fact

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.033

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

by that slim Republican majority that
warped our politics for the billionaires.
Those two false facts were that all of
this new spending was going to be independent of political campaigns—that
was never tested, never vetted, never
litigated. That was a fact that was invented behind the curtains of the Supreme Court by those five Justices.
History shows since then that had a
real factfinding effort been undertaken, it would have been clear that
this spending is not at all independent
of political campaigns.
But here is where it is indisputable.
The Court also held—those five
Judges—that all of this unlimited billions that they were letting loose into
our politics would be transparent, that
voters would know who was behind the
money. Well, in 2024, $1.9 billion in
money was spent in elections that we
don’t know who is behind. That is a $1.9
billion factual rebuke to the Supreme
Court’s Citizens United decision. It
simply isn’t true.
So that decision hangs on a false fact
that was found by a Court that
shouldn’t even be doing factfinding and
which for 16 years those five Justices
have scrupulously refused to correct
even as the falsity of the fact upon
which their decision depended has been
proven over and over and over again.
I will close by pointing to the DISCLOSE Act—a bill that can remedy
this by requiring contributions over 10
grand into a political race to be disclosed by the actual donor. No more
hiding behind a 501(c)(3) that converts
to a 501(c)(4) that sends it to a super
Pac that sends it to the election. No,
you go all the way back to the actual,
real donor.
We should pass that bill. Every time
we brought it up, every Republican has
voted to defend dark money, and every
Democrat has voted to rid our politics
of this corrupting scourge. Every time,
every Republican, every Democrat. It
is a clear divide, a clear difference between us. And the public is with us.
The public is infuriated that big, secretive special interests can control our
politics from behind the scenes with
massive dark money contributions.
Last point. If you can make an enormous dark money contribution, you
can threaten or promise to make an
enormous dark money contribution,
and those threats and promises will
never be seen. It is the core of political
corruption to make decisions based on
secret threats and promises about massive political spending.
We have to get rid of this. The decision was ill-founded, factually wrong,
and needs to be corrected.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon.
Mr. MERKLEY. I thank my colleague
Senator WHITEHOUSE, who has been
pointing out that we have a money and
politics system that is corrupting the
vision of government by and for the
people and is replacing it with government by and for the powerful. Who in

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

S207

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

America wants a governmental system,
designed and intended to be a reflection of ordinary citizens’ desires and
aspirations and opinions, to simply be
a country run by oligarchs, by billionaires? Yet that is where we have arrived.
We absolutely need to change this
campaign system—moneys in the campaign—in order to save any possibility
of a republic by and for the people.
What we really have now are two
campaign systems—one for ordinary
citizens and one for the megarich that
gives the megarich extraordinary
power.
If you or I make a donation to a candidate, well, first of all, there is a cap
on it of several thousand dollars. I
know nobody in my blue-collar community donates several thousand dollars to a campaign, but there are upper
middle-income families that do donate
thousands of dollars, but it is thousands, not millions, not tens of millions, and it is completely disclosed.
You can look up who gave to the candidate. It is disclosed. It is capped.
That is the system for ordinary Americans.
But then there is the system for the
powerful that every single Republican
in this Chamber keeps voting to defend. It is called the dark money system. There is no cap on the amount
that can be donated. There is no public
disclosure to the American people.
The Supreme Court created this dual
system, saying: You know, a cap on
money to the candidate—well, that
could produce a conflict of interest or
appearance of corruption, so you can
cap it. But if you give it to the friend
of the candidate to run a parallel campaign, well, that is suddenly whitewashed or washed clean and no influence on the candidate. The candidate
probably won’t even know about it.
Well, everyone knows that is a complete fallacy, complete and totally.
Somebody gives $10 million to the
friend of the candidate to run a parallel
campaign, the candidate knows that is
happening. They know the ads. They
hear about the source. Even that parallel campaign—they can still share
staff. I mean, there is no real division
between them.
So that was a completely phony distinction created by the Court to create
a system of corporate and billionaire
power in America. As my colleague
pointed out in the context of climate,
we saw a radical change immediately.
Well, the growth in dark money has
been stunning. Because there is so
much money among the oligarchs and
billionaires, they want to spend it to
create laws that favor the oligarchs
and billionaires, and they are spending
at an extraordinary rate.
Six years ago, it was about $300 million. That is a lot of money. But according to the Brennan Center article
from May 7—Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to have this Brennan
Center article printed in the RECORD.

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
[May 7, 2025]
DARK MONEY HIT A RECORD HIGH OF $1.9
BILLION IN 2024, FEDERAL RACES
(By Ian Vandewalker)
The 2024 federal election cycle was the
most secretive since the Supreme Court’s
Citizens United decision in 2010. Dark money
groups, nonprofits and shell companies that
spend on elections without revealing their
donors, plowed more than $1.9 billion into
last year’s election cycle, a dramatic increase from the prior record of $1 billion in
2020.
Citizens United, which allowed corporations and unions to raise and spend unlimited amounts on elections, was premised significantly on the Court’s assumption that all
of this newly permitted election spending
would be transparent. In reality, many of the
groups the Court allowed to spend money on
elections were not required to disclose their
donors. Since Citizens United, dark money
groups have spent at least $4.3 billion on federal elections.
As dark money has proliferated, it has also
evolved. Immediately after Citizens United,
many newly empowered groups purchased
their own ads to influence elections. Some of
these purchases were reported to the Federal
Election Commission (FEC), which makes
such information publicly available. However, since at least 2020, dark money groups
have largely shifted toward making large
transfers to allied super PACs—in amounts
that far exceeded any previous direct ad
spending. These totals can only be tabulated
by reviewing each super PAC’s campaign finance reports. Dark money groups also increasingly run ads, including many online
ads, that are worded and timed such that
they do not trigger FEC disclosure requirements.
This analysis offers the first comprehensive accounting of dark money in the most
recent federal election cycle.
It combines publicly available FEC data
with data on otherwise undisclosed television spending from the Wesleyan Media
Project, a research institute that tracks political advertising, and data on digital political ad sales that certain online platforms
voluntarily make public. Some other categories of undisclosed political spending cannot be reliably tracked. Therefore, the $1.9
billion figure reported in this analysis necessarily—and perhaps substantially—underestimates the true scale of dark money
spending in 2024.
TYPES OF DARK MONEY SPENDING

The term dark money as used in this analysis refers to election spending and contributions by nonprofits and shell companies that
are not legally required to—and do not—disclose the identities of their donors. The lack
of transparency does not make the spending
analyzed here illegal, although the Brennan
Center supports legislation to require full
disclosure of more of it. Dark money flowed
into the 2024 elections in four ways that can
be tracked: contributions to super PACs, direct spending reported to the FEC, TV spending, and online spending.
CONTRIBUTIONS TO SUPER PACS

During the 2024 election cycle, shell companies and 501(c) nonprofits that did not disclose their funding sources gave $1.3 billion
to super PACs—more than in the prior two
election cycles combined.
Citizens United and later court cases led to
the creation of super PACs, which can receive contributions of any amount, including
from corporations and unions. Although

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.034

S14JAPT1

S208

super PACs are supposed to operate independently from the candidates they support,
many are established by candidates’ close allies or run by former staff or party
operatives. Many share consultants with
campaigns and even enlist candidates to help
them fundraise.
Recent FEC rulings have opened the door
to even more direct cooperation between
candidates and super PACs in certain critical
areas—including canvassing and get-out-thevote efforts.
Donald Trump’s 2024 campaign outsourced
many of these activities in swing states to a
super PAC run by his largest supporter, tech
billionaire Elon Musk, while Kamala Harris
leaned heavily on a super PAC run by Democratic Party operatives.
Super PACs are required to report their donors, but they can easily hide the original
sources of their funds by taking money from
dark money groups. This practice has exploded in recent elections. Many of the topspending super PACs in 2024—including Future Forward USA, which worked to elect
Harris, and the Senate Leadership Fund,
which is tied to Republican Party leaders—
had affiliated dark money groups that provided eight- or nine-figure sums.
The chart below shows how dark money
has evolved since 2010 according to FEC data.
Direct ad spending by dark money groups
used to be the main reported funding avenue,
but its 2012 peak is now eclipsed by dark
money contributions to super PACs in each
of the previous three elections. (For the purposes of this analysis, the term super PACs
includes groups called Carey committees or
hybrid PACs that have both an independent
expenditure arm and an arm that takes limited contributions.)
TELEVISION AD SPENDING

Dark money groups spent approximately
$242 million on TV ads targeting federal candidates during the 2024 election cycle, according to new Wesleyan Media Project research. The vast majority was not reported
to the FEC. As explained in the methodology
below, this study’s dark money total of $1.9
billion avoids double counting the small
amount of spending that may be included in
both data from the Wesleyan Media Project
and FEC data.
Federal rules only require certain campaign ads to be reported to the FEC. Ads
that do not expressly advocate for the election or defeat of a candidate using unambiguous phrases like ‘‘vote for’’ or ‘‘vote
against’’ are generally not subject to reporting requirements, except for TV and radio
ads run within 30 days of a primary or 60
days of Election Day.
By running ads that avoid explicit calls to
vote for or against a particular candidate
outside of the mandated reporting windows,
dark money groups can bypass FEC disclosure rules. Some of this spending can still be
tracked because it is available through TV
ad tracking services, and those ads are reflected in this analysis. But additional TV
spending on streaming applications like
Hulu and local TV ad buys means the actual
total exceeds the $242 million discussed here.
ONLINE AD SPENDING

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Digital ads are another form of dark
money spending that is often missing from
FEC data, and data from the largest online
platforms shows that hidden sources spent
$315 million. Like TV ads, online ads can
avoid disclosure requirements if they do not
explicitly advocate for the election or defeat
of a particular candidate. Unlike TV and
radio ads, online ads that mention candidates are not subject to FEC reporting regardless of proximity to Election Day.
Nevertheless, some major online platforms
voluntarily maintain databases of political

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

ad sales. These datasets indicate that about
320 groups that do not disclose their donors
collectively spent more than $281 million on
online ads during the 2024 election cycle
without disclosing any spending to the FEC.
Another 38 nonprofits that do not disclose
their donors but reported at least some
spending to the FEC spent an additional $34
million on online ads. (As with TV spending,
this analysis does not double count spending
that appears in both data from online platforms and FEC data.) Without standardized
disclosure regulations for online political advertising, however, the full extent of digital
election spending remains difficult to quantify.
The major platforms that reported political ad sales for 2024 are Facebook,
Instagram,
Google,
YouTube,
X,
and
Snapchat. Spending totals for Facebook,
Instagram, Google, and YouTube were collected by OpenSecrets, and spending totals
for X and Snapchat were obtained directly
from those platforms.
Social media platforms owned by Meta, the
parent company of Facebook and Instagram,
attracted the majority of documented online
spending by dark money groups for the 2024
cycle—about $238 million.
Google and YouTube, which are owned by
Alphabet Inc., attracted about $66.2 million
in dark money over the same period.
Snapchat documented about $7 million. X reported around $3.9 million in dark money ad
spending, though analysts have raised questions about the completeness of its data.
Importantly, each online platform makes
its own decisions about how to define reportable political advertising, and these definitions can shift over time. Other practices, including what information is provided for ads
and the format in which it is presented, also
differ considerably. Researchers have documented significant gaps in multiple political
ad archives. And even the most comprehensive archives generally exclude certain categories of spending, such as payments to
influencers for content or political endorsements, further obscuring the whole picture.
DIRECT SPENDING REPORTED TO THE FEC

Nonprofits that do not disclose their donors reported about $43 million in direct
spending to the FEC during the entire 2024
cycle. That amounts to less than 2.5 percent
of all dark money in last year’s election. A
small portion of this FEC-disclosed spending
went to ads that are also included in TV and
online ad data discussed above, but this analysis avoids double counting those expenditures.
The $43 million in direct spending is an increase over the prior cycle. During the 2022
midterms, dark money groups reported less
than $25 million in spending to the FEC, the
lowest total since the Citizens United decision. Spending reported to the FEC peaked
at around $309 million in 2012. However, as
groups switched to a strategy of largely
funding allied super PACs, direct spending
reported to the FEC gradually dropped.
SPENDING THAT CANNOT BE TRACKED

Several other types of election spending by
dark money groups have not been included in
this analysis because they are difficult or
impossible to track. As noted, not all online
platforms release spending data, and none
publishes data on certain forms of expenditures, like paid influencers.
This analysis also does not include data for
radio ads that are not reported to the FEC,
and, as mentioned above, streaming video
applications and some TV spending. Other
forms of communication, like billboards and
flyers, are also generally left out of FEC
data unless they expressly advocate for or
against a candidate.

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

DARK MONEY BY PARTY

Both Democrats and Republicans benefited
from hundreds of millions of dollars in dark
money in 2024. More spending backed Democrats, as has been the case since the 2018
midterm elections (before which more dark
money typically favored Republicans). The
presidential race was the source of much of
this disparity in last year’s cycle.
Overall, dark money groups boosting
Democrats put up about $1.2 billion to influence 2024 elections, while groups boosting
Republicans accounted for about $664 million.
THE PRESIDENTIAL CONTEST

The presidential election attracted more
super PAC spending—totaling around $2 billion—than any other race in the 2024 cycle.
Political committees supporting Trump or
Harris collectively received more than $500
million from dark money groups.
Future Forward USA Action, the main
dark money group supporting Joe Biden and
then Harris, gave the most. The 501(c)(4) nonprofit poured more than $304 million into
spending on ads and contributions to its
closely tied super PAC, Future Forward
USA. That means that $1 out of every $6
from undisclosed sources in the 2024 election
cycle came through a single dark money
group.
At the same time, multiple dark money
groups also worked to elect Trump, and the
flow of money increased substantially in the
final months of the election cycle. Securing
American Greatness, after its incorporation
in March 2024, spent more than $81 million,
about $67 million of which went to super
PACs.
Another major supporter of Trump’s presidential bid was Building America’s Future, a
501(c)(4) nonprofit that reportedly received
funding from Musk. It contributed more
than $35 million to super PACs that spent
heavily on seemingly pro-Harris ads falsely
suggesting that her campaign supported divisive policies.
CONGRESSIONAL LEADERSHIP

The presidential election was not the only
race to attract large sums of money from secret donors in 2024. The main dark money
groups aligned with the Democratic and Republican Parties in Congress spent more
than $432 million, up from about $346 million
during the 2022 midterms and $320 million
during the 2020 cycle. These groups are
501(c)(4) nonprofits that each have ties with
party leadership and share staff and resources with an affiliated super PAC.
Majority Forward, a dark money nonprofit
affiliated with Senate Democratic leadership, poured more than $136 million into key
Senate races. More than $81.7 million of that
money went to Senate Majority PAC, the
main super PAC aligned with Senate Democrats in recent cycles. But unlike prior cycles, Senate Majority PAC did not spend the
funds directly. Instead, it seeded a new super
PAC named WinSenate that spent the money
on ads to influence Senate races.
One Nation, the main dark money group
with ties to Senate Republicans, spent about
$123 million in 2024. Of that, $59.3 million
went toward advertising, mainly to TV ads.
More than $53 million worth of airtime made
One Nation the top dark money spender on
TV ads during the 2024 election cycle, according to research by the Wesleyan Media
Project. One Nation also steered more than
$63 million to an allied super PAC, the Senate Leadership Fund.
House Republicans’ dark money group, the
American Action Network, poured $69 million into the 2024 elections. The main dark
money group affiliated with House Democrats, House Majority Forward, gave about
$61 million to influence congressional races.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA6.001

S14JAPT1

January 14, 2026
CONCLUSION

Dark money spending in federal elections
broke records in 2024, even as it became
harder to track. Fueled by Citizens United,
secretive political spending has eroded accountability and Americans’ trust in the political process. The trend toward secrecy in
U.S. campaigns is likely to continue until
Congress takes action to require disclosure
of large political contributions and expenditures.
METHODOLOGY

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

The methodology for this analysis yielded
a conservative estimate of dark money in
2024 federal elections by building on a system
created by OpenSecrets to measure dark
money in 2020. This approach included an examination of spending reported to the FEC
by groups without disclosed donors, TV ad
data from research conducted in partnership
with the Wesleyan Media Project using
Vivvix CMAG data, and online ad data from
major platforms. Spending totals were obtained directly from Snap and X, then analyzed by the Brennan Center; spending totals
for social media platforms affiliated with
Meta
and
Google
were
provided
by
OpenSecrets, then analyzed by the Brennan
Center. OpenSecrets’ viewpoint coding system was used for any groups that reported
independent expenditures or electioneering
communications to the FEC. Some dark
money groups report ad spending to the FEC.
To avoid double counting the amounts reported to the FEC, this analysis followed a
methodology similar to the one applied by
OpenSecrets in 2020: Both online and TV ad
spending were combined into a total figure
for each group, which was then compared
against the FEC-reported spending. Only the
larger of the two amounts was used.

Mr. MERKLEY. Dark money hit a
record-high $1.9 billion in the 2024
races. That is a sixfold increase in 6
years. That is the rich and powerful
buying their government. It is an absolute travesty.
No one in the founding community of
our Nation who wrote the Declaration
of Independence, who wrote the Constitution, wanted to design a system
where the megarich ran the place as a
cabal of elites, but that is what we
have, and that is what we have to
change.
We saw this with President Trump.
On April 11 in 2024, he met with the fossil fuel executives. He had dinner at
Mar-a-Lago. His pitch was simple: In
exchange for $1 billion, he told them,
he promised to prioritize their preferences in the next election.
Well, those fossil fuel leaders delivered hundreds and hundreds of millions
of dollars in election spending and lobbying. And what did Trump do? He delivered for them. He gave them $18 billion in new and expanded tax breaks. A
pretty good deal, huh? With hundreds
of millions of dollars invested, you get
$18 billion in tax breaks.
He penalized their competition. The
renewable energy that is cheaper and
cleaner? He put up all kinds of obstacles to favor dirty, more expensive fossil fuels. He green-lighted LNG terminals. He blocked new solar and wind.
He took the United States out of the
Paris climate accords. That is the example of how this money corrupts.
So everything we are fighting for, for
the ordinary person, is being torched

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

S209

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

by these megadonations. You saw what
Trump calls this Big Beautiful bill. It
was really a big, ugly betrayal of
American families. It proceeded to cut
nutrition.
It
proceeded
to
cut
healthcare to deliver, well, trillions of
dollars of tax breaks for the richest
Americans, and it even will run up the
debt by $30 trillion in the next 30 years
for those richest Americans. If we are
going to change this, we have to
change this dynamic. If we fail, we
have really failed in our oath to the
Constitution.
I invite my Republican colleagues to
start fighting for a vision of government by and for the people, not by and
for the elite—oligarchs and the billionaires. Let’s save our Republic.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Minnesota.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Mr. President, I
am here today to mark 16 years since
the Supreme Court’s decision in Citizens United, which opened the floodgates to unlimited special interest
money in our elections.
We had a campaign finance system.
It wasn’t perfect. There was a bipartisan effort to put some limits on
things. The problem with the way it is
now is that it opens it up, and it is impossible to even trace what money is
coming in and from where.
I want to thank Senator KELLY for
bringing us to the floor today to discuss such an important issue for our
democracy and thank my colleagues
who are here today.
In the 2024 Federal election, secret
money groups spent $1.9 billion, nearly
double the amount spent just one cycle
before. This undermines our democracy
and shakes the public’s trust because
unlimited, anonymous Federal spending in our elections doesn’t encourage
free speech. It drowns out the voices of
the American people who are seeking
to participate.
I have long supported a constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens
United and restore the authority of
Congress and the States to establish
reasonable limits on campaign spending, and I will keep making the case to
build support for that effort. In the
meantime, there are things that we can
do to make our campaign finance system stronger and more transparent.
That is why I have led the effort,
alongside Ranking Member PADILLA, to
advance commonsense bills, including
the Freedom to Vote Act, to shine
light on secret money and make sure
Americans know who is trying to influence their votes. We came very close to
passing my bill in the last Congress.
The Freedom to Vote Act would provide important new tools to rid our
politics of Big Money and root out foreign interference.
It includes the DISCLOSE Act, which
I have cosponsored—Senator WHITEHOUSE’s bill—in every Congress since
2012, to end secret money in our politics. The DISCLOSE Act also makes it
harder for billionaires and others to
hide their contributions by ending the

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

use of transfers between organizations
in order to cloak the identity of donors. It requires organizations that
spend money on political activities to
disclose the true owner.
The Freedom to Vote Act also includes my Honest Ads Act, bipartisan
legislation that I first introduced with
Senator John McCain, whom we miss
very much and his leadership when it
comes to campaign finance. This bill
would require online platforms to take
steps to prevent foreign nationals from
buying ads. It would ensure that all online platforms disclose their buyers of
digital political ads if the platforms
reach 50 million or more unique U.S.
visitors per month, meaning online
platforms would finally have to follow
the same rules that TV and radio stations already follow for political ads.
It is simply insane that, in one medium, there are some rules and, in another, there are not. These changes
will increase transparency while including commonsense exemptions to
protect the First Amendment rights of
websites that are simply part of traditional media.
Third, the Freedom to Vote Act
would strengthen rules banning the coordination between candidates and
super PACs to make sure candidates
cannot evade contribution limits by
working with their super PACs.
Finally, the Freedom to Vote Act includes important reforms to the Federal Election Commission to improve
the enforcement of our campaign finance laws. Since the Citizens United
decision came down, 16 years ago, new
technologies have emerged that only
make the need for reform more pressing. AI videos are making their way
into political ads, giving dark money
groups a new and cheaper tool with
which to influence politicians and mislead the public.
That is why I lead bipartisan bills to
ban the use of AI to create deceptive
campaign ads—that is a bill that Senator HAWLEY and I lead—and to require
disclaimers on political ads that have
content substantially generated by AI.
Think about it. If they are blatantly
deceptive and are not satire or parody,
which is allowed by our Constitution,
then they are banned. Otherwise, at
least there is a label that says ‘‘Created by AI.’’ That will let the voters
know something is up. Maybe this isn’t
really the politician I love or the politician I don’t love.
Whether it is a question of who is
funding an ad or whether or not the
content of the ad is real, voters deserve
transparency. We need to end secret
money in our politics to make sure the
American people know their elected officials work for them, not the wealthy
and the powerful few, and to make sure
we have a government that works for
everyone.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from New Jersey.
Mr. KIM. Mr. President, I rise today
with such deep concern about the state

E:\CR\FM\A14JA6.001

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S210

of our democracy. Why have we let the
scourge of money in our politics get
this bad? Why have we ignored the vast
majority of Americans who want us to
get it under control? Why have we
ceded our democracy to the highest
bidder? I am not alone in feeling exasperated and feeling frustrated and
being angry.
As we look back at 16 years, in the
wake of the Citizens United decision,
we should be honest with ourselves:
Our politics were never truly fair. Voters were marginalized or excluded because of the color of their skin. Machines and bosses took advantage of everyday people. The powerful thought
they could decide for the rest of us.
But we made progress. We took steps
forward. So much of it was reversed
with one swoop of Citizens United. Now
we are awash in money and influence,
living through politics where the new
bosses hide behind a Supreme Court decision that allows them to pump unlimited money into elections without
the risk of exposure or accountability.
It feels overwhelming. But to understand how bad the amount of money in
politics has gotten, you just have to
look at the numbers.
According to OpenSecrets, during the
2008 election cycle, outside spending totaled about $574 million. Two years
later, the Citizens United decision
came down. Just 2 years after that,
during the next Presidential election
cycle, outside spending topped off at
nearly $1.3 billion. And just 2 years
ago, in 2024, it came close to $4.5 billion. Those numbers are disgusting.
The American people are sick and tired
of this, being bombarded with ads.
But it is not just about that. It is
worse. The American people know that
they are being purposely manipulated,
fed lies. The amount of money—
untraced, unaccountable, undemocratic
money—is beyond comprehension.
To me, what is even more unbelievable is that it is insanely unpopular.
Last year, the group Issue One conducted a poll on the 15th anniversary of
the Citizens United decision. Nearly 80
percent said that unchecked spending
gave rise to corruption. More than 75
percent said that the amount of money
in politics was causing them to lose
faith in democracy itself, while 77 percent said that, when we tackle Big
Money in our politics, we make our democracy stronger. These numbers are
across the political spectrum, and
these numbers are borne out in survey
after survey. Pew, in 2023, showed that
nearly three-quarters of all Americans
just want us to put limits on what can
be spent.
We live in a time when there is the
greatest amount of distrust in our government in modern American history.
Now, I decided to run for office nearly
a decade ago because I saw what Citizens United did and how the unchecked
money in our politics was impacted. It
was one of the first things I talked
about on the campaign trail. It was one
of the first things I pushed to introduce

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

and spoke out about on the House
floor, and every year, we have carried
the fight forward to reverse it.
It is important for us to remember
not to feel helpless. I have often said
that the opposite of democracy is apathy. And too often, we say of money in
politics that this is a problem too big,
that we can’t solve; or that the challenges are too entrenched and that we
are not going to be able to mobilize to
fix it. I would just urge us, on this anniversary of Citizens United, to keep in
mind that it doesn’t have to be this
way. We don’t need to have a politics
that is exasperating. We can have one
that is empowering. We can have one
wherein the voices of voters, not the
endless bank accounts of the well-off
and the well-connected, decide who
represents us, and we can have a politics that restores and grows trust rather than actively degrades.
This year is the 250th anniversary of
the independence of our Nation. We
will be referencing that a lot in this
Chamber because this is our moment to
free Americans from the influence of
Big Money and to give them back their
voice in a democracy. Let us come together and get it done.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from New Jersey.
Mr. BOOKER. Mr. President, I want
to thank Senator MARK KELLY for
bringing people to the floor to talk
about that which is, unequivocally, the
greatest threat to American democracy
right now. It is the cancer that is metastasizing more and more and more.
Since the Citizens United decision, I
have watched as to how this body has
seen clearly corrupt forces beginning
to overrun the common sense and the
will of the people in policy. More and
more are being bent to the whim and
the will of the wealthiest of the
wealthy in our country and the world,
as well as to corporations—many of
them, multinational corporations.
We are in crisis—our Nation is in crisis—as more and more Americans lose
trust and lose faith in our country, in
our democracy, in the people who
serve—the 535 Members: the 100 Members of the Senate and the 435 Members
of the House of Representatives. They
feel more and more that they are in it
for themselves and for the corporations
and not to do the hard work of the people.
Trust is vital for a democracy to
thrive, and there has been nothing
more powerful in the undermining of
that trust, in the years that I have
been in the Senate, than what I have
seen in the destructive force of money
in our politics. We know that the decision that was made by a conservative
majority of five Justices—three of
whom are still on the Court—permitted
those billionaires and corporations to
pour unlimited, unchecked money into
our elections, drowning out the collective voices of the people.
Let me give you an example, a sobering fact. In 2024, about 44 percent of all

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

of the money raised to support Donald
Trump came from 10 individual donors.
Think about that for a second. Of the
billions of dollars that were spent on
this election for the President of the
United States right now, 44 percent of
that money was contributed by 10 people. This is not just a purview of any
party, though; this is something that is
infecting our entire system.
People ask the question rightfully:
What does all that influence and
money buy? Well, right now, we are
seeing it. Individuals like Elon Musk
and other billionaires are exercising an
outsized influence on our party, threatening people in this body and other
bodies to drop millions and millions of
dollars against them. And to say that
doesn’t have an influence is wrong. Unlimited corporate cash literally buys
policies that put even more money in
the pockets of the wealthiest, allows
them to rig the system to benefit
them, while working-class Americans
more and more get a raw deal.
We are seeing a virtual welfare state
for the wealthiest of the wealthy in our
policies that benefits and protects the
wealthiest, that serves the largest corporations, that is designed to line the
pockets further and further of the
wealthy. It is a tax cut for corporations that we have seen in policies,
while Americans and their most important issues—whether it is their
healthcare, whether it is their ability
to make a living—are further and further undermined.
Citizens United has created a system
where Presidential pardons are pay-toplay, where environmental regulations
that keep us safe and healthy are
slashed, where corporate mergers are
rubberstamped by Federal regulators.
For 16 years now, we have seen the
slow, cancerous corruption of American democracy. We have seen how
folks who pay the price get outsized influence, that a small group of billionaires and corporations wield enormous
power over elections and, in turn, over
the policies that all Americans have to
live under. And this has fueled what is
growing to be a growing discontent.
Ending Citizens United is wildly popular on both sides of the aisle. The majority of Americans want to see an end
to this cancerous decision. Americans
are sick and tired, and they are demanding that we act.
I believe this body should come together in a bipartisan way to end the
nightmare that has been unleashed on
America by Citizens United. I know
from private conversations with people
on both sides of the aisle that it would
be a relief not to have this outsized influence of money and power on this
body. It would allow us to focus in an
undeterred way on the business of the
people.
I am proud to cosponsor bills that
would end this nightmare like Democracy for All, the amendment to overturn this misguided decision. I am
proud to champion commonsense reforms like the Freedom to Vote Act

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.038

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

and—God—the DISCLOSE Act, which
would ensure that the dark money
pouring into our elections, the cancerous resources unleashed by the
wealthiest of the wealthy—that at
least they could not pour that money
in and then hide their identity. It
would shine light on what is a dark,
dark process.
I urge my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle but particularly my Republican colleagues to listen to the overwhelming majority of Americans who
just not only want to avoid the dark,
cancerous reality that Citizens United
brought to us but are hoping and
yearning for our democracy to get back
to the ideals that we all share, that we
pledge allegiance to, that could make
this 250th anniversary of our country
something truly to celebrate: that we
are a nation free from this cancer, free
from the dark money that is flooding
our politics; that, indeed, we are free at
last to see what can happen in America
that focuses on the people and the
power of the people and not just the
power of the wealthiest.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
Democratic whip.
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, I want
to thank Senator MARK KELLY for
bringing us together on the floor to
talk about Citizens United.
Senator KELLY has the honor of representing the State of Arizona. When I
was a Member of the House of Representatives, I served with a Congressman from Arizona named Morris Udall.
He was a great guy. He ran for President. He was, I guess, the source of
more jokes and comedy than any politician of his day. He used to say: If you
have politics in your bloodstream, only
embalming fluid will replace it.
I am living proof that he was right.
In 1982, I decided to run for the U.S.
House of Representatives for the first
time. This was after I lost three
straight elections. My wife said this is
my last chance. So I took on an incumbent in 1982 for the U.S. House of Representatives. He had been in that seat
for 22 years. But because of the quirky
law in Illinois, the Democrats got to
draw the map, so I got a map against
the Republican incumbent which was
40 percent new territory. I had a
chance. And 1982 was a big year for
Democrats. I remember it. I still remember my fear: Would I raise enough
money to be a viable candidate? Nobody knew for sure.
The average cost of a congressional
campaign in 1982 was $215,000, for a
campaign to run for the U.S. House. I
raised and spent, as did my opponent,
$800,000. We set records—$800,000.
If you say that today—‘‘Would you
start off and wage a campaign for the
House with $800,000?’’—they would say
‘‘Well, that is just for the announcement, right? You are going to need a
few more dollars if you are serious
about a campaign.’’ The number has
grown dramatically and now is in the
millions for candidates for the House
and for the Senate.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

S211

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

You are looking at the last open,
public sponsor of public financing of
campaigns. Nobody else has tackled it
since I stopped introducing it. At the
time I introduced it, Arlen Specter of
Pennsylvania, a Republican, was my
cosponsor. We had a bipartisan bill. I
still believe it is the right way to go,
but it doesn’t have a chance.
Under the current system that has
been described by my colleagues here
on the floor, there is so much entrenched money that they virtually
control the agenda and scare the living
hell out of average individuals who
don’t have a fortune to spend. That is
the reality of what we face.
Senator BOOKER is a member of the
Senate Judiciary Committee. It is an
interesting world we live in. There is a
group—I won’t name their names on
the floor, but it would be easy to figure
out who I am talking about—that admonishes me regularly, as the chairman and ranking member of the Senate
Judiciary Committee, that I am just
not progressive enough; I am not doing
enough.
This influence group here in Washington is a dark money operation. We
don’t know where their money is coming from. They are the reformers, this
dark money operation.
We now have, currently, a debate
going
on
on
the
floor
about
cryptocurrency. Remember what happened in the last campaign on
cryptocurrency? The industry decided
that they would pick out one or two
Democrats and make a point that they
were in the wrong position when it
came to cryptocurrency. So they spent
$40 million to defeat one of our colleagues here in the Senate, and they
succeeded. That is the kind of thing
that happens now: 40 million bucks.
That is more than a good day raising
money for most candidates, but that is
the reality of what we face.
This decision that we face today—
Citizens United—was mindless. To say
that a business has the same rights as
individuals under the Constitution is a
mindless conclusion. And it is no surprise. If I am not mistaken—I will double-check—if I am not mistaken, not a
single Supreme Court Justice who
ruled in that case had ever stood for office, ever had a fundraiser, ever had to
go through it and understand what it
does to you.
I think ethical reform that is meaningful requires a scandal that is earthshattering. I am not sure what is left
by way of scandal. What is going on
with corruption in this business has become almost routine. And I am sorry
to say that because so many people on
both sides of the aisle are good, honest
people who are public servants trying
to do their best. But this Citizens
United decision and where we are in
politics today have changed this business so much, I am not sure we can
ever reclaim the kind of idealism that
we all aspire to as public servants in
this institution.
I thank the Senator for drawing us to
the floor today. There is a lot of work

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

to be done, and I may not be around for
some of it. But I will still remember
that $800,000 when I first ran was a
record. Now it is rather routine.
Let’s make sure that if you have politics in your bloodstream, it doesn’t
take embalming fluid to replace it.
Let’s replace it with the ideals that we
all aspire to.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Connecticut.
Mr. MURPHY. Mr. President, I thank
Senator KELLY for bringing us down to
the floor today.
It is hard to believe it has been 16
years since our politics were upended,
since the floodgates were opened to
corporate money in an unlimited way,
in an anonymous way, coming into our
elections.
Senator DURBIN, of course, has been a
hero, as he mentioned spending much
of his career trying to introduce legislation and pass legislation that would
put citizens in charge of our elections
rather than Big Money.
So let’s just for a few minutes here,
because I know there are others who
want to speak—I just want to make
maybe three points.
The first is to just give you the
scope, if we haven’t put this information on the record already, as to how
things have changed. Senator DURBIN
was doing some of this already in referencing how little elections used to
cost compared to how much they cost
today, but let’s just talk about the full
amount of money that is in politics
today as compared to let’s say 1976—a
few years before Senator DURBIN was
first running for Congress.
In 1976, total Federal election spending by candidates and committees was
$160 million. In the last election, in
2024, candidates and committees together spent $15.9 billion. OK. Now, it
is a long time between 1976 and 2024, so
let’s adjust that for inflation. Adjusted
for inflation, it is still 100 times more
money. That is stunning. That is stunning in and of itself, but here is what
makes it corrupt. What makes it corrupt is that prior to the Citizens
United decision, outside groups, noncandidate groups, were spending about
$144 million in elections annually. In
2024, outside groups spent $4.2 billion.
When Senator DURBIN was first running, he was raising money from individuals, folks who were spending $25,
$100, maybe a couple hundred dollars
on campaign contributions. Individuals
today make up just 16 percent of total
spending in elections—16 percent.
Eighty-four percent of all the spending
in elections today is not done by citizens; 84 percent of spending is by corporations and organizations. Most of
that money—maybe not most. Much of
that money is anonymous; you have no
idea where it comes from.
So let me tell you what the impact of
that is. The impact of that is corruption. Let’s just call it what it is. When
a handful of billionaires and corporations have that much influence on our

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.039

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S212

elections, an unaccountable influence—
you have no idea who is spending all of
that money, who is throwing these ads
on TV that are being produced by PACs
with innocuous sounding names like
Save Our Future, Build Our Future,
This Is Our Future—the impact of that
is just—it is corrupt. It is corrupt.
There is a group that is being formed
right now called Leading the Future—
another one of these innocuous sounding PACs. It is promising to spend $100
million in the election this fall, and it
is being funded by a group of AI companies—companies that are trying to get
the Congress to pass legislation to essentially give these AI companies a
free
ride—no
protection
from
deepfakes, no protection from the poison they are feeding our children. They
want free rein, so they are putting up
$100 million in this next election.
I just did the math, sitting at my
desk, quickly. The average individual
contribution today is about $25. That is
a lot of money for some people, to give
$25 to an election. If every single resident of my State—every single resident—gave $25, that wouldn’t equal the
$100 million commitment that one
super PAC has made to this next election. That is stunning. That shows you
how much power a handful of these
companies have.
The only way that this group Leading Our Future can put $100 million
into this next election to try to stop
Congress from regulating artificial intelligence is because of the Citizens
United decision, because that decision
allows those companies that are swimming in money right now to be able to
write an unlimited check into this next
election.
So you can understand why people
feel powerless today, why people feel
like this whole system is rigged because even if they give $25, it just
doesn’t make a difference when a handful of companies can, with the snap of
their fingers, muster $100 million to try
to change the impact of an election on
public policy.
The last point I want to make is this:
This fight that we are having now in
which only Democrats care about
changing our campaign finance laws, in
which Republicans almost to a person
have no interest in trying to decrease
the influence of corporations and billionaires in our elections, it is
ahistorical. In fact, this has not historically been a particularly partisan
issue except for the last 25 years.
There is a giant, cult-like poster of
Donald Trump on the Department of
Labor that I drive by every day in and
out of the Capitol. It is super creepy,
the idea that we have Mao- and Stalinlike banners of the President of the
United States surrounding the U.S.
Capitol. But next to the banner of Donald Trump on the Department of Labor
building is a banner depicting the
image of Teddy Roosevelt. I guess it is
an attempt by the President to draw an
equivalency
between
himself
and
Teddy Roosevelt. That is a pretty—
that is a stretch.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

But Teddy Roosevelt was a Republican, a Republican who in the wake of
a pretty minor scandal, in 1904, when a
couple of companies sent secret checks
to his campaign and to other Republican campaigns, came to Congress and
said: We have got to ban corporate
money from elections.
He had trouble getting Republicans
to do it at first. So he reached out
across the aisle and worked with a particularly vile Democrat, a guy by the
name of Benjamin ‘‘Pitchfork’’ Tillman—just a bad, bad guy. Actually, our
rule XIX, which we use against each
other occasionally to try to settle the
tone of debate, it is in our rules because of Benjamin ‘‘Pitchfork’’ Tillman.
Anyway, Roosevelt—a Republican—
and Tillman—a Democrat—got together and said: Let’s ban corporations
from being able to influence our elections. That is the Tillman Act that was
the law of the land in practice until the
Citizens United decision. For 100 years
until that decision, Republicans and
Democrats actually worked together
pretty well to say: You know what, the
people should be in charge, not corporations. That wasn’t a partisan idea.
It is now, unfortunately.
I am grateful to Senator KELLY for
bringing us down to the floor to talk
about the way our citizens feel like
they don’t have power, the way that
the Citizens United decision has left
our voters feeling like the game is
rigged. But it is kind of sad that it is
only Democrats down here talking
about the impact that that decision
has had on the influence of corporations and billionaires in our politics.
For a long time, Republicans cared
about trying to make sure that our democracy was fair. That is not the case
any longer.
I thank Senator KELLY for allowing
us to come down and have this discussion.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Kentucky.
WAR POWERS RESOLUTION

Mr. PAUL. Mr. President, we are
here on the floor of the Senate today to
discuss the War Powers Resolution, to
discuss the recent war activities in
Venezuela, and yet there still is a debate. Some say there is not a war;
some say there is a war; some say we
won’t know for a while if there is a war
or isn’t a war.
Last year, we had this debate. The
junior Senator from Texas came forward and presented a War Powers Resolution for Gaza. He said that President
Biden’s decision to send U.S. troops in
to build a beachhead, to build a pier,
was sending them into a war zone.
Interestingly, every Republican Senator at that time voted against a point
of order, and the point of order said no
hostilities existed. The point of order
at the time said Gaza is not a war. And
every Republican voted against that
point of order because every Republican considered that Gaza was a war
zone and that the War Powers Resolution applied.

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Fast forward to today, the proposition that the majority of Republicans
will put forward is a point of order saying there isn’t a war in Venezuela. So
they all believed that there was a war
in Gaza, but they all now believe that
there is not a war in Venezuela.
Now, there are arguments, I think,
actually for both being war. In Gaza,
the troops that were building the
beachhead were fired on multiple
times, so I think U.S. troops under fire
sounds a bit like you are putting them
into a war.
Now, we have a situation in Venezuela where hundreds of troops were
sent in—dozens and dozens—and pilots
and planes were sent in. You bombed a
nation’s capital. You had extraordinary rendition of the nation’s President, and now, we have a blockade involving hundreds of ships and thousands of sailors, but that is not a war.
It is somewhat boggling to the mind
that almost every Republican Senator
believed there was a war when a few
soldiers were shot at in Gaza trying to
build a pier. I agreed with them. I
think that was putting U.S. troops into
war.
But now every Republican—not every
Republican—virtually all Republican
Senators who believed that it was a
war in Gaza now believe it is not a war
in Venezuela.
Now, some of them on the quiet will
tell you: Well, it was a war, but it is all
over. It is all done. Yeah. We are not
going to quibble. We really weren’t arresting somebody. It wasn’t a drug arrest. It was a war. It is a mini-war. But
it is all over, so the War Powers Resolution doesn’t apply because the war is
over.
And yet, we still have an entire military blockade of a country, and that is
not a war. This is a real question.
So we have been given a legal opinion
by the current administration, and we
had one of their assistant attorneys
general come and explain to us why
this is not a war. You have to realize
this is an important part of the debate
because, if it is a drug bust, it is not a
war. So they told us this is really just
a drug bust. We had to bomb the entire
capital. We had to remove all their air
defenses. We have an armada of 20,000
ships and hundreds of airplanes flown
from all over the world, but it really
was just a drug arrest; it really isn’t a
war.
But this young man came in to us,
and he explained to us that we probably don’t know yet whether it is a
war. The way we will know it is a war
is by the scope, the extent, and the duration, including how many people die
in the war.
So the problem we have, though, is
the Constitution gives us the power to
initiate war, to declare war. But if we
don’t know if it is a war until after all
the people die and we add up how many
people died and they call it a constitutional war because a lot of people died,
wouldn’t it then be a little bit late to
vote on initiating a war?

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.040

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

See, this is an enormous debate. This
is an important debate, and this should
not be sluffed over as, Oh, no big deal.
The war is already over.
Well, we actually don’t even know if
the war is already over. We are under a
blockade. The current administration
has said they will send troops back in
if they need to. They said they will
send troops into other countries if they
need to. The blockade is said to be, Oh,
we are going to control the ships, and
we are going to sell the oil, and we are
going to run. We are in charge. It is our
oil. We are going to be in charge of
Venezuela.
But that sounds to me like a military
blockade, a long-term military blockade, and I don’t know how we argue
that that is not war. But the position
of the administration and probably the
position of other Presidential administrations—because this isn’t really and
shouldn’t be Republican versus Democrat—this should be legislative prerogative versus Presidential prerogative,
and it should be about the Constitution.
The
Constitution
specifically,
thoughtfully, vested the power of initiating war and declaring war to Congress. They talked about it. They
talked about it in the Constitutional
Convention. They wrote about it in the
Federalist Papers, and from Hamilton
to Jefferson, the spectrum of our
Founding Fathers concluded they
didn’t want the President to have this
power. They said the initiation—the
declaration of war shall be vested by
Congress in the legislature.
So what we have is an elaborate song
and dance. They know the declaration
of war resides here. They know initiation of war—so they argue first that it
is not war; it is a drug bust. But then
they say: Well, internationally, people
say it probably is a war, so in case you
think it is a war, we are going to tell
you that it is not really a war because
we won’t know if it is a war until it is
over. We will tell you more about it.
We will know when the war is over
whether it actually was a war and
whether we should have voted to initiate war when the war is over depending on how many people die.
And then they say: Well, we are
going to look at the scope, extent, and
duration of the war, but since we don’t
know what that is, we are going to
guess based on what the policymakers
say. And they say to us now we are not
going back in, so we don’t have to vote
on whether or not we are going to war
with Venezuela.
This, to me, is an absurdity; it is
logic that runs in circles, and it doesn’t
get us any closer to where we need to
be. The reason the Founding Fathers
gave this power to the legislature is because they wanted to make war less
frequent, they wanted to make war
hard to initiate, they wanted to see
war more as a defensive notion, not as
an offensive enterprise.
During the debate over whether Gaza
was a war, the resolution was intro-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:54 Jan 15, 2026

S213

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

duced by the junior Senator from
Texas, and virtually every Republican
voted for it. Interestingly, Marco
Rubio voted for it. The Secretary of
State actually voted to say that the
war in Gaza where troops were being
shot at that were building a pier was a
war. But now, things seem to have reversed, and all those who thought Gaza
was a war where there were some shots
being fired at the people trying to build
a pier—which by many people’s interpretation would be a lot less than an
entire invasion of a capital and removal of a President and a blockade of
an entire country—every Republican in
this body, including the current Secretary of State, voted that Gaza was a
war.
In making the arguments that Gaza
was a war, the junior Senator from
Texas expressed the reality that the
Senate had abdicated its constitutional
responsibility. So at that time, the
junior Senator from Texas argued that
Gaza was a war. He said:
Over recent decades, we have seen the Senate hand away much of our responsibility on
foreign policy and national security to the
Executives. That is contrary to the design of
our Constitution, and it is frankly harmful
to the Senate and harmful to this country.

I couldn’t agree more, but I don’t understand how it was harmful when we
were talking about Gaza and it is no
longer harmful when we are talking
about arguably a much greater military incursion into a country. It seems
as if—and I know this would be shocking to people—that there is some partisanship here, that there is a different
definition of war under Democrats than
there is under Republicans.
My colleague from Texas went on to
highlight the flagrant hypocrisy of
both parties, saying on the Senate
floor:
[Now], far too often, the Senate has
stepped out of our historic role in foreign
policy and [has] said: Whatever the President
wants, we, the Senate, aren’t going to say
anything about it.
When there is a Republican President,
Democrats suddenly discover their voice and
say: Hey, the Senate ought to say something.
But when it is a Democrat President, it
seems no matter how incoherent and disastrous the foreign policy from the Democrat
President, [the] Democrat Senators don’t
want the Senate to exercise its authority.

I would argue today is evidence that
both sides are guilty of this. I would
argue that if Gaza was a war, that
bombing of the Venezuelan capital and
removal of the President and the
blockade of an entire country might
qualify as a war.
If a few soldiers shooting at our soldiers who are trying to build a temporary pier or a temporary port in
Gaza is war—which every Republican
in the body voted for—certainly they
must think the invasion of a capital is
a war, that removing a President is
war, or that blockade of a country.
So even though the first incursion,
the first invasion, may well be over, is
the blockade of a country not a war?
Are we not at war when we have a military blockade of a country?

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

The American people are sick and
tired of their elected officials disregarding the Constitution when their
party is in power and then becoming
ardent defenders of the Constitution
when the opposing party is in power.
Each of us took an oath to the Constitution to defend it that applies at all
times, not just when it is politically
convenient.
Congress maintains a constitutional
duty to debate matters of war. Playing
politics when the lives of our brave
servicemembers are on the line and our
country is at risk of being entangled in
yet another foreign conflict is an inexcusable dereliction of duty.
At this point, I think we need to have
a fulsome debate—a debate in the country, a debate in the Senate—over what
war is. But I think anyone who accepts
the ludicrous notion that they will tell
you what war is after the war is over
should not be treated seriously.
How can we do our duty? How can we
do our duty to initiate and declare war
if we don’t know what war is until it is
over?
If after the war we can count the casualties, and there are a significant
amount of casualties, or the incursion
took a significant amount of time,
then there is war. Or some will say:
Well, we can just defund the war. You
know what, it has never happened.
Find me the Senator or Congressman
who wants to vote against money for
our troops who are being shot at. It is
very difficult to stop funding a war
once we start because a nation’s patriotism rises up naturally.
The time to start a war is before it
gets started. But if they are telling you
they define war by how many casualties there are, you have got to wait
until the war is over to determine
whether it was a war, to determine
whether we should initiate the war.
This is an absurdity.
Both parties, frankly, have been
guilty of hypocrisy on this, but the
order today that we will be voting on is
whether or not the point of order says
that this is not a war.
Well, invasion of another country,
blockading of a country, and removing
another country’s leader, to my mind,
clearly is war, and I will vote against
this point of order.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Virginia.
Mr. KAINE. Mr. President and my
colleagues, last week, the Senate
agreed to discharge our bipartisan War
Powers Resolution from the Foreign
Relations Committee so that we could
finally, after months, debate military
action against Venezuela and Venezuelans, on the floor of the Senate,
and not just allow the administration
to wage combat on its own with no information shared except in classified
settings.
I thank my colleagues, two of whom
are here on the floor today, who voted
for this resolution. They did not vote
to rebuke a President, although, for
some reason, he has chosen to see it

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.041

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S214

that way. Instead, they voted to uphold
a basic constitutional principle that we
should not be waging offensive hostilities without a debate and vote in
Congress.
As I described last week, the reason
for that principle is clear: Don’t send
our sons and daughters into military
hostilities without the debate and vote
in Congress that would put the thumbprint of the Nation’s leadership on the
validity of the mission.
I believed that today we were going
to have a debate about the War Powers
Resolution, possibly consider amendments to it, and then hold a vote on
final passage. But I have now learned
that some want to foreclose the possibility of a debate and allow the President to carry out this unauthorized
campaign with no public debate and no
vote. And they are apparently preparing a parliamentary move to deprive our resolution of the privileged
status given it under the War Powers
Resolution and, thus, shut debate
down.
First, an effort to declare this resolution not privileged—apparently, by arguing that the campaign in and against
Venezuelans is not hostilities—is something that the House has actually been
doing, but the Senate should not emulate.
Some of you remember that the Senate has passed a number of resolutions
against President Trump’s unilateral
tariff taxes that are privileged. They
are also privileged—or they used to
be—in the House, but the House was so
afraid to even have a debate or vote
about this matter that they used a procedural parliamentary trick to turn off
the privilege. I don’t think that is worthy of emulation by the ‘‘greatest deliberative body’’ in the world. We
shouldn’t be afraid to debate or discuss
anything, especially matters of war
and peace.
Second, an argument that the Venezuelan campaign is not ‘‘imminent
hostilities’’ within the meaning of the
War Powers Resolution is a violation of
every reasonable meaning of that term.
Let’s begin with the boat campaign
against boats with Venezuelans on it,
starting in mid-September, that has
now killed more than a hundred designated combatants; the amassing of
U.S. military assets, what the President calls an armada in and around
Venezuela; the President’ authorization of covert action in Venezuela; the
U.S. military’s use in the interdiction
of oil from Venezuela; the attack, over
two weekends ago, to seize the Venezuelan President, President Maduro,
and his wife, where more than a hundred combatants were killed, where
U.S. troops were injured; and now ongoing control facilitated by the U.S.
military.
The United States is determining
who can govern Venezuela. We have
tapped the Vice President of Venezuela
and determined that she is somebody
who should be the leader, rather than
the opposition who won an overwhelming election, just a year ago.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

We have said we can determine when
Venezuela will finally be entitled to
have its own election, saying that they
are not going to be ready for that for
some long period of time.
We are seizing the nation’s primary
economic asset, its oil. We are deciding
how the oil revenues—every penny of
the oil revenues—of this nation should
be spent, and President Trump is even
saying that he gets to determine which
U.S. companies can even invest in the
Venezuelan oil economy.
And it is all being done with the active participation of the U.S. military.
The U.S. military assets in place
around Venezuela are, as President
Trump said, an armada, 16,000 U.S. personnel. This is open source reporting as
of 2 days ago, arrayed around Venezuela:
The USS Gerald R. Ford Carrier
Strike Group: Carrier Air Wing 9, the
USS Winston Churchill, the USS Bainbridge, and the USS Mahan.
The Iwo Jima Amphibious Readiness
Group, which includes: the USS Fort
Lauderdale, the USS San Antonio, and
the 22nd Marine Expeditionary Unit.
The USS Thomas Hudner (DDG–116),
the USS Stockdale (DDG–106), the USS
Lake Erie (CG–70), the USS Gettysburg
(CG–64), the USS Wichita (LCS–13), the
USNS Waters, the USNS Joshua Humphreys, and the USNS Kanawha.
And that is in addition to air assets
that are arrayed all around the region
that have been used and are likely to
be used in the future.
Everything that is being done to control Venezuela, its politics, and its
economy are being facilitated by the
U.S. military, but it is more than assets in place. Operation Southern
Spear, the boat strikes of Venezuelan
boats in international waters, is still
being carried out by the U.S. military.
The U.S. military is engaged in a naval
blockade of Venezuela, transit out and
transit in. Would we think that was an
act of war if Russia was blockading the
United States and not allowing commerce to come into or out of our ports?
The U.S. military is engaged in active interdiction of Venezuelan oil in
the Pacific and the Caribbean and elsewhere in the world, and the United
States is threatening future military
action.
President Trump said about Vice
President Rodriguez, if she didn’t act
well, she would have a fate worse than
President Maduro. President Trump
was going to do a second invasion, last
Friday, that he called off after our vote
Thursday afternoon—threats of future
invasion.
If this is not ‘‘imminent hostilities’’
with the death now of more than 200
combatants, with U.S. troops injured,
with an armada arrayed around, a
naval interdiction of oil, and a blockade of this country’s economy, it would
violate every reasonable meaning of
this term, and to pretend otherwise
would weaken the respect that this institution should aspire to.
Finally, to my colleagues, there has
been some recent correspondence be-

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

tween the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Senator
RISCH of Idaho, and the Secretary of
State, Marco Rubio, that basically underlines my points.
Some Senate colleagues wanted to
use this procedural maneuver today,
and they felt that it would help if they
could have a clear definition or description from the administration that
the military operation is over.
And so, I have the letter here that
Senator RISCH wrote to the President
of the United States yesterday, and he
asked two simple questions: First,
‘‘provide Congress with an official correspondence confirming that Operation
Absolute Resolve has ended’’—first request—and second, specify ‘‘that U.S.
military personnel are no longer involved in hostilities in Venezuela.’’
Two simple questions. I don’t know
that those questions would have been
sufficient for me, but, apparently, Senator RISCH thought if he could get
‘‘yes’’ answers to both of those questions, it would be sufficient for him.
Secretary Rubio sent a response
today and would not answer yes to either of the questions. The letter from
Senator Secretary, dated earlier today,
January 14, very explicitly does not
say that Operation Absolute Resolve is
over. He was asked to say that it
ended; he would not say that it has
ended.
How could it be ended when the
President is still threatening other
sanctioned and indicted Venezuelan officials with a fate worse than Maduro’s
if they don’t meet the U.S. standards?
So in this letter which my colleagues
sought to justify this parliamentary
maneuver that is coming up, Secretary
Rubio would not specify that Operation
Absolute Resolve has ended.
Well, how about the second question:
Please specify ‘‘that U.S. military personnel are no longer involved in hostilities in Venezuela.’’
Secretary Rubio would not say that
either. ‘‘There are currently no U.S.
Armed Forces in Venezuela.’’ He didn’t
say U.S. forces aren’t involved in hostilities in or against Venezuelans because he couldn’t say that with the
interdiction, with the blockade, with
the boat strikes.
And so even the effort of my colleagues to try to find a parliamentary
escape hatch—oh, there is no hostilities—and softball set of two questions to the Secretary of State to justify their position produced a response
where he would not agree that the operation is over—the military operation—and he would not agree that the
United States is now not in hostilities
in or against Venezuela.
This is the third vote we have had on
Venezuela in the last 3 months. Only
now—only now—does the administration and its supporters make the claim
that there are no hostilities. They
didn’t make that claim in the first 2
months, as the armada was amassing,
as we were killing people in open

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.043

S14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

waters, as we were committing to covert action, as we were preparing and
practicing for an invasion.
They knew that it was hostilities,
and that is why they didn’t challenge
it. But only now, on the third vote, are
they challenging whether this is or is
not hostilities, and they are doing so to
avoid public debate. That is the reason
they are doing this.
If this cause and if this legal basis
were so righteous and so lawful, the administration and its supporters would
not be so afraid to have this debate before the public and the U.S. Senate.
For that reason, I urge my colleagues
to avoid a parliamentary gag rule on
discussion of this military operation
and support the bipartisan War Powers
Resolution.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MORENO). The Senator from California.
Mr. SCHIFF. Mr. President, this year
our Nation will celebrate its 250th
birthday—250 years in which our country has built on the foundation that is
our Constitution.
The Framers could not conceive exactly what the future would bring, but
they did anticipate a great deal, in significant part because they could count
on some of the immutable characteristics of human nature, of institutions,
of communities—like the attraction of
the accumulation of power—and how,
unless that gravitational force is
counterbalanced, one institution or one
man can come to dominate the life of a
country.
One power in particular concerned
our Founders, and that was the power
to make war. They had seen and been
the victims of a monarch who used the
power of war against them. So they
made the radical decision—so contrary
to all the precedent at the time—not to
invest such a vital attribute of state
sovereignty in the Executive but to
grant the power to declare war to Congress.
In April 1798, a future President,
James Madison, wrote to another future President, Thomas Jefferson, underscoring the danger and the decision.
He said:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

The constitution supposes, what the History of all Governments demonstrates, is
that the Executive is the branch of power
most interested in war and most prone to it.
. . . It has accordingly with studied care,
vested the question of war in the Legislature.

‘‘[M]ost prone to it’’—words written
more than 200 years ago and so fitting
for today, when in but his first year in
office, the President used military
power in Iran, Nigeria, Syria, Yemen,
and most significantly, in Venezuela.
After months of escalating military
action against boats in the Southern
Caribbean, after amassing a massive
military armada on the doorstep of a
foreign nation, the administration dispatched American servicemembers to
invade and arrest the corrupt leader of
Venezuela, Nicolas Maduro—military
action that we were repeatedly told

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

S215

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

would never come to pass, by a President who promised to avoid starting
new foreign wars, engaging in nation
building, or conducting regime change
operations.
This operation was not about narcotics, nor was it about democracy, nor
was it about oil. The military occupation in Venezuela captured the country’s corrupt dictator but has left the
corrupt drug-running regime in place
instead of turning over the reins of
governance to that country’s legitimately elected leadership of Maria
Corina Machado and Edmundo Gonzalez. And now our President has committed to running Venezuela for years
in order to exploit its oil resources.
Today, we have the opportunity to
exercise the power bestowed on us by
our Framers to authorize the use of
force—or decline to do so—but to reassert some constraint on an Executive
grown too fond of the use of military
power.
We took the first step last week when
a bipartisan majority of this body
voted to set before the Senate a War
Powers Resolution on Venezuela. That
was a strong bipartisan signal that this
Chamber was unwilling to let the war
powers of this body atrophy to the
point where they are no more substantial than air.
Now we are on the precipice of that
debate—whether we should again risk
the lives of our servicemembers to procure access to another nation’s oil—
and the American people should see us
weighing that cost.
The President has threatened the
possibility of additional strikes in Venezuela if Venezuela does not ‘‘behave.’’
And by ‘‘behave,’’ I think we have to
acknowledge that the behavior the
President expects is for that country to
share access to its oil wealth with
American oil companies. Many of those
companies are dubious about investing
in Venezuela. Some believe it would
take years or more than a decade to
make that profitable.
Whether it makes good business
sense to them is their decision, but
whether we use the military might of
the United States of America to safeguard their investment is our decision,
and I say it is not worth risking the
lives of our troops.
There are some deeply important
questions as to the use of American
military power that are implicated in
this debate—questions that deserve answers.
Will we see years of American
gunships parked off of Venezuela as
part of some new, amorphous ‘‘Donroe
Doctrine’’? How do we expect to run
another country of more than 20 million people? Will U.S. forces be used to
protect oil infrastructure in Venezuela? Will our President continue to
stand by the illegitimate regime that
Maduro’s capture has left in place or
will we support the outcome of the last
election in which Maduro’s opposition
was triumphant? Are we better off
spending our Nation’s time and taxes

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

on Venezuela or should we spend them
at home to bring down costs and address the affordability crisis?
Our servicemembers and their families deserve answers to these questions
before we ask any servicemember to
put their life on the line. Let us make
sure they get those answers. Let us
have this debate. Let us move beyond a
parliamentary point of order designed
to hide from the American people the
cost of our military involvement in
Venezuela, the continuing cost of it.
Let’s have the fulsome debate that deserves because at the center of this debate is a question of whether we want
to risk our servicemembers’ lives in
order to secure the oil resources of another country.
I do not believe it is worth doing so,
but let those who believe that it is
worth the risk and the danger to our
servicemembers and their families—let
them come to the Senate floor and
make that argument. Let us have this
debate. Let us not hide behind some
parliamentary maneuver to even avoid
a conversation here.
There hasn’t been a single hearing in
committee, an open hearing, on this
subject, not a fulsome debate over the
use of our military power. Let us do so
now.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
Democratic leader.
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, the
need for this resolution is simple. It is
clear. The American people do not support another forever war with Venezuela. The American people don’t
want Donald Trump sending our troops
into harm’s way without so much as a
debate in Congress.
Today, the Senate has a chance to
move forward on asserting Congress’s
constitutional authority on matters of
war and peace. We can tell Donald
Trump: Enough with foreign adventures. It is time to focus on lowering
costs here at home. That is what the
American people want.
This resolution is necessary right
now because Donald Trump has made
clear that what happened in Venezuela
is not a one-and-done operation—not at
all.
Last week, the New York Times
asked him: Are we going to be there a
month? 6 months? a year?
Do you know what his answer was?
Donald Trump said:
I would say much longer.

He said: We want to give money to
Venezuela.
Here we are. People don’t have
enough money for healthcare, for housing, for so many other things, and we
want to give money to Venezuela? How
is that ‘‘America first?’’
Trump threatened further military
action if the current government
doesn’t cooperate with the United
States. The administration is trying to
concoct an argument that we are not
engaged in hostilities, but that is absurd. You don’t have to be a great expert on military affairs to know that

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.044

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S216

we are heavily engaged. Donald Trump
says we are not engaged in hostilities?
Tell that to the 16,000 U.S. servicemembers currently deployed in the Caribbean. Tell that to our servicemembers
on the Ford Carrier Strike Group.
Look at the Marine Expeditionary Unit
operating in the region.
Donald Trump is turning the Caribbean into a dangerous powder keg, and
Congress must rein him in before one
mistake ignites a larger, more unstable
conflict.
So the Senate needs to exert its constitutional role when it comes to the
use of military force.
I know that there are Senate Republicans acting in good faith who are
worried about Venezuela getting out of
hand. I urge them to reject this point
of order, to provide a necessary backstop, a necessary check, a necessary
guardrail on Executive power. It is the
right thing to do for the American people. That means no more forever wars,
no more military escapades without
congressional authorization, no more
tens of billions to prop up foreign regimes while American families struggle right here at home.
I want to thank Senator KAINE, I
want to thank Senator SCHIFF, and I
want to thank Senator PAUL for joining with me in this very necessary resolution. Of course, I thank our great
ranking member of the Armed Services
Committee for his good work as well.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Rhode Island.
Mr. REED. Mr. President, last week,
this body advanced a War Powers Resolution to rein in President Trump’s unauthorized military actions in Venezuela. This week, we will vote on final
passage. I urge my colleagues to support it.
It is important to recall how we arrived here. What happened on January
3—the military raid in Caracas, the
capture of Nicolas Maduro, and the
President’s declaration that the United
States will ‘‘run’’ Venezuela and seize
its oil—was not an isolated incident; it
was a culmination of a monthslong
campaign built on dubious legal arguments, institutional failures, and Congress’ willful abdication of our constitutional duties.
For months, my colleagues and I
warned that President Trump’s military campaign against the alleged drug
boats was strategically incoherent and
legally questionable. We warned that
the massive military buildup was not
about narcotics trafficking. We warned
that this campaign was always directed
at military action against Venezuela.
At every turn, this body had the opportunity to exercise oversight and demand accountability, and at every
turn, we failed to do so. Now we must
correct that failure.
President Trump began laying the
foundation for this operation—all the
operations in Venezuela—the moment
he was sworn in. On his first day in office, he designated multiple drug car-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

tels as terrorist organizations. Shortly
thereafter, he ended temporary protected status for some 350,000 Venezuelan migrants and authorized holding some at the naval station at Guantanamo before deportation.
On March 15, the President invoked
the Alien Enemies Act—a wartime authority that had not been used since
World War II—and declared that Tren
de Aragua, or TdA, was a cartel plotting to invade and actively invading
the United States as an ‘‘invading
force.’’ He did this despite a National
Intelligence Council assessment in
April of 2025 that concluded the Venezuelan Government was not directing
an invasion of the United States by
TdA.
It would not be the last time President Trump disregarded the law and
the facts to achieve his policy goals.
Also, by last summer, it was clear
that, in addition to Secretary Hegseth,
Deputy Chief of Staff Stephen Miller
and Secretary of State Marco Rubio
were engaged in planning these various
proposed operations, and their personal
agendas converged. Their goal was ultimately to destabilize and depose
Maduro and secure access to Venezuelan’s oil reserves.
Over the summer and fall, the Department of Defense flowed massive
military assets into the Caribbean: the
Iwo Jima Amphibious Ready Group,
the 22nd Marine Expeditionary Unit,
attack submarines, P–8 Poseidon aircraft, Aegis destroyers, F–35 fighter
jets, and eventually the USS Gerald R.
Ford Carrier Strike Group. The administration never explained why this
buildup was necessary other than
vague references to drug interdiction.
It was clear then and it is perfectly
clear now that they were preparing for
an attack on Venezuela.
By late summer, President Trump
had signed a secret directive ordering
the Pentagon to conduct maritime
strikes on drug boats. Secretary
Hegseth then signed an execute order,
or EXORD, directing lethal military
strikes against alleged drug boats. He
has refused to submit that EXORD to
Congress despite legal requirements for
him to do so. By not following a statutory requirement to submit these
EXORDs
to
Congress,
Secretary
Hegseth and the President are breaking
the law.
On September 2, the U.S. military
carried out its first strike, killing 11
individuals on an alleged drug boat.
Additional strikes continued throughout the fall and winter, and to date,
the U.S. military has conducted 35
known strikes, killing at least 120 people.
President Trump tries to justify
these lethal attacks by creating a new
term—‘‘designated terrorist organization’’—a term that does not exist in
U.S. law or anywhere else, so far as we
have been able to determine. What does
exist in law—authorized by Congress—
is the ‘‘foreign terrorist organization’’
designation, which authorizes legal and

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

economic sanctions. In other words,
designating a cartel as a foreign terrorist organization limits that group’s
financial, property, and travel interests. It does not authorize lethal military action. We have searched high and
low for a designation authorized by
Congress of a group that would automatically allow lethal action, and we
have not found it. Congress is still
waiting for the President to publicly
release the legal opinion underlying
these legal actions preceding the recent operation in Venezuela, Operation
Absolute Resolve. They have not done
so yet, although they have released the
latest legal opinion.
Even more troubling is that, in the
process of conducting these strikes on
the alleged drug boats, the JAGs—the
judge advocates general—who had to
opine on the legality, did not have access to this controlling legal opinion
by the Department of Justice. They
didn’t get access to it until November,
which was long after many of these
strikes took place.
The legal foundation for this campaign and the operations that President Trump engaged in became extraordinarily tenuous during the September 2 strike. According to numerous public reports, after the initial attack, two survivors were left floating
on the wreckage of their boat, miles
from land. The United States had complete control of the skies and waters
for miles around. Yet, after monitoring
these survivors on video for the better
part of an hour or at least 40-some-odd
minutes, the order was given to fire lethal rounds at these survivors.
Even if one accepts the President’s
determination that we are in an armed
conflict with cartels, the Geneva Conventions still apply. Article 12 of the
second Geneva Convention defines
‘‘shipwrecked’’ persons as those ‘‘in
peril at sea or in other waters from any
cause.’’
The U.S. Navy’s ‘‘Commander’s
Handbook on the Law of Naval Operations’’ makes clear that ‘‘following
each naval engagement at sea, belligerents are obligated to take all possible
measures to search for and rescue the
shipwrecked.’’
The Department of Defense’s ‘‘Law of
War Manual’’ states that members of
the Armed Forces must refuse to comply with clearly illegal orders, including law of war violations. It even provides a definition and an example to
avoid confusion:
For example, orders to fire upon the shipwrecked would be clearly illegal.

That is our law. That is the manual
of the Department of Defense.
The administration has released a
video of all of these attacks except this
one, and I think it would be helpful to
the public—to all of us—to make that
video available.
As we all know, on January 3, this
campaign reached a climax. U.S. forces
conducted airstrikes to neutralize antiaircraft systems, carried out cyber operations to shut down power in Caracas, and executed a helicopter assault

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.046

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

on the Presidential compound to seize
Maduro and his wife. The tactical success of this mission is a testament to
their capabilities and also to the incredible courage and quality of the
men and women of our Armed Forces.
However, military skill is not the
same as strategic wisdom. Executing a
successful raid does not constitute a
plan for governing a nation. Indeed, alleviating the plight and misery of the
Venezuelan people appears nowhere in
the administration’s stated plans for
the future of Venezuela.
Instead, President Trump announced
that the U.S. was ‘‘going to run the
country’’ and seize control of Venezuelan oil production. He stated that
‘‘we are ready to stage a second and
much larger attack if we need to.’’ So
the possibility of hostilities certainly
still exists in the President’s mind, and
he expects to be involved in Venezuela
for years to come. This is not really a
plan; it is an aspiration. Even the experts in the oil industry suggest that it
is not one that is feasible at this moment.
Under international law, the raid on
January 3 violates article 2(4) of the
United Nations Charter, which prohibits the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political
independence of any state. The United
States is bound by treaty to follow the
U.N. Charter. The Constitution makes
treaties part of the ‘‘supreme law of
the land,’’ and the President is bound
by his oath to ensure the laws are
faithfully executed.
The administration, however, seems
to have determined that it can ignore
the supreme law of the land because it
claims it was simply enforcing the law.
That is wrong and cynical, and we are
in a situation where the President continues to assert that we can use hostilities at any time. In fact, on January 9, he said, ‘‘We are not afraid of
boots on the ground.’’
Let me, for a moment, point out another great hypocrisy that has arisen
in this situation. This all began as a
way to prevent drugs from reaching
this country and affecting families
throughout this country. The President
was standing up and down, spouting
about how he has gotten rid of
fentanyl. Of course, fentanyl does not
come out of this area of the world.
But this is one of the interesting
things that happened just last night:
President Trump canceled $2 billion in
grants for the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration. These were grants intended to
fund overdose prevention work in communities, to provide lifesaving reversal
drugs, and to fund treatment for people
with opioid addiction. These are the
very programs that put people on a
path toward long-term recovery to
avoid deaths through drugs. The
Trump administration is prepared to
commit billions of dollars to attack
Venezuela but will take it from those
people who are suffering from drug addiction in the United States.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

S217

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

It is our duty to ensure that the
United States engages in armed conflict only after having the approval of
Congress. This body has had every opportunity up until now to demand accountability, and too many of us have
refused. The President has flouted the
law, and we have failed in our duty to
correct it. So we must, I think, vote for
this resolution. It is our responsibility.
It is the oath we took, and it is the
oath, tonight, that we must follow.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Idaho.
Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, I rise
today to raise a point of order on the
War Powers Resolution before the Senate, which I reserve the right to do at
the close of my remarks and after Senator KAINE moves the matter forward.
I understand many of the sentiments
people have about war powers and the
balance between Congress and the
President. There is truly clear tension
between the branches and the Constitution on this matter, and, of course,
that has reared its head many, many
times during the existence of our country.
Putting U.S. troops in hostility is an
incredibly serious matter. These are
American lives on the line, and we
should not expose them to danger unless there are vital national interests,
and, of course, we should not ask them
to engage in endless wars.
We are not debating those issues here
today. What we are debating is trying
to stop something that is not happening. Let me say that again. The objective of this resolution is to stop
something that is not happening.
The resolution is relatively short—
three pages long. It is full of the usual
whereases, wherefores, et cetera, et
cetera. But this is the operative language. It is very clear:
Congress hereby directs the President to
terminate——

terminate—
the use of the U.S. Armed Forces for hostilities within or against Venezuela.

That is what we are voting on today.
We are attempting to direct the President to terminate the use of the U.S.
Armed Forces for hostilities within or
against Venezuela. Only Congress can
dream this up.
Now, I know there are a lot of people
who think this is a very powerful institution, and it is, indeed, but even this
institution cannot stop something that
isn’t happening, and that is exactly
what the resolution directs the President to do.
Currently, there are no U.S. forces
engaged in hostilities in Venezuela.
The President did authorize actions
that were limited in scope, short in duration, and done to protect U.S. interests and citizens. The operation only
saw 200 troops, and they were inside
Venezuela, on Venezuela’s soil, for less
than 2 hours. Those troops engaged
with some unfortunate Cuban guards,
who are no longer with us, for 27 minutes. That is what this was made up of.

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

It was incredibly brief, targeted, and
very successful.
The War Powers Act requires a President to submit a report to Congress
within 48 hours of ‘‘introducing U.S.
forces into hostilities.’’ The President
did that. If U.S. troops stay in hostilities, the President is required to
submit reports to Congress ‘‘periodically,’’ is the word used. Sadly, the
War Powers Act never required the
President to submit a report to Congress when hostilities ended. It should
have been in the bill; it wasn’t.
For this reason, I sent a letter to the
President asking him to confirm that
there are no U.S. forces engaged in hostilities in Venezuela. Now, I knew that.
You all knew that. You were all in the
briefing when we got it. However, since
this was raised and people were trying
to stop something that isn’t happening,
I asked the President of the United
States to confirm that it is not happening. Obviously, they responded—the
administration responded and said
clearly that there are no hostilities
and no troops in Venezuela.
I sent a letter to the President, and
the response confirmed that the operation has ended, that it is over, that
there are no troops there, that there is
nothing to terminate.
There are no U.S. forces in hostilities.
Now, I know some of my colleagues
will argue that a vote for this resolution is a prospective statement about
limiting future action in Venezuela.
That is not what it says. They argue
we still have ships in the Caribbean.
Clearly, the President is ready to invade again, they say. But, again, that
is not what the resolution says. It says
cease the hostilities that are going on.
No language in this resolution addresses future action, and, indeed, the War
Powers Act doesn’t allow that unless
there are ongoing hostilities.
As we have seen in the days since the
operation, the administration is enforcing U.S. sanctions and seizing vessels that are violating them. Many of
those sanctions were created by the
laws passed by Senators voting here
today, and the War Powers Act has no
binding authority to constrain the
President’s Commander in Chief powers
before U.S. forces are put into hostilities. Nothing in the act does that,
nor does the Constitution allow it.
If the President was to deploy U.S.
forces again, the administration has
committed they would require, as is required by law, to send a new report
under the law, and Congress could then
act. That is the law.
Let me be clear. No President, Republican or Democrat, will ever consider a prospective War Powers Resolution vote as binding on the President’s
constitutional article II powers as
Commander
in
Chief,
and
they
shouldn’t. Having 535 ‘‘Commanders in
Chief’’ is a really, really bad idea, and
our Founders knew that.
President Trump is laser-focused on
protecting American interests while

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.047

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S218

also avoiding costly and life-threatening conflicts. The recent actions in
Venezuela were limited in scope, short
in duration, and done to protect U.S.
interests and citizens. What President
Trump has done in Venezuela is the
definition of the President’s article II
constitutional authorities as Commander in Chief.
Similarly, President George H.W.
Bush authorized limited military operations to arrest and bring Panama’s
Manuel Noriega to the United States to
stand trial for drug-related charges. Interestingly, that lasted 2 weeks, and
there were thousands of troops involved—not done in a very short period
of time with only a handful of troops—
and the Democrats applauded President Bush for his action.
For years, my Democratic colleagues
have called for Maduro’s removal. You
heard me the other day read statements that my Democratic colleagues
have made. But when President Trump
actually made that happen, now they
say: How dare he do this. This is TDS,
Trump derangement syndrome, at its
obvious worst.
I firmly believe the operation in Venezuela was a good thing. I understand
that some of my colleagues disagree
with me, but that does not give this
body the right to block the Commander
in Chief’s article II authority and defy
every law of gravity and try to stop
something that isn’t happening.
I yield the floor to my friend from
Virginia.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Virginia.
Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, in a moment, I will make the motion that my
colleague from Idaho mentioned, the
motion to proceed to Calendar No. 298,
but I do want to just address the points
that he made very briefly.
My colleague from Idaho had said
there is no current use of U.S. hostilities in Venezuela, and he has also
said that the military operation Absolute Resolve is over. That is what he
has just told this body. And he has
said, because of those two facts, he is
making the motion that we will hear in
a moment, the inquiry.
I just want to refer my colleagues to
the letter exchange between Senator
RISCH and Secretary Rubio because
that is not what the letters say. The
letters do not say what has been represented by my colleague.
Let me read what Senator RISCH
asked the President, and then let me
read Senator Rubio’s response.
Senator RISCH said: I respectfully request that you provide Congress with
an official correspondence confirming
that Operation Absolute Resolve has
ended and that U.S. military personnel
are no longer involved in hostilities in
Venezuela.
Those were the two questions posed
to the President.
Let me read you Senator Rubio’s answer. He did not confirm in his answer
that Operation Absolute Resolve has
ended. The letter does not mention Op-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

eration Absolute Resolve because it
hasn’t ended. The President himself
has said that he is holding out the possibility of doing the exact same thing
that he did to President Maduro to
other Venezuelan officials who have
been indicted by the United States, and
that is why Secretary Rubio, in the letter, could not give an affirmative answer to Senator RISCH’s question. Operation Absolute Resolve has not ended.
There was a second question Senator
RISCH asked: Confirm that U.S. military personnel are no longer involved
in hostilities in Venezuela.
Secretary Rubio wouldn’t confirm
that either. All Secretary Rubio says
is: There are currently no U.S. Armed
Forces in Venezuela.
What about the boat strikes? What
about the naval blockade? What about
the naval seizure of Venezuelan oil?
Those are all hostilities under domestic and international law. They are all
hostilities. And that is why Secretary
Rubio, I think, being intellectually
honest, refused to give an affirmative
answer to my colleague’s question. He
said there are no troops currently in
Venezuela, but he would not say that
the U.S. military is not involved in
hostilities.
So even on this record, with my colleague posing two questions to the administration—tell us the operation is
over; tell us the United States is not
involved in hostilities—the administration would do neither. And for that
reason, I ask that we proceed on the
path we are on to have this debate finally before the American public.
f

DIRECTING
THE
REMOVAL
OF
UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES
FROM HOSTILITIES WITHIN OR
AGAINST
VENEZUELA
THAT
HAVE NOT BEEN AUTHORIZED
BY CONGRESS—Motion to Proceed
Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, I therefore move to proceed to Calendar No.
298, S.J. Res. 98.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report.
The senior assistant executive clerk
read as follows:
Motion to proceed to Calendar No. 298, S.J.
Res. 98, to direct the removal of United
States Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not been authorized by Congress.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Idaho.
POINT OF ORDER

Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, I make a
point of order—raise a point of order—
that this joint resolution is not entitled to privilege under 50 U.S.C. 1546a
due to U.S. troops not being engaged in
hostilities.
VOTE ON POINT OF ORDER

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
Chair submits the question to the Senate for its decision.
The question is, Is the point of order
well taken?
Mr. RISCH. I ask for the yeas and
nays.

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk called the roll.
The yeas and nays resulted—yeas 50,
nays 50, as follows:
[Rollcall Vote No. 9 Leg.]
YEAS—50
Banks
Barrasso
Blackburn
Boozman
Britt
Budd
Capito
Cassidy
Cornyn
Cotton
Cramer
Crapo
Cruz
Curtis
Daines
Ernst
Fischer

Graham
Grassley
Hagerty
Hawley
Hoeven
Husted
Hyde-Smith
Johnson
Justice
Kennedy
Lankford
Lee
Lummis
Marshall
McConnell
McCormick
Moody

Alsobrooks
Baldwin
Bennet
Blumenthal
Blunt Rochester
Booker
Cantwell
Collins
Coons
Cortez Masto
Duckworth
Durbin
Fetterman
Gallego
Gillibrand
Hassan
Heinrich

Hickenlooper
Hirono
Kaine
Kelly
Kim
King
Klobuchar
Luján
Markey
Merkley
Murkowski
Murphy
Murray
Ossoff
Padilla
Paul
Peters

Moran
Moreno
Mullin
Ricketts
Risch
Rounds
Schmitt
Scott (FL)
Scott (SC)
Sheehy
Sullivan
Thune
Tillis
Tuberville
Wicker
Young

NAYS—50
Reed
Rosen
Sanders
Schatz
Schiff
Schumer
Shaheen
Slotkin
Smith
Van Hollen
Warner
Warnock
Warren
Welch
Whitehouse
Wyden

(Mr. JUSTICE assumed the Chair.)
The VICE PRESIDENT. On this vote,
the yeas are 50, the nays are 50.
The Senate being equally divided, the
Vice President votes in the affirmative
and the point of order is sustained.
f

MORNING BUSINESS
f

MEASURES PLACED ON THE
CALENDAR
The following bill was read the second time, and placed on the calendar:
S. 3627. A bill to require institutions of
higher education to disseminate information
on the rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for other
purposes.
f

EXECUTIVE AND OTHER
COMMUNICATIONS
The following communications were
laid before the Senate, together with
accompanying papers, reports, and documents, and were referred as indicated:
EC–2459. A communication from the Director, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Rescission of Portions of Permanent Program Performance
Standards Related to Siltation Structures’’
((RIN1029–AC92) (Docket No. OSM–2025–0010))
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2460. A communication from the Director, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.049

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 14, 2026

and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Backfilling and Grading’’ ((RIN1029–AD03) (Docket No. OSM–2025–
0025)) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2461. A communication from the Director, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Prior Balance Replacement Funds’’ ((RIN1029–AC93) (Docket
No. OSM–2025–0013)) received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2462. A communication from the General Counsel of the Federal Housing Finance
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘2026–2028 Enterprise
Housing Goals Final Rule’’ (RIN2590–AB59)
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2463. A communication from the Director of Legislative Affairs, Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled
‘‘Regulatory Capital Rule: Modifications to
the Enhanced Supplementary Leverage
Ratio Standards for U.S. Global Systemically Important Bank Holding Companies
and Their Subsidiary Depository Institutions; Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity and
Long-Term Debt Requirements for U.S.
Global Systemically Important Bank Holding Companies’’ (RIN3064–AG11) received in
the Office of the President of the Senate on
January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2464. A communication from the Deputy General Counsel for Housing, Office of
the General Counsel. Department of Housing
and Urban Development, transmitting, pursuant to law, six (6) reports relative to nominations, vacancies, designations of service in
acting roles, discontinuations of service in
acting roles and actions on nominations for
positions covered by the Federal Vacancies
Reform Act of 1998, received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Banking, Housing,
and Urban Affairs.
EC–2465. A communication from the Director of Legislative Affairs, Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Adjusting and Indexing Certain Regulatory
Thresholds’’ (RIN3064–AG15) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2466. A communication from the Senior
Counsel, Legal Division, Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, transmitting, pursuant
to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Home
Mortgage Disclosure (Regulation C) Adjustment to Asset-Size Exemption Threshold’’
(12 CFR Part 1003) received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Banking, Housing,
and Urban Affairs.
EC–2467. A communication from the Senior
Counsel, Legal Division, Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, transmitting, pursuant
to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Truth
in Lending Act (Regulation Z) Adjustment to
Asset-Size Exemption Threshold’’ (12 CFR
Part 1026) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs.
EC–2468. A communication from the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, transmitting the report of an officer
authorized to wear the insignia of the grade
of lieutenant general in accordance with

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

S219

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

title 10, United States Code, section 777a; to
the Committee on Armed Services.
EC–2469. A communication from the Section Chief, Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled
‘‘Extension of Transition Period to Calendar
Year 2026 for Certain Requirements in Revenue Ruling 2025–4’’ (Notice 2026–6) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Finance.
EC–2470. A communication from the Section Chief, Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled
‘‘Safe Harbor for the Credit for Carbon Oxide
Sequestration under Section 45Q for Qualified Carbon Oxide Disposed of in Secure Geological Storage in Calendar Year 2025’’ (Notice 2026–1) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Finance.
EC–2471. A communication from the Section Chief, Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled
‘‘Exempt Organizations Rulings and Determination Letters Procedures’’ (Rev. Proc.
2026–5) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Finance.
EC–2472. A communication from the Commissioner, Federal Maritime Commission,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the Commission’s Performance and Accountability Report for fiscal year 2025 received in the Office
of the President pro tempore; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2473. A communication from the Associate Director, Office of Legislative, Intergovernmental, and Public Affairs, Court
Services and Offender Supervision Agency,
transmitting, pursuant to law, a report relative to a vacancy and designation of an acting officer for a position covered by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998 for the position of Director, Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency, received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 8, 2026; to the Committee on Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2474. A communication from the Chief
of Staff, National Science Foundation, transmitting, pursuant to law, the Uniform Resource Locator (URL) for the Foundation’s
fiscal year 2025 Agency Financial Report; to
the Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs.
EC–2475. A communication from the Chairman, Occupational Safety and Health Review
Commission, transmitting, pursuant to law,
the Commission’s Performance and Accountability Report for fiscal year 2025 received in
the Office of the President pro tempore; to
the Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs.
EC–2476. A communication from the Federal Register Liaison, Internal Revenue
Service, Department of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule
entitled ‘‘Section 1295 Retroactive QEF election PLR Revenue Procedure’’ (Rev. Proc.
2026–10) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 8, 2026; to the
Committee on Finance.
EC–2477. A communication from the Secretary of the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, transmitting, pursuant to law,
the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Withdrawal of
Interpretive Guidance: Retail Commodity
Transactions Involving Certain Digital Assets’’ (RIN3038–AF64) received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.
EC–2478. A communication from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Health and Human Services, transmitting,
pursuant to law, a report entitled ‘‘Fiscal
Year 2024 Annual Progress Report on the
C.W. Bill Young Cell Transplantation Program and National Cord Blood Inventory
Program’’; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
EC–2479. A communication from the Biologist, National Marine Fisheries Service, Department of Commerce, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled
‘‘Takes of Marine Mammals Incidental to
Specified Activities; Taking Marine Mammals Incidental to Military Readiness Activities in the Hawaii-California Training
and Testing Study Area’’ (RIN0648–BN44) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2480. A communication from the Supervisory Program Analyst, Wireline Competition Bureau, Federal Communications Commission, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Numbering Policies
for Modern Communications; Telephone
Number Requirements for IP–Enabled Service Providers; Implementation of TRACED
Act Section 6(a)-Knowledge of Customers by
Entities with Access to Numbering Resources’’ (RIN3060–AK36) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2481. A communication from the Supervisory Program Analyst, Public Safety and
Homeland Security Bureau, Federal Communications Commission, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled
‘‘Wireless Emergency Alerts; Amendments to
Part 11 of the Commission’s Rules Regarding
the Emergency Alert System’’ (DA 25–12) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2482. A communication from the Supervisory Program Analyst, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, Federal Communications Commission, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled
‘‘Auction of Advanced Wireless Services
(AW–3) Licenses; Notice and Filing Requirements, Minimum Opening Bids, Upfront Payments, and Other Procedures for Auction 113;
Bidding Scheduled to Begin June 2, 2026’’
(DA 25–1075) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2483. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; Fireworks Display, Ohio
River Mile Marker 73–74, Wellsburg, West
Virginia’’ ((RIN1625–AA00) (Docket No.
USCG–2025–1099)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2484. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; West of Cyril E. King
Airport, St. Thomas, Virginia’’ ((RIN1625–
AA00) (Docket No. USCG–2025–1110)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2485. A communication from the Acting
Chief, Office of Engineering and Technology,
Federal Communications Commission, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule
entitled ‘‘Delete, Delete, Delete’’ (FCC 25–85)
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA6.005

S14JAPT1

S220

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND
JOINT RESOLUTIONS
The following bills and joint resolutions were introduced, read the first
and second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated:
By Mr. WARNER (for himself and Mr.
KAINE):
S. 3630. A bill to designate the facility of
the United States Postal Service located at
46164 Westlake Drive in Sterling, Virginia, as
the ‘‘Firefighter Trevor Brown Post Office
Building’’; to the Committee on Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Ms. CORTEZ MASTO (for herself,
Ms.
ROSEN,
Mr.
Mr.
COONS,
HICKENLOOPER, Mr. HEINRICH, Mr.
BENNET, and Mr. LUJÁN):
S. 3631. A bill to allocate funds for the
local law enforcement grant programs, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mr. RICKETTS (for himself and Mr.
COONS):
S. 3632. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide credits for the
production of renewable chemicals and investments in renewable chemical production
facilities, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Finance.
By Mrs. HYDE–SMITH (for herself and
Ms. SLOTKIN):
S. 3633. A bill to amend the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 to reauthorize the expansion of middle mile infrastructure into
rural areas; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.
By Mr. WYDEN:
S. 3634. A bill to express the sense of Congress regarding the conduct by the
Netanyahu administration in Gaza and to
impose sanctions to discourage governments
from obstructing humanitarian assistance,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
By Mr. DAINES (for himself and Mr.
SHEEHY):
S. 3635. A bill to reauthorize the Fort Peck
Reservation Rural Water System Act of 2000;
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER (for herself and Mr. CURTIS):
S. 3636. A bill to amend titles 23 and 49,
United States Code, to modify the rules relating to eligible projects under the TIFIA
program and the railroad rehabilitation and
financing program, to establish a transit-oriented development financing program for
projects of a certain size, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and
Public Works.
By Mr. MARSHALL (for himself and
Mr. BENNET):
S. 3637. A bill to amend the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching
Policy Act of 1977 to reauthorize the Agriculture Advanced Research and Development
Authority, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and
Forestry.
By Mr. PAUL:
S. 3638. A bill to permit voluntary economic activity; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. CRUZ (for himself and Mr.
WELCH):
S. 3639. A bill to expedite processing of satellite and space licenses, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
By Mr. SCOTT of Florida (for himself,
Mr. CRUZ, Mr. BANKS, and Mrs.
MOODY):
S. 3640. A bill to require the Secretary of
the Treasury to include any entity identified

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

as a Chinese military company on the NonSDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex
Companies List; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Mr. SCOTT of Florida (for himself
and Mr. CORNYN):
S. 3641. A bill to revoke the visas of, and
impose visa restrictions on, certain individuals located in the United States and abroad
who are associated with regimes in Venezuela, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Bolivia, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MARSHALL:
S. 3642. A bill to direct the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human
Services to investigate certain payment increases under State programs funded by the
Department of Health and Human Services;
to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. HAWLEY:
S. 3643. A bill to establish the Office of the
Special Inspector General for Program
Fraud, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. CORNYN (for himself, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. SCOTT of Florida, Mr.
TUBERVILLE, and Mrs. BLACKBURN):
S. 3644. A bill to amend the Child Care and
Development Block Grant Act of 1990 to
debar child care providers who commit fraud
from receiving certain financial assistance,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
the Judiciary.
By Mr. COTTON:
S. 3645. A bill to improve the efficiency of
the removal process by enhancing cooperation between government entities and by expanding the grounds for deportation for any
alien to include any felony or any 2 misdemeanors; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MURPHY (for himself, Mr.
SCHUMER, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, Mr.
Mr.
BOOKER,
Mr.
BLUMENTHAL,
MERKLEY, Mr. PADILLA, Mr. SCHIFF,
Ms. SMITH, Mr. VAN HOLLEN, and Mr.
WELCH):
S. 3646. A bill to stop the Government from
attacking individuals and organizations for
their political speech or participation; to the
Committee on the Judiciary.
f

ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS
S. 199

At the request of Mr. CRAPO, the
name of the Senator from North Dakota (Mr. HOEVEN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 199, a bill to amend the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide special rules for the taxation of
certain residents of Taiwan with income from sources within the United
States.
S. 405

At the request of Mr. TUBERVILLE,
the name of the Senator from Indiana
(Mr. BANKS) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 405, a bill to modify eligibility requirements for amateur sports governing organizations.
S. 593

At the request of Mrs. FISCHER, the
name of the Senator from Indiana (Mr.
BANKS) was added as a cosponsor of S.
593, a bill to amend the Clean Air Act
to modify Reid Vapor Pressure requirements and to provide for the return of
certain retired credits, and for other
purposes.
S. 609

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the name of the Senator from Maine

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

(Mr. KING) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 609, a bill to improve mental health
services of the Department of Veterans
Affairs, and for other purposes.
S. 921

At the request of Mr. BANKS, the
name of the Senator from New Hampshire (Ms. HASSAN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 921, a bill to direct the
Secretary of Health and Human Services to issue guidance on whether hospital emergency departments should
implement fentanyl testing as a routine procedure for patients experiencing an overdose, and for other purposes.
S. 944

At the request of Mr. VAN HOLLEN,
the names of the Senator from Connecticut (Mr. BLUMENTHAL), the Senator from Oregon (Mr. MERKLEY), the
Senator from Rhode Island (Mr. REED),
the Senator from Georgia (Mr. OSSOFF)
and the Senator from Massachusetts
(Mr. MARKEY) were added as cosponsors
of S. 944, a bill to amend title 23,
United States Code, with respect to the
highway safety improvement program,
and for other purposes.
S. 1245

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the name of the Senator from Maine
(Mr. KING) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 1245, a bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to expand health care and
benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs for military sexual trauma, and for other purposes.
S. 1320

At the request of Mrs. MURRAY, the
name of the Senator from Maine (Mr.
KING) was added as a cosponsor of S.
1320, a bill to direct the Secretary of
Defense and the Secretary of Veterans
Affairs to take certain steps regarding
research
related
to
menopause,
perimenopause, or mid-life women’s
health, and for other purposes.
S. 1572

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the names of the Senator from Texas
(Mr. CORNYN), the Senator from North
Carolina (Mr. TILLIS) and the Senator
from Minnesota (Ms. KLOBUCHAR) were
added as cosponsors of S. 1572, a bill to
amend title 18, United States Code, to
improve the Federal carjacking statute.
S. 1773

At the request of Ms. BALDWIN, the
name of the Senator from New York
(Mrs. GILLIBRAND) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1773, a bill to amend the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to reinstate the deduction for personal casualty losses as in effect prior to the enactment of Public Law 115–97.
S. 2225

At the request of Mr. LUJÁN, the
name of the Senator from Minnesota
(Ms. KLOBUCHAR) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2225, a bill to amend title
XVIII of the Social Security Act to add
physical therapists to the list of providers allowed to utilize locum tenens
arrangements under Medicare.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA6.007

S14JAPT1

January 14, 2026
S. 2423

At the request of Mr. MORAN, the
names of the Senator from New Hampshire (Ms. HASSAN) and the Senator
from Indiana (Mr. YOUNG) were added
as cosponsors of S. 2423, a bill to require the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development and the Secretary
of Agriculture to enter into a memorandum of understanding relating to
housing projects, and for other purposes.
S. 2586

At the request of Mr. SCHATZ, the
name of the Senator from Delaware
(Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 2586, a bill to require
the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
to establish an assessment program for
commercial-scale offshore aquaculture
through demonstration projects, to establish Aquaculture Centers of Excellence, to support aquaculture workforce development and working waterfronts, and for other purposes.
S. 3214

At the request of Mr. MURPHY, the
name of the Senator from Georgia (Mr.
OSSOFF) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3214, a bill to require a background
check for every firearm sale.
S. 3603

At the request of Mr. WELCH, the
name of the Senator from New Hampshire (Mrs. SHAHEEN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3603, a bill to amend the
Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 to improve the cost of living adjustment exclusion from income under the supplemental nutrition assistance program,
and for other purposes.
S. 3622

At the request of Mr. SANDERS, the
name of the Senator from Delaware
(Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 3622, a bill to prohibit
the naming, renaming, designating, or
redesignating of any Federal building,
land, or other asset in the name of a
sitting President, and for other purposes.
S. 3627

At the request of Mrs. MOODY, the
name of the Senator from South Dakota (Mr. THUNE) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3627, a bill to require institutions of higher education to disseminate information on the rights of,
and accommodations and resources for,
pregnant students, and for other purposes.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S. CON. RES. 25

At the request of Mrs. GILLIBRAND,
the names of the Senator from Minnesota (Ms. SMITH), the Senator from
Colorado (Mr. HICKENLOOPER), the Senator from Arkansas (Mr. BOOZMAN), the
Senator from California (Mr. PADILLA)
and the Senator from Delaware (Ms.
BLUNT ROCHESTER) were added as cosponsors of S. Con. Res. 25, a concurrent resolution recognizing the 15th anniversary of the January 8, 2011, Tucson, Arizona, shooting and honoring
the survivors and victims, including
former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

S221

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

a gun violence survivor and one of the
most influential voices of courage in
the United States in the fight to end
gun violence.
S. RES. 573

At the request of Mr. RISCH, the
names of the Senator from North Carolina (Mr. BUDD), the Senator from
Pennsylvania (Mr. MCCORMICK), the
Senator from Idaho (Mr. CRAPO), the
Senator from Wyoming (Mr. BARRASSO), the Senator from Indiana (Mr.
YOUNG), the Senator from South Carolina (Mr. SCOTT), the Senator from Alabama (Mrs. BRITT), the Senator from
Utah (Mr. CURTIS), the Senator from
Mississippi (Mr. WICKER), the Senator
from Missouri (Mr. HAWLEY), the Senator from Nebraska (Mr. RICKETTS) and
the Senator from Texas (Mr. CORNYN)
were added as cosponsors of S. Res. 573,
a resolution expressing the need for the
United States’ continued leadership on
matters of religious freedom.
S. RES. 582

At the request of Mr. CORNYN, the
name of the Senator from Florida (Mr.
SCOTT) was added as a cosponsor of S.
Res. 582, a resolution expressing the
sense of the Senate in support of Operation Absolute Resolve.
AMENDMENT NO. 4056

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the name of the Senator from Massachusetts (Mr. MARKEY) was added as a
cosponsor of amendment No. 4056 intended to be proposed to H.R. 4016, a
bill making appropriations for the Department of Defense for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes.
AMENDMENT NO. 4155

At the request of Mr. PADILLA, the
names of the Senator from California
the
Senator
from
(Mr.
SCHIFF),
Vermont (Mr. SANDERS), the Senator
from New Jersey (Mr. KIM), the Senator from Oregon (Mr. WYDEN) and the
Senator from Washington (Ms. CANTWELL) were added as cosponsors of
amendment No. 4155 intended to be proposed to H.R. 6938, a bill making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes.
AMENDMENT NO. 4221

At the request of Mr. HEINRICH, his
name was added as a cosponsor of
amendment No. 4221 intended to be proposed to H.R. 6938, a bill making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes.
f

AMENDMENTS SUBMITTED AND
PROPOSED
SA 4222. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4223. Ms. HIRONO submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by her to the
bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4224. Mr. VAN HOLLEN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4225. Ms. SMITH (for herself and Ms.
KLOBUCHAR) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by her to the bill H.R.
6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the
table.
SA 4226. Mr. LUJÁN submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4227. Mr. PAUL submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
joint resolution S.J. Res. 98, to direct the removal of United States Armed Forces from
hostilities within or against Venezuela that
have not been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4228. Mr. PAUL submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
joint resolution S.J. Res. 98, supra; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4229. Mr. WHITEHOUSE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4230. Mr. BOOKER submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4231. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4232. Ms. DUCKWORTH (for herself, Mr.
VAN HOLLEN, and Mr. BOOKER) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by her
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
f

TEXT OF AMENDMENTS
SA 4222. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
On page 162, lines 10 through 13, strike
‘‘$1,465,630,000, to remain available until expended, of which $23,899,000 shall be available
for transfer to the Upper Colorado River
Basin Fund and’’ and insert ‘‘$1,768,036,000, to
remain available until expended, of which
$23,899,000 shall be available for transfer to
the Upper Colorado River Basin Fund,
$140,406,000 shall be available for the
WaterSMART program, $134,000,000 shall be
available for section 4007 of the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act
(43 U.S.C. 390b note; Public Law 114–322),
$28,000,000 shall be available for the conduct
of Bureau of Reclamation environmental restoration and compliance activities, and’’.

SA 4223. Ms. HIRONO submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
her to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. lll. Not later than 120 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit to Congress a report describing—
(1) an assessment of staffing needs across
the Forest Service required to maintain capacity in and ensure successful delivery of
the programs for which amounts are made
available by this Act; and

E:\CR\FM\A14JA6.009

S14JAPT1

S222

(2) the number of employees in the Forest
Service as of—
(A) the date on which the report is submitted; and
(B) January 1 of the year in which the report is submitted and January 1 of each of
the previous 9 calendar years.

SA 4224. Mr. VAN HOLLEN submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by him to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in title II of division A, insert the following:
SEC. lllll. The Attorney General shall
retain, preserve, and compile any records or
evidence related to any investigation, prosecution, services provided to victims, or incarceration of Jeffrey Epstein: Provided,
That not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Attorney General
shall submit to the Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies of the Committee on Appropriations of
the Senate a report that includes information on the history of the Jeffrey Epstein
case (including the 2008 non-prosecution
agreement), victims and testimony (including notifications under section 3771 of title
18, United States Code (commonly known as
the ‘‘Crime Victims’ Rights Act’’)), investigation of co-conspirators, internal reviews
and misconduct findings by the Department
of Justice, the current status of investigations into the financial and trafficking networks of Jeffrey Epstein, an intelligence assessment of Jeffrey Epstein’s financial ties,
clients, and connections (if any) to the
United States Government or foreign governments, and oversight failures at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in New York,
New York: Provided further, That, as necessary to protect privacy, the Attorney General may redact the names and personally
identifiable information of victims from the
report submitted to Congress.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SA 4225. Ms. SMITH (for herself and
Ms. KLOBUCHAR) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by her to
the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other
purposes; which was ordered to lie on
the table; as follows:

ices—Community Oriented Policing Services
Programs’’ shall be $813,000,000; and
(3) the amount made available under this
Act for grants under section 1701 of title I of
the 1968 Act (34 U.S.C. 10381) shall be
$266,093,613.

SA 4227. Mr. PAUL submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the joint resolution S.J. Res. 98,
to direct the removal of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of section 1, add the following:
(5) The use of military force by the armed
forces of a foreign state within or against
the United States to apprehend, arrest, and
transfer the President of the United States
to that foreign state would be considered an
act of war against the United States.

SA 4228. Mr. PAUL submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the joint resolution S.J. Res. 98,
to direct the removal of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of section 1, add the following:
(5) Seven members of the United States
Armed Forces were wounded during the
warfighting in Venezuela and have the full
support of Congress as they recover.

SA 4229. Mr. WHITEHOUSE submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by him to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC.

lll.

DEFINITIZATION AND DISBURSEMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
AWARDS.

At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. lll. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to prevent a
State law enforcement agency from participating in an investigation into a Federal law
enforcement officer-involved shooting that
occurred in Minnesota on January 7, 2026.

Any grant allocation, discretionary grant
award, discretionary contract award, or
other transaction agreement made by the
Department of Energy that, as of the date of
enactment of this Act, was obligated with a
unique award key and a Federal award identification number and remains capable of
being definitized shall be definitized and disbursed before September 30, 2026, only for the
purposes associated with the award or transaction agreement, as applicable, and for the
entity with the same recipient identifier as
such award was made, within the same period of availability as the award was originally provided.

SA 4226. Mr. LUJÁN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:

SA 4230. Mr. BOOKER submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:

At the appropriate place in title II of division A, insert the following:
SEC. ll. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act—
(1) the amount made available under this
Act for ‘‘Justice Operations, Management,
and Accountability—Salaries and Expenses’’
shall be $127,000,000;
(2) the amount made available under this
Act for ‘‘Community Oriented Policing Serv-

At the appropriate place, insert the following:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

SEC. ll. DOJ GRANT ELIGIBILITY.

In awarding grants administered by the
Department of Justice to any entity and in
determining the eligibility of the entity to
receive grant funds, the Attorney General
may not require the entity to agree to comply with, certify compliance with, or comply
with—

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

(1) section 642 of the Illegal Immigration
Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of
1996 (8 U.S.C. 1373);
(2) any memorandum issued by the President; or
(3) any Executive Order issued by the
President.

SA 4231. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in division C, insert the following:
SEC. llll. None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this
Act shall be obligated or expended to open,
improve, authorize, permit, construct, plan,
or consider any easement, special use authorization, or other instrument allowing
any utility corridor or year-round road to be
located on winter wildlife habitat in the
White River National Forest in the State of
Colorado within sections 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, and 33 of T. 4 S., R. 82 W., to
the 680-acre parcel described on page 1 of the
Record of Decision for the Berlaimont Estates Access Route Final Environmental Impact Statement, dated March 2023.

SA 4232. Ms. DUCKWORTH (for herself, Mr. VAN HOLLEN, and Mr. BOOKER)
submitted an amendment intended to
be proposed by her to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
In section 444(a) of division C, strike ‘‘division J’’ in the matter preceding paragraph
(1) and all that follows through ‘‘Infrastructure’ ’’’ in paragraph (3) and insert ‘‘section
100051 of Public Law 119–21 (commonly
known as the ‘‘One Big Beautiful Bill Act’’)
(139 Stat. 385)’’.
f

AUTHORITY FOR COMMITFEES TO
MEET
Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, I have
five requests for committees to meet
during today’s session of the Senate.
They have the approval of the Majority
and Minority Leaders.
Pursuant to rule XXVI, paragraph
5(a), of the Standing Rules of the Senate, the following committees are authorized to meet during today’s session
of the Senate:
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR,
AND PENSIONS

The Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions is authorized to meet during the session of the
Senate on Wednesday, January 14, 2026,
at 10 a.m., to conduct a hearing.
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

The Committee on the Judiciary is
authorized to meet during the session
of the Senate on Wednesday, January
14, 2026, at 2:30 p.m., to conduct a hearing.
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS AND
ENTREPRENEURSHIP

The Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship is authorized to meet during
the session of the Senate on Wednesday, January 14, 2026, at 2:30 p.m., to conduct a hearing.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA6.012

S14JAPT1

January 14, 2026
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON AGING

The Special Committee on Aging is
authorized to meet during the session
of the Senate on Wednesday, January
14, 2026, at 3:30 p.m., to conduct a hearing.
SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE

The Select Committee on Intelligence is authorized to meet during
the session of the Senate on Wednesday, January 14, 2026, at 3 p.m., to conduct a closed briefing.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. JUSTICE). The majority leader.
f

ORDERS FOR THURSDAY,
JANUARY 15, 2026
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that when the Senate completes its business today, it
stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on Thursday, January 15; that following the
prayer and pledge, the Journal of proceedings be approved to date, the
morning hour be deemed expired, the
time for the two leaders be reserved for
their use later in the day, morning
business be closed, and the Senate resume consideration of H.R. 6938.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

ORDER FOR ADJOURNMENT
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, if there is
no further business to come before the
Senate, I ask that it stand adjourned
under the previous order following the
remarks of Senator WHITEHOUSE.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The Senator from Rhode Island.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

U.S. SUPREME COURT

Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President, I
am here on the floor for the 36th speech
in my ‘‘Scheme’’ series, calling attention to the rightwing scheme to capture our courts and justice system.
It has morphed from stacking the
Court with billionaire-selected Justices
to now putting pressure on sitting
judges to try to get them to do what
the Trump political operation wants. It
turns out that the rightwing interests
don’t always like it when the courts
they worked so hard to capture just
don’t deliver.
Last week, the Judiciary Committee’s Federal Courts Subcommittee
held a hearing on impeaching rogue
judges, it was called. My Republican
colleagues argue that Federal judges
should be impeached and removed from
office for ruling in ways that MAGA
doesn’t like.
Over the past year, there is a backdrop to this, which is that Federal
judges and their families—and their
families—have been the victims of a
campaign to smear and attack judges
who rule against the Trump administration. It is pretty clear that many of
these calls for impeachment are just a
tactic in that intimidation campaign.
There are some tells.
Tell No. 1: It is rare for a Senator to
call for a judge’s impeachment because

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

S223

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

the Senator would be a juror, and it is
hard to be an impartial juror later if
you already called the defendant
guilty.
Tell No. 2: Impeachment isn’t a remedy for judges getting decisions wrong.
Appeal is that remedy, as the Chief
Justice has clearly stated. Impeachment is a remedy for actual misconduct. Virtually everyone has agreed
on that for almost 200 years.
When Senators start saying the almost 200 years of law history is wrong,
that is a pretty big hint they may have
another agenda.
Tell No. 3: If Republicans were serious about rooting out judicial misconduct, we probably would have gotten answers about Clarence Thomas
paying his taxes. There is evidence
that Justice Thomas may have broken
criminal statutes. We know he failed to
report on his financial disclosures more
than a quarter of a million dollars in
income from a forgiven loan, not to
mention the undisclosed boondoggles
of private jet and yacht travel.
Well, that raises a very obvious question: If income wasn’t declared on his
judicial disclosure report, did he also
not report it to tax authorities? I have
asked that question. Thomas has refused to answer it. Whether, when, and
by whom his taxes on that income were
paid are all unanswered questions.
None of my Republican colleagues
seem interested in that misconduct
even though ordinary people are regularly prosecuted for tax violations and
false statements.
Tell No. 4: My Republican colleagues
don’t seem at all interested in how
their impeachment threats egg on
more nefarious and dangerous threats
against judges and their families. The
campaign of threats under the shadow
of which the Federal judiciary is now
operating is unlike any time in memory.
Also, there is significant evidence
that this campaign is being orchestrated. Yet the Marshals Service and
our MAGA DOJ have repeatedly refused to confirm that they would investigate for orchestration or conspiracy
or enterprise. That is worth looking
into. That might have been a good subject for the hearing, but that is not
what it was about.
Tell No. 5: This is a big one. One of
the judges my Republican colleagues
want to impeach—the prime target, in
my view—is Chief Judge James
Boasberg of the DC District Court. Few
judges have been singled out more for
MAGA attacks than Chief Judge
Boasberg.
What are his sins? Well, he sentenced
January 6 rioters who President Trump
unleashed on this building 5 years ago.
MAGA world has since decided that no
crimes were committed that day. That
is new. At the time, Senator CRUZ, who
called the hearing to impeach Judge
Boasberg, described those crimes as a
‘‘violent terrorist attack on the Capitol.’’ That was then.
The campaign against Chief Judge
Boasberg very much involves the

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

MAGA DOJ. What are his sins there?
Well, first, FBI Director Patel tried to
scapegoat Chief Judge Boasberg as the
person stopping Patel from being honest with the Judiciary Committee
about his grand jury testimony in the
Mar-a-Lago classified records case.
I asked him what he told the grand
jury. It is black letter law that a witness is allowed to disclose his own testimony to a grand jury, and Patel had
testified before that grand jury. He did
so only after he had asserted his Fifth
Amendment rights against self-incrimination and was given immunity
from prosecution.
The obvious implication is that
whatever Director Patel told that
grand jury put him at risk of prosecution, and we wanted to know what
crime Patel thinks he might have committed. It is kind of relevant when he
is now the Director of the FBI.
Director Patel lied to us in the committee that he couldn’t describe his
testimony based on a supposed court
order from what he called the DC district chief judge.
Guess who that is. Chief Judge
Boasberg. Chief Judge Boasberg later
exposed that lie in a related proceeding, saying that Patel could ‘‘divulge the contents’’ of his own testimony and ‘‘nothing was preventing
him from doing so before the committee.’’ So he blew up Kash Patel’s
lie. That meant, when Patel came
back, he had to invent a new lie to
avoid answering that question.
Second is another MAGA DOJ sin.
When the MAGA DOJ wanted to illegally jet people out of the country in
the dark of night to an El Salvadoran
prison, Chief Judge Boasberg was on
duty, and he ordered that stopped. This
infuriated the MAGA DOJ. Then-Principal Associate Deputy Attorney General Emil Bove told DOJ lawyers that
if courts stopped these deportations,
they would need to be ready to tell
those judges ‘‘f you,’’ using the full
four-letter word. Chief Judge Boasberg
became the target of that Bove ‘‘f
you.’’
In that matter, considerable evidence
of contempt of court by DOJ officials
caused Chief Judge Boasberg to notice
probable cause and schedule contempt
proceedings. That, I think, is the heart
of this whole messy situation.
One of the subjects of that contempt
proceeding was now-Judge Bove. As
that contempt proceeding went forward, two Trump judges on the DC Circuit stepped in, and they blocked that
contempt hearing. They blocked it
using something called an administrative stay, which is the procedure that
usually lasts for hours, days, or at
most a week or 10 days. They blocked
that contempt hearing using an administrative stay for 4 months. Guess what
happened during that 4 months. Republicans hustled none other than Emil
Bove onto the Third Circuit Court of
Appeals with no factual record from
any contempt proceeding for the committee to see. Bove’s judiciary hearing

E:\CR\FM\A14JA6.013

S14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S224

was so important to MAGA that Bondi
and Blanche, her Deputy, came over to
the hearing to give the eyeball to Republicans on the committee.
Later, the administrative stay was
lifted, and the full DC Circuit cleared
Chief Judge Boasberg to resume his
contempt proceedings. Well, that decision came down on a Friday. On Monday, a handful of Republican Senators
sent a letter to the DC Circuit chief
judge seeking District Court Chief
Judge Boasberg’s suspension while Republicans thought about impeaching
him. Cleared to proceed Friday; the letter for suspension drops Monday.
The letter itself makes no sense. The
judiciary just doesn’t suspend judges
because some random Members of Congress call for impeachment. But anything goes to stop the contempt proceeding into Trump’s MAGA DOJ.
Adding to this, the MAGA Attorney
General filed a misconduct complaint
against Chief Judge Boasberg based on
a private comment he allegedly made
at a private meeting of the Judicial
Conference. That is an administrative
body. That has nothing to do with the
cases judges hear. The AG and Members of Congress are invited—I often attend—and its proceedings are private.
So the AG’s complaint was a major
breach.
The alleged offending comment was
this: that Chief Judge Boasberg ‘‘raised
his colleagues’ concerns that the administration would disregard rulings of
Federal courts, leading to a constitutional crisis.’’
If you don’t see the ethics violation
there, well, you are not alone. This socalled ethics complaint looks preposterous to this Senator. It looks like it
is a strategic device to have something
to complain about to block the contempt proceeding.
It gets worse.
In November, Trump’s personal lawyer—now the MAGA Deputy Attorney
General, Todd Blanche—went before
the Federalist Society to urge what he
called
war—war—against
Federal
judges, particularly ones who are ‘‘repeat players’’ or ‘‘stop an entire operation or an entire administrative policy.’’ He did not say Chief Judge
Boasberg’s name yet, but it was clear
who was in the zone of his war threat.
But last week’s Judiciary subcommittee hearing was not as subtle.
The backdrop to last week’s hearing
was Republican Senators breaking
norms and 200 years of history to call
for impeaching judges because of those
judges’ judicial decisions. Those same
Senators ignore proof of real judicial
misconduct of not filing your disclosures correctly and perhaps not filing
your taxes at all. They ignore completely the ongoing environment of attacks on the judiciary, which their
comments obviously inflame. Then, of
course, they are targeting a judge that
the MAGA DOJ is hell-bent on putting
out of business so that he can’t investigate their contempt.
That brings me to the final tell,
which is that this impeachment bluster

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

is really about propping up the MAGA
DOJ campaign against Chief Judge
Boasberg.
Here is tell No. 6: Virtually none of
what my Republican colleagues accuse
Chief Judge Boasberg of is true.
Take the letter that Senator CRUZ
sent to Speaker JOHNSON last week. According to that letter, Chief Judge
Boasberg ‘‘targeted’’ Republican Senators by ‘‘secretly authorizing and
sealing’’ Jack Smith’s grand jury subpoenas for those Senators’ phone
records. Well, you don’t have to be
much of a lawyer to spot the issues
here.
First, judges don’t authorize or seal
grand jury subpoenas. Prosecutors
issue those subpoenas on their own,
and they file them under seal because
that is the law.
Chief Judge Boasberg didn’t target
those Senators either. People under investigation for trying to overturn the
2020 election, in a case involving an investigation of that criminal conspiracy, called Senators as a part of
that conspiracy. That is how the Senators’ names came up—not because
Jack Smith chose them.
Jack Smith said it best: He ‘‘did not
choose those Members. President
Trump did.’’
And it gets better.
Chief Judge Boasberg had no way of
knowing that it was Senators on the
other end of the toll records’ request. A
toll records’ request only gives the
phone number to the service provider
so they can tag that phone number and
then provide the requested toll records
to the investigators. He would not have
known whose records were in that subpoena because the DOJ’s practice at
the time was not to disclose that information.
Some Republican Senators went so
far as to falsely describe the subpoenas
and the toll records’ requests as wiretaps. Chairman GRASSLEY himself has
acknowledged this was not true. The
requested data were toll records showing limited information like incoming
and outgoing calls, not the contents of
any calls or messages. People on the
Judiciary Committee should know the
difference between toll records and
wiretaps. It is basic stuff.
Republicans also say that Chief
Judge Boasberg shouldn’t have issued
nondisclosure orders temporarily preventing the phone companies from telling the Senators about these subpoenas. These orders were justified by
a finding that if the existence of the
subpoenas got out, it would probably
lead to evidence-tampering, witness intimidation, and interference with
Smith’s investigations.
What Republican Senators say is
that it is outrageous that Chief Judge
Boasberg thinks Senators might interfere with an investigation. Well, that
was not the problem. That is not what
Chief Judge Boasberg said. What he
and Jack Smith probably were worried
about was not interference by Republican Senators. If you listen closely to

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Jack Smith’s House testimony, it
sounds like what he was really worried
about was interference by Trump and
his coconspirators. That is what makes
sense. And if it became public that the
Senators were the subject of that subpoena, the Trump machine would go to
work on them. It is that Trump conspiracy that Smith was investigating,
and that conspiracy already had a pattern and practice of intimidating witnesses, tampering with evidence, and
interfering in investigations.
Add to that the fact that the conspirators only called Republican Senators in the first place to try to pressure them to commit a crime. It is not
a shocker that investigators were wary
about even more pressure and interference.
By the way, we could settle this
question. We don’t have to speculate on
what the motivation was behind those
nondisclosure orders. We could ask
Jack Smith himself, who has actually
requested to testify before the Senate
Judiciary Committee. I am sure we
would learn a lot from that. Ranking
Member DURBIN says they have offered
to bring in Jack Smith multiple times,
and the Republicans on the committee
keep saying no. They don’t want to
hear the answer; they just want to
propagate their supposition.
If you go back to Senator CRUZ’s letter, he accuses Chief Judge Boasberg of
violating a 2004 law protecting Senators’ official phone records. Well, it is
a little thing, but, you know, facts are
important when you are lawyers and
are talking about things like impeaching judges. We actually didn’t pass the
relevant language in 2004; we passed it
in 2020 by amendment after, interestingly, the first Trump administration
did the same thing to Members of Congress—took their records and didn’t
disclose.
Now, that is a small error. The real
point here is that Chief Judge Boasberg
had no clue that these were Senators’
records. It is hard to find fault when he
doesn’t have the information and when
that was the standard practice of the
Department of Justice at the time and
when the Trump Department of Justice
had done the same thing to Members of
Congress before.
So to make this whole thing look
more nefarious, Republicans rewrote
the law last year in that continuing
resolution bill to make it look more
like Chief Judge Boasberg did something wrong. In that bill, they retroactively made illegal his nondisclosure
orders. They were perfectly legal at the
time. They were standard operating
practice both for the Department of
Justice and the court at the time. He
had no notice that these were Senators
behind the phone numbers. And years
later, here come Republican Senators
in the CR bill they jammed through,
and they throw in a provision that goes
all the way back and makes that conduct now illegal.
Why would you do that? Well, now it
enables the rhetorical battle—the narrative—to be ‘‘Oh, Judge Boasberg

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.052

S14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

issued these illegal orders’’ and then
leave out the bit that they were perfectly legal and standard operating
procedure at the time.
But if the purpose of this whole operation is to rev up the attack and threat
machine, what I call the flying monkeys of the far right—‘‘Fly, my
pretties. Go harass that judge. Go harass that judge’s daughter’’—then calling the orders illegal adds impetus.
By the way, it is not just me saying
Republicans are being misleading
about what took place here. The Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
debunked these conspiracy theories
about Chief Judge Boasberg, long before last week’s hearing, and Jack
Smith effectively did the same thing
through letters and his sworn testimony to the House.
At last week’s hearing, I entered into
the record statements from respected
impeachment experts from the American Bar Association and from a group
of retired Federal judges, all saying the
same thing: This is nonsense, and cut
it out before someone gets hurt.
We even heard from one of Justice
Scalia’s proteges, retired Fourth Circuit Judge Michael Luttig, who described one of the Republican witness’s
testimony at a hearing as ‘‘contemptible.’’
The fact that none of this deterred or
discouraged my Republican colleagues
should tell everyone listening that this
is not going to stop. This is a pressure
campaign, and they are desperate to
stop the contempt investigation into
the MAGA Department of Justice. You
add all this together, and that is exactly what it starts to look like: a
MAGA campaign, a coordinated strategy to bring pressure and threats to
bear on a Federal judge—not arguments in court—outside pressure and
threats, and to do so in an environment
in which violent threats are prevalent,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:32 Jan 15, 2026

S225

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

perhaps the worst environment of violent threats the Federal judiciary has
ever seen and one in which, just to add
additional poison into the equation,
the MAGA DOJ repeatedly refuses to
assure us that proper investigative
policies will be followed about threats
to Federal judges.
If you have a scheme or a campaign
to threaten Federal judges and you
won’t look beyond the utterer of the
threat and you won’t investigate orchestration, organization, coordination, conspiracy, enterprise—any of
that—you are not doing your job. That
is basic investigative procedure. And
we are up to, I think, 20 times that we
have asked the Marshals Service or the
MAGA DOJ: Will you investigate behind the utterer for potential orchestration?
It is an easy answer. It is like: Yes, of
course we will.
So when they won’t answer that
question, that is a big warning. What
this is all about is that the MAGA DOJ
wants to stop the contempt hearing,
period.
I hope that neither Chief Judge
Boasberg nor any of the other judges
who have been targeted by MAGA and
its threatening internet flying monkeys are intimidated by this, but that
doesn’t make it any less dangerous.
And I would sure hope that this body,
the U.S. Senate, would be better than
to play along with a scheme to amplify
pressure and threats against sitting
Federal judges—pressure and threats
against sitting Federal judges. But
here we are with MAGA Republicans
leading the charge, obedient to an increasingly dangerous Executive.
I have put this together. These are
all the different vectors of pressure
against the judge.
First, there is that MAGA Bondi
complaint that I talked about that I
think is fake, strategic, pretextual, de-

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

signed to give an excuse to criticize the
judge who will be looking into the
DOJ’s contempt.
The House has filed Articles of Impeachment to try to put pressure on
him and to whip up the MAGA flying
monkeys.
The Senate just held the hearing that
I spoke about.
Two Trump judges blocked the contempt proceedings with a highly unusual administrative stay. It was only
when that stay was lifted that, within
days, Republicans sent the letter to the
chief judge asking to have Judge
Boasberg suspended.
The Deputy Attorney General of the
United States declared war on certain
Federal judges using descriptors that
look exactly like this judge.
And we just found out that, in the appropriations bill, Republicans have
tried to defund his office, the office of
the chief judge of the DC District
Court.
And then, of course, you have got
that stunt in the continuing resolution
of declaring his perfectly legal conduct
years ago retroactively illegal.
That is eight separate vectors of
pressure against one judge. That is not
the way the Federal judicial system is
supposed to operate, and it is particularly wrong in this environment of violent and dangerous threats.
To be continued.
I yield the floor.
f

ADJOURNMENT UNTIL 10 A.M.
TOMORROW
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate stands
adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 7:06 p.m.,
adjourned until Thursday, January 15,
2026, at 10 a.m.

E:\CR\FM\G14JA6.053

S14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

E39

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS
RECOGNIZING JOSEPH RAY
WILLIAMS

HONORING AVERY GREEN

HON. CRAIG A. GOLDMAN
OF TEXAS

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Aviation Structural
Mechanic First Class Joseph Ray Williams,
United States Navy, of Roanoke, Texas, for
his honorable service in the Armed Forces of
the United States of America and for his continued service to his community.
Petty Officer First Class Williams served
honorably in the United States Navy from
1996 to 2016, completing seven deployments
and circumnavigating the globe three times in
defense of the Nation. As a member of Helicopter Mine Countermeasures Squadron 15,
he played a vital role in support of the Kosovo
Campaign, Operation Enduring Freedom, and
the Global War on Terror. His military service
was marked by courage, professionalism, and
devotion to duty earning him six Good Conduct Medals, three Navy and Marine Corps
Achievement Medals, three Humanitarian
Service Medals, the Global War on Terrorism
Expeditionary and Service Medals, and numerous unit and marksmanship awards recognizing his excellence and leadership across
two decades of service.
Following his distinguished naval career,
Petty Officer Williams continued his lifelong
mission of service by founding Texas Veterans
Outdoors (TVO) in 2017, a nonprofit organization dedicated to helping veterans transition
successfully into civilian life. What began as a
small grassroots effort in Denton County has
grown into a global network of more than
9,000 members, providing mentorship, coaching, and fellowship to veterans and their families. Through outdoor experiences such as
hunting, fishing, hiking, and retreats, TVO offers therapeutic and empowering opportunities
that help veterans reconnect with themselves,
their families, and their communities.

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

Under Petty Officer Williams’ leadership,
Texas Veterans Outdoors has become a
model of veteran-led outreach and healing,
fostering resilience and camaraderie among
service members across Texas and beyond.
His work has strengthened families, inspired
community partnerships, and created a legacy
of compassion and leadership that continues
to uplift those who have served.
Petty Officer Williams’ steadfast dedication
to his fellow veterans, his community, and his
country reflects the highest traditions of the
United States Navy and brings great credit
upon himself, the State of Texas, and the
United States of America.

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Avery Green in earning
second place at the Health Occupation Students of America International Leadership
Conference Competition. This accomplishment
shows Ms. Green’s dedication to her education and serving those within her community.
The Health Occupation Students of America
organization encourages students to become
leaders in one of the highest demand job markets in the Nation. The growing need for
healthcare workers is becoming increasingly
evident. Ms. Green’s participation and excellence in the Clinical Nursing competition
shows initiative and highlights a level of
strength and compassion indicative of a true
Texan spirit. As the first from Aledo High
School to win the State HOSA competition
and go on to compete at the International
Leadership Conference, she is an inspiration
to many within the district who will seek to follow in her footsteps.
On behalf of the 12th Congressional District
of Texas, I am proud to offer my congratulations to Ms. Avery Green and wish her much
luck and success in her years to come.
f

TRIBUTE TO JUSTIN MATURO

HON. DEREK TRAN
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mr. TRAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to pay
tribute to Justin Maturo, a member of my congressional staff who will soon be departing
Capitol Hill after a combined fifteen years of
public service. From intern to Deputy Chief of
Staff, Justin has held several important roles
in three congressional offices where he has directly contributed to the betterment of communities in the states of Texas and California.
Born in Westchester, New York, and raised
in Tappan, New York, to an Italian father and
Hawaiian mother, Justin first came to Washington, D.C. as a wide-eyed college student at
American University with a mountain of motivation and aspirations to shape policy.
As an intern for the U.S. House Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, he
showed promise by swiftly screening requests
and manning the phones. He then served as
a Staff Assistant to the late Congresswoman
Eddie Bernice Johnson from Texas, where he
quickly rose in the ranks to serve as her Senior Legislative Assistant and covered a robust
portfolio of legislative issues such as defense,
labor, housing, campaign finance reform, and
more. After a brief stint in the private sector,
Justin was called back to public service where

he served as Deputy Chief of Staff and Legislative Director to Congressman MARK TAKANO
from California. After several years on the Hill,
Justin earned a prestigious appointment at the
Department of Defense where he served as
Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Legislative Affairs to coordinate
legislative affairs across all military departments and components in service to our great
Nation.
I was fortunate Justin agreed to come back
to Capitol Hill to join my office as Deputy Chief
of Staff and Legislative Director. In the short
time he has been with my team, he has
worked with me to protect veteran jobs, secure additional resources for military assets in
my district, call for the release of Vietnamese
prisoners of conscience, and so much more.
He has always taken every challenge in
stride—appreciating and knowing fully well the
great responsibility we have to our constituents as public servants. His colleagues—both
current and former—describe him as a trusted
mentor. What sets Justin apart is his superpower ability to stay above the fray and to
keep his eye on the prize. Despite always operating with a full load of projects on any given
day, Justin always makes time to give advice
and mentor younger staff with sincerity and
genuine compassion.
I cannot thank Justin enough for having
acted as a trusted advisor and guiding me
through my first year in Congress. Together,
we set a foundation that will have resounding
impacts in my district for years to come.
I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge
that Justin’s jovial spirit and words of wisdom
will be sorely missed by all those who were
lucky to work with him. Alas, all good things
must come to an end. I wish him, his wonderful partner Jackie, and their dog Truman all
the best in this next chapter of their lives. I
know Justin will continue to make a positive
impact in his next quest and I honor his great
contributions to the people of California’s 45th
Congressional District.
f

RECOGNIZING ERIC LEE NEWTON

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Sergeant Eric Lee
Newton, United States Army, of Colleyville,
Texas, for his honorable service in the Armed
Forces of the United States of America and for
his continued service to his community.
Sergeant Newton served honorably in the
United States Army from 1968 to 1971 as a
tank commander with K Troop, 11th Armored
Cavalry Regiment, under the command of
Colonel George Patton. While deployed to
Vietnam from July 1968 to July 1969, he displayed extraordinary courage and devotion to

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:12 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

E:\CR\FM\A14JA8.001

E14JAPT1

E40

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

his fellow soldiers. During a mortar attack on
his unit, Sergeant Newton was wounded by
shrapnel while shielding his comrades and
rescuing the company mascot, sustaining injuries that earned him the Purple Heart. His exemplary service also earned him the Army
Commendation Medal, Vietnam Service
Medal, Vietnam Campaign Medal, National
Defense Service Medal, Combat Infantry
Badge, and recognition for marksmanship on
both the M–14 and M–16 rifles. His unit additionally received the Valorous Unit Award and
the Vietnam Cross of Gallantry with Palm for
collective heroism in combat.
Following his military service, Sergeant
Newton has remained a lifelong advocate for
veterans and a pillar of his community. He has
served as Senior Vice Commander of the Military Order of the Purple Heart Chapter 1513
in the Mid-Cities and as Junior Vice Commander for the Department of Texas, championing programs that support wounded veterans and their families. For more than thirty
years, he has also served as the National
Public Affairs Officer for the 11th Armored
Cavalry Veterans of Vietnam and Cambodia,
preserving the legacy of those who served
and ensuring their sacrifices are remembered.
Beyond his dedication to veterans, Sergeant
Newton has spent decades volunteering
across Colleyville as a coach, civic volunteer,
and youth mentor. He served on the design
committee for Colleyville Heroes Park, volunteered with Kidsville Park, and coached youth
baseball and soccer. In 2005, he returned to
Iraq to document the 11th Armored Cavalry
Regiment’s combat history, continuing his lifelong commitment to telling the story of American service and sacrifice.
Sergeant Newton’s courage in battle, enduring service to veterans, and steadfast commitment to his community reflect the highest traditions of the United States Army and bring
great credit upon himself, the State of Texas,
and the United States of America.
f

HAITI ECONOMIC LIFT PROGRAM
EXTENSION ACT
SPEECH OF

HON. GREGORY F. MURPHY
OF NORTH CAROLINA

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Monday, January 12, 2026
Mr. MURPHY. Mr. Speaker, I rise in strong
support of my bill H.R. 6504, the HELP Extension Act. My legislation provides a three-year
extension of the HOPE/HELP programs.
These are trade preference programs which in
the past has helped deliver meaningful economic opportunities to thousands of people in
Haiti who desperately need stability, hope, and
a path forward.
I first traveled to Haiti doing medical mission
work following the devastating earthquake in
2010, and I have returned many times since.
Through those visits, I have come to know the
people of Haiti well. They are good, hardworking people who are resilient and strive for
stability and dignity in the midst of chaos and
profound suffering caused by political unrest.
Today, Haiti is facing an unprecedented
convergence of crises. Rampant gang violence, political uncertainty, and the near-total
collapse of basic institutions have devastated
daily life and pushed an already fragile nation

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:12 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

to the brink of disaster. In this environment,
economic stability is not a luxury. It is a necessity to give the people an opportunity to
have some semblance of a normal life. Jobs
mean food on the table, children in school,
and communities that are less vulnerable to
criminal influence, corruption and violence.
The HOPE/HELP programs remain among
the few functioning lifelines that provide lawful
employment and economic stability in Haiti,
and it is imperative that the U.S. play a role
in these endeavors. Extending these programs
will not by any means solve all of Haiti’s challenges, but it will preserve jobs, provide employers with certainty, and allow them to continue employing hardworking Haitians during
an extraordinarily difficult time. Stability in Haiti
matters deeply to the United States. Haiti is in
our own backyard. What happens there affects
the broader stability of our hemisphere. When
nations in our hemisphere collapse, the consequences inevitably reach our shores. Malign
influences such as Islamic radicals or dictatorial regimes such as Russia and China see an
avenue to gain a foothold against the U.S. in
our region.
Ensuring stability, opportunity, and lawful
economic activity in Haiti as a defensive
measure, if for not other reasons, is squarely
in the national security interest of the United
States. If these jobs were to disappear, it
would fuel further instability and risk creating a
vacuum that could be filled by gangs,
transnational criminal organizations, or these
hostile foreign actors. Without legitimate employment opportunities, many Haitians are left
with impossible choices. Either submit to criminal networks, migrate to another country, or
starve. So please understand that the HOPE/
HELP program is a win-win for all parties involved. It is good for Haiti, good for America,
and good for the security of the Western
Hemisphere.
I would also like to mention a dear friend of
mine, Father Rick Frechette, a Catholic priest
from Connecticut who has served the poorest
of the poor in Haiti for more than 40 years. He
has regularly tended to their spiritual and medical needs. Yet at the same time, he has, at
his own personal peril, rescued hundreds of
kidnapped individuals held ransom by these
murderous bandits that control much of Port
au Prince. I converse with him regularly, and
he provides firsthand insight into the worsening conditions on the ground. The picture he
describes is heart breaking and appalling.
Several hospital guards have been killed,
many hospitals workers forced to leave the
country, and the threat of criminal gangs continues to be an ever-present danger. These
are the real human consequences of instability.
We have a moral and national responsibility
to act where we can and to support policies
that prevent further collapse. I urge all of my
colleagues to support this critical life and nation saving legislation.
f

HONORING THE STANDARD MEAT
COMPANY ON THEIR 90TH ANNIVERSARY

HON. CRAIG A. GOLDMAN
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Standard Meat Company in

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 14, 2026

Fort Worth, Texas. For 90 years, the Standard
Meat Company has been providing quality
meat to Texans and the rest of the world.
After its founding in 1935, the Standard
Meat Company built a reputation of high quality meat products. Quickly they were able to
expand from local business to a coast to coast
clientele and eventually to a global market.
From innovations in packaging to protect the
freshness and shelf life of their product to cutting edge production and sustainability technology, Standard Meat Company has remained at the top of the industry for nearly a
century. Now, in its fourth generation of family
ownership, the Rosenthal family continues to
prioritize innovation and evolution within the
company, honoring the Texan spirit of resilience and hard work.
On behalf of the 12th Congressional District
of Texas, I am proud to offer my congratulations to Standard Meat Company on their 90th
Anniversary and I am eager to see their continued growth into the future.
f

RECOGNIZING JAMES
PALMERSHEIM

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Captain James
Palmersheim, United States Army, of
Colleyville, Texas, for his honorable service in
the Armed Forces of the United States of
America and for his continued service to his
community.
Captain Palmersheim was commissioned as
an officer in the United States Army in 1984
as a Distinguished Military Graduate from Marquette University’s ROTC program. He served
on active duty as an Army aviator and intelligence officer, flying both fixed and rotary
wing aircraft, including the OV–1D Mohawk
and RU–21H. During his service with the
224th Military Intelligence Battalion, he demonstrated exceptional skill and leadership
earning the Air Assault Badge, Senior Aviator
Badge, Army Commendation Medal, Army
Achievement Medal, and National Defense
Service Ribbon.
Following his military career, Captain
Palmersheim has continued to exemplify selfless service through a lifetime of work supporting veterans, military families, and youth
across the Nation. In 2003, he led a national
effort to restore and fly a Huey helicopter
across the country culminating in its historic
landing on the National Mall, where it now
stands as a centerpiece of the Smithsonian’s
Price of Freedom exhibit. As founder and
longtime director of American Airlines’ Veterans and Military Initiatives program, he
helped develop groundbreaking partnerships
that provided resources, recognition, and support for wounded warriors, Gold Star families,
and military personnel worldwide.
Captain Palmersheim has also served on
the boards of numerous nonprofit organizations, including the Air Power Foundation, the
Gary Sinise Foundation, and Snowball Express, which honors children of fallen service

E:\CR\FM\A14JA8.004

E14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

members. He co-founded Independence
Corps Foundation, which has donated millions
of dollars in mobility equipment to veterans
and first responders with disabilities. He currently sits on the board of the Tribute to Valor
Foundation, an organization he helped establish to inspire students nationwide through the
core values of the Medal of Honor and STEM
education. His service has earned him multiple
prestigious honors, including the Medal of
Honor Society Patriot Award, the Order of
Saint Michael from the Army Aviation Association of America, and honorary recognition from
the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment and the 457th Fighter Squadron.
Captain Palmersheim’s unwavering dedication to veterans, their families, and the next
generation reflects the highest traditions of the
United States Army and brings great credit
upon himself, the State of Texas, and the
United States of America.
f

CELEBRATING THE RETIREMENT
OF LOS FRESNOS CHIEF OF POLICE, HECTOR GONZALEZ

HON. VICENTE GONZALEZ
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ of Texas. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to recognize and honor
the City of Los Fresnos Chief of Police, Hector
Gonzalez, whose retirement marks the conclusion of forty-five years of outstanding service
in law enforcement.
Chief Gonzalez’s leadership has kept our
community safe, enabled our continued
growth, and made the Rio Grande Valley a
desirable place to live.
As a mentor to countless men and women
in uniform, he instilled core values of accountability, transparency, and respect, which will
leave a lasting and positive impact on the Los
Fresnos Police Department.
Chief Gonzalez served Los Fresnos with
honor, integrity and courage, while maintaining
a steadfast commitment to the safety and wellbeing of everyone in our community.
I am honored to represent some of the best
of South Texas, including those who put their
lives on the line each day to keep our communities safe. Under Chief Gonzalez’s leadership, Los Fresnos Police has gone above and
beyond, fostering trust between law enforcement and the community they serve.
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a grateful South
Texas, I thank Chief Hector Gonzalez for his
service to the people of Los Fresnos and congratulate him on his much-deserved retirement.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF EDWARD
‘‘EDDIE’’ COLE

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

HON. MAXWELL FROST
OF FLORIDA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mr. FROST. Mr. Speaker, I rise to honor the
life and legacy of Edward ‘‘Eddie’’ Cole, a devoted public servant, community advocate,
and beloved leader who passed away on Saturday, December 20, 2025, at the age of 67.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:12 Jan 15, 2026

E41

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

Eddie Cole proudly served as Mayor of Florida’s oldest Black incorporated municipality,
the Historic Town of Eatonville from 2016 to
2022.
A
tireless
champion
for
preserving
Eatonville’s history, including the legacy of the
Hungerford School, Mayor Cole led with passion, integrity, and an unwavering commitment
to his community.
Beyond public service, he spent more than
30 years as an assistant coach for the Rollins
College women’s basketball team, earning induction into the Rollins Sports Hall of Fame in
2023. He also served as chaplain for the Orlando Magic, offering guidance and faith to
players and staff.
Perhaps his greatest pride was his two decades as executive director of Every Kid Outreach Inc., where he transformed countless
young lives through mentorship, encouragement, and opportunity.
While his accomplishments were many,
Eddie Cole’s greatest impact was the love he
poured into people.
Mayor Cole led with love, compassion, and
a deep commitment to uplifting others, serving
his community for decades as a public servant, coach, and trusted leader.
Sending much love and prayers to his family, loved ones, and all who were blessed to
know him. His legacy of service will live on
forever.

advocacy for veterans. Appointed by Texas
Governor Greg Abbott as Presiding Officer of
the Texas Military Preparedness Commission,
he works to strengthen Texas’ military installations and ensure their continued role in national defense. As President of the Freedom
Mobility Foundation, he leads efforts to provide adaptive vehicles and mobility equipment
to severely injured veterans empowering them
to regain independence and quality of life.
Major General Pottinger’s exceptional record
of military leadership, combined with his unwavering commitment to veterans and the
community, reflects the highest traditions of
the United States Air Force and brings great
credit upon himself, the State of Texas, and
the United States of America.

HON. EMILIA STRONG SYKES
OF OHIO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mrs. SYKES. Mr. Speaker, had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call
No. 18; NAY on Roll Call No. 19; YEA on Roll
Call No. 20; YEA on Roll Call No. 21; YEA on
Roll Call No. 22; and NAY on Roll Call No. 23.
f

f

HONORING ABRAHAM ALEXANDER

RECOGNIZING KEVIN POTTINGER

HON. CRAIG A. GOLDMAN

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Major General
Kevin Pottinger, United States Air Force, of
Keller, Texas, for his honorable service in the
Armed Forces of the United States of America
and for his continued service to his community.
Major General Pottinger served with distinction in the United States Air Force for nearly
four decades, from 1976 to 2015. A command
pilot with more than 3,500 flight hours in the
F–16 Fighting Falcon, he held leadership positions at every level, culminating in his role as
Commander of the 301st Fighter Wing and
later as Mobilization Assistant to the Commander, Pacific Air Forces, at Joint Base
Pearl Harbor–Hickam, Hawaii. Following his
initial retirement, he selflessly returned to active duty after the September 11th terrorist attacks to fly combat missions in the War on
Terror, exemplifying the Air Force core values
of integrity, service, and excellence. His military decorations include the Distinguished
Service Medal, Legion of Merit with oak leaf
cluster, Meritorious Service Medal with silver
oak leaf cluster, Air Medal, Air Force Commendation Medal with oak leaf cluster, Air
Force Achievement Medal, and numerous
campaign and service awards recognizing his
combat readiness and humanitarian contributions.
Following his military career, Major General
Pottinger has continued to serve his state and
Nation through leadership, mentorship, and

PO 00000

f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Frm 00003

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

OF TEXAS

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor Mr. Abraham Alexander for receiving the Stephen Bruton Award.
Mr. Alexander grew up and began his career in Fort Worth. In remarkable fashion, his
music career has soared, earning him national
recognition and numerous accolades. The Stephen Bruton Award recognizes Mr. Alexander
for his contribution to the film industry through
his song ‘‘Like a Bird’’ in the film Sing Sing. As
filmmaker and fellow Fort Worth native Taylor
Sheridan described, Mr. Alexander is a
‘‘dreamer who is living that dream.’’
For eighteen years, the Lone Star Film Festival has brought together filmmakers, producers, and musicians from across the media
and entertainment industry for its prestigious
award show. With the reception of the Stephen Bruton Award, Mr. Alexander joins the
ranks of celebrated musicians such as Willie
Nelson, Clint Black, and Pat Green.
On behalf of Texas’ 12th Congressional District, I am honored to recognize Mr. Alexander’s outstanding achievement in music. His
success is an inspiration to the City of Fort
Worth and our community. I extend my heartfelt congratulations to Mr. Alexander and look
forward to seeing what he creates next.
f

RECOGNIZING JAMES LEONARD
WILLIAMS

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens

E:\CR\FM\A14JA8.007

E14JAPT1

E42

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Major General
James Leonard Williams, United States Marine Corps, of Dallas, Texas, for his honorable
service in the Armed Forces of the United
States of America and for his continued service to his community.
Major General Williams served with distinction in the United States Marine Corps for
more than 38 years, including both active and
reserve duty during multiple conflicts. Over the
course of his career, he held numerous leadership and command positions within the 4th
Marine Division, 1st Marine Expeditionary
Force, Combined Joint Task Force 180, and
2nd Force Reconnaissance Company, Special
Operations Capable. His operational service
included deployments supporting the War on
Drugs and combat tours in both Afghanistan
and Iraq. His military decorations include the
Defense Meritorious Service Medal, Legion of
Merit Medal, Bronze Star Medal, Meritorious
Service Medal, Navy Achievement Medal, Afghanistan Campaign Medal, Iraq Campaign
Medal, National Defense Service Medal, and
the Secretary of Defense Service Badge,
among numerous other honors.
Beyond his exemplary military career, Major
General Williams has demonstrated a lifelong
commitment to public service, education, and
community leadership. He has served on numerous boards and advisory groups, including
the FBI Citizens Academy Alumni Association,
InfraGard North Texas Alliance, North Texas
Crime Commission, and the Veterans Advisory
Board for the VA North Texas Health Care
System. He is President of the Board for International Leadership of Texas, a public charter
school district, and serves as an advisor to
both the Tarleton State University School of
Criminal Justice and the Tower Center for Political Science at Southern Methodist University.
Major General Williams also dedicates extensive time to helping veterans navigate the
VA system, offering mentorship, guidance, and
financial
coaching
to
help
fellow
servicemembers and their families succeed in
civilian life. His leadership, compassion, and
devotion to service continue to strengthen
North Texas communities and inspire future
generations.
Major General Williams’ extraordinary record
of military and civic service reflects the highest
traditions of the United States Marine Corps
and brings great credit upon himself, the State
of Texas, and the United States of America.
f

THE LIGHT WILL WIN

HON. BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER
OF ILLINOIS

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Mr. Speaker, last week,
the bipartisan House Abraham Accords Caucus was privileged to host Rabbi Yehoram
Ulman and Ahmed al-Ahmed, of Sydney, Australia, and survivors of the terrorist attack at
Bondi Beach last month.
When a father-and-son pair of ISIS-inspired
gunmen began massacring Jews during a Hanukkah celebration on the beach—murdering
15 people, including Rabbi Ulman’s son-inlaw—Ahmed, a Muslim who was at the event

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:12 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

January 14, 2026

by serendipity, rushed for cover. As one of the
terrorists approached his position, Ahmed heroically rose to the moment, charged, and single-handedly disarmed the attacker, saving
countless lives.
On behalf of the entire Abraham Accords
Caucus, I thank Rabbi Ulman and Mr. alAhmed for traveling here and passionately
sharing their stories. I also thank my many
colleagues for joining us to honor these two
great men.
The Abraham Accords Caucus was formed
after the accords were signed five years ago
on a simple belief: Jews and Arabs belong to
the same land, and elevating the people will
elevate the land and bring peace to everyone
in the region.
Yesterday, Rabbi Ulman and Ahmed alAhmed showed that this spirit extends far beyond the Middle East. Their shared humanity
and embrace of each other reflects our hope
for the future, a future in which people see the
dignity and grace in one another and have the
strength to stand up and confront hatred and
evil.
As I told Ahmed, he is a hero to us all. He
teaches us that love of the stranger can lift us
all and defeat hatred. Or, as Rabbi Ulman and
Mr. al-Ahmed have titled their visit around the
world, ‘‘The Light Will Win.’’

cation, civic engagement, and community development in Keller and Tarrant County, serving for twelve years on the Keller Independent
School District Board of Trustees. Additionally,
he is a founding member of the Keller ISD
Education Foundation, which continues to provide grants and stipends to outstanding teachers and programs that enhance student learning opportunities.
In addition to his education leadership, he
has held numerous community and civic roles,
including Treasurer of the Keller Chamber of
Commerce Board, Chair of the Boy Scouts’
Friends of Scouting fundraising campaign,
Foundation Chair and past President of the
Golden Triangle Rotary Club, and member of
the Fort Worth Symphony Board. Through
these positions, Staff Sergeant Harrison has
played an instrumental role in raising funds
and building partnerships that strengthen
schools, support youth development, and enrich the cultural life of North Texas.
Staff Sergeant Harrison’s exemplary service
to his Nation and his lifelong dedication to the
Keller community reflect the highest traditions
of the United States Air Force and bring great
credit upon himself, the State of Texas, and
the United States of America.

f

HONORING THE SANDERS TRAVEL
CENTRE ON THEIR 30TH ANNIVERSARY AND FORBES TRAVEL
GUIDE ENDORSEMENT

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. HERBERT C. CONAWAY, JR.

f

HON. CRAIG A. GOLDMAN

OF NEW JERSEY

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mr. CONAWAY. Mr. Speaker, I was not
present for part of votes on January 12, 2026.
Had I been present, I would have voted YEA
on Roll Call No. 15.
f

RECOGNIZING KENNETH A.
HARRISON

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Staff Sergeant
Kenneth A. Harrison, United States Air Force,
of Keller, Texas, for his honorable service in
the Armed Forces of the United States of
America and for his continued service to his
community.
Staff Sergeant Harrison served honorably in
the United States Air Force from 1966 to 1970
during the Vietnam War, where he was assigned to the 12th Reconnaissance Intelligence Technical Squadron. In that role, he
provided critical intelligence and reconnaissance support, contributing to the success of
U.S. operations in Southeast Asia. His professionalism, dedication, and skill earned him the
National Defense Service Medal, Vietnam
Service Medal, Air Force Good Conduct
Medal, and Air Force Medal 900 in recognition
of his exemplary performance and commitment to duty.
Following his military service, Staff Sergeant
Harrison devoted himself to improving edu-

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Sanders Travel Centre in
Fort Worth, Texas. For 30 years, Sanders
Travel Centre has been guiding people in luxury travel and has been recognized with an
endorsement by Forbes Travel Guide.
Trust is a major factor in booking travel and
for three decades Sanders Travel Centre has
excelled in building and maintaining that much
needed trust. Their diverse expertise in advising individual, group, and corporate travelers
on both domestic and international destinations, along with their dedication to a luxury
experience is what makes them stand out.
Forbes Travel Guide, a prestigious luxury travel rating system, has also acknowledged and
endorsed Sanders Travel Centre for their hard
work in the hospitality industry. This endorsement marks them as one of the top 50 travel
agencies in the world, quantifying what we, in
Fort Worth, have long recognized.
On behalf of the 12th Congressional District
of Texas, I am proud to offer my congratulations to Sanders Travel Centre on their 30th
Anniversary and endorsement by Forbes Travel Guide.
f

RECOGNIZING TODD BOEDING

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 14, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.

E:\CR\FM\A14JA8.013

E14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Captain Todd
Boeding, United States Marine Corps, of Dallas, Texas, for his honorable service in the
Armed Forces of the United States of America
and for his continued service to his community.
Captain Boeding served with distinction in
the United States Marine Corps from 1989 to
2001. Beginning his service as an enlisted
Marine administrative clerk and later commissioning as an infantry officer, he embodied the
Marine Corps’ core values of honor and commitment throughout his career. He served with
the 1st Marine Regiment and was later selected for the elite Marine Barracks in Washington, D.C., where he was a member of the
famed Silent Drill Team representing the Marine Corps in ceremonies honoring presidents,
foreign dignitaries, and fallen service members. His military decorations include the Navy
Unit Commendation Medal, two Meritorious
Unit Commendations, the National Defense
Service Medal, Armed Forces Expeditionary
Medal, Sea Service Deployment Ribbon, Certificate of Commendation, and multiple letters
and certificates of appreciation, along with Expert Rifle and Sharpshooter Pistol Badges.
After the September 11, 2001, attacks, Captain Boeding extended his service to continue
supporting the Corps and his country. Since
leaving active duty, he has remained deeply
committed to service and leadership within his
community. As a Board Member and Ambassador for Carry The Load, he has played a
vital role in honoring and supporting veterans,
first responders, and military families helping
expand the organization’s national impact and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:12 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

its mission of restoring the true meaning of
Memorial Day. His mentorship and friendship
have guided countless veterans in their transition to civilian life, continuing his lifelong legacy of servant leadership.
Captain Boeding also co-founded Tribe and
Trust Leadership Academy, a program dedicated to developing the next generation of
leaders by instilling the principles of teamwork,
integrity, and service that defined his Marine
Corps career. His tireless dedication to veterans, young leaders, and the broader North
Texas community exemplifies the very best of
American service and citizenship.
Captain Boeding’s honorable military service
and his enduring commitment to country and
community reflect the highest traditions of the
United States Marine Corps and bring great
credit upon himself, the State of Texas, and
the United States of America.
f

SENATE COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4,
agreed to by the Senate of February 4,
1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized schedule of all
meetings and hearings of Senate committees, subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference.
This title requires all such committees
to notify the Office of the Senate Daily
Digest—designated by the Rules Committee—of the time, place and purpose
of the meetings, when scheduled and
any cancellations or changes in the
meetings as they occur.

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

E43

As an additional procedure along
with the computerization of this information, the Office of the Senate Daily
Digest will prepare this information for
printing in the Extensions of Remarks
section of the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD
on Monday and Wednesday of each
week.
Meetings scheduled for Thursday,
January 15, 2026 may be found in the
Daily Digest of today’s RECORD.
MEETINGS SCHEDULED
JANUARY 28
10 a.m.
Committee on Environment and Public
Works
To hold hearings to examine improving
the Federal environmental review and
permitting process, part 2.
SD–562
2:30 p.m.
Committee on the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Federal Courts, Oversight, Agency Action, and Federal
Rights
To hold hearings to examine scammers,
focusing on fighting fraud in Minnesota
and beyond.
SD–226
FEBRUARY 3
10:15 a.m.
Committee on the Judiciary
To hold hearings to examine hidden facts
regarding Nazis and Swiss banks.
SH–216

E:\CR\FM\A14JA8.018

E14JAPT1

Wednesday, January 14, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate
Chamber Action
Routine Proceedings, pages S185–225
Measures Introduced: Seventeen bills were introPage S220
duced, as follows: S. 3630–3646
Measures Considered:
Commerce, Justice,
Science; Energy and Water Development; and
Interior and Environment Appropriations Act—
Agreement: Senate continued consideration of H.R.
6938, making consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, taking action
on the following amendments and motions proposed
Pages S185–218
thereto:
Pending:
Thune Amendment No. 4208, to change the enPage S185
actment date.
Thune Amendment No. 4209 (to Amendment
No. 4208), of a perfecting nature.
Page S185
Thune motion to commit the bill to the Committee on Appropriations, with instructions, Amendment No. 4210, to change the enactment date.
Page S185

Thune Amendment No. 4211 (to the instructions
(Amendment No. 4210)), of a perfecting nature.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Page S185

Thune Amendment No. 4212 (to Amendment
No. 4211), of a perfecting nature.
Page S185
A unanimous-consent agreement was reached providing for further consideration of the bill at approximately 10 a.m., on Thursday, January 15,
2026.
Page S223
Hostilities Within or Against Venezuela: Senate
began consideration of the motion to proceed to consideration of S.J. Res. 98, to direct the removal of
United States Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not been authorized
by Congress.
Page S218
During consideration of this measure today, Senate
also took the following action:
By 51 yeas to 50 nays, Vice President voting yea
(Vote No. 9), Senate determined that the point of
order against the joint resolution, as not being entitled to privilege under 50 U.S.C. 1546a due to U.S.
troops not being engaged in hostilities, was sustained.
Page S218

Measures Placed on the Calendar: Pages S186, S218
Executive Communications:
Pages S218–20
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages S220–21
Amendments Submitted:
Pages S221–22
Authorities for Committees to Meet:
Pages S222–23

Record Votes: One record vote was taken today.
(Total—9)
Page S218
Adjournment: Senate convened at 10 a.m. and adjourned at 7:06 p.m., until 10 a.m. on Thursday,
January 15, 2026. (For Senate’s program, see the remarks of the Majority Leader in today’s Record on
page S223.)

Committee Meetings
(Committees not listed did not meet)

CHEMICAL ABORTION DRUGS
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions:
Committee concluded a hearing to examine chemical
abortion drugs, after receiving testimony from Louisiana Attorney General Liz Murrill, Baton Rouge;
Monique Chireau Wubbenhorst, University of Notre
Dame, Durham, North Carolina; and Nisha Verma,
Physicians for Reproductive Health, Atlanta, Georgia.
AFGHAN PAROLEE PROGRAM
Committee on the Judiciary: Subcommittee on Border
Security and Immigration concluded a joint hearing
with the Subcommittee on Crime and Counterterrorism to examine Biden’s Afghan parolee program,
after receiving testimony from Craig Adelman, Deputy Inspector General for Audits, Office of Inspector
General, Department of Homeland Security; Arne
Baker, Senior Official Performing the Duties of the
Inspector General, Office of Inspector General, Department of State; Michael J. Roark, Deputy Inspector General for Evaluations, Office of Inspector General, Department of Defense; Simon R. Hankinson,
The Heritage Foundation Center for Border Security
and Immigration, and Nayla Rush, Center for Immigration Studies, both of Washington, D.C.; Perry
D77

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:48 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D14JA6.REC

D14JAPT1

D78

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Blackburn, AFG Free, Tampa, Florida; Julie
Marzouk, Marzouk Evolve Advocacy Consulting,
Irvine, California; and Nadim Yousify, Romulus,
Michigan.
AGRICULTURAL ECONOMY
Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship: Committee concluded a hearing to examine growing the
small business agricultural economy, including S.
1555, to increase loan limits for loans made to small
manufacturers, S. 2100, to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to modify certain rules applicable
to qualified small issue manufacturing bonds, to expand certain exceptions to the private activity bond
rules for first-time farmers, and S. 3471, to improve
purchasing of food by the Department of Agriculture, after receiving testimony from Melissa
Spurgin, First Iowa State Bank, Albia, Iowa; Jay
Funke, Del Clay Farm Equipment, LLC, Edgewood,
Iowa; Erbin Crowell, Neighboring Food Co-op Association, Shelburne Falls, Massachusetts; and Maria

January 14, 2026

Moreira, World Farmers and Rural Coalition, Lancaster, Massachusetts.
INTELLIGENCE
Select Committee on Intelligence: Committee met in
closed session to receive a briefing on certain intelligence matters from officials of the intelligence
community.
INTERNATIONAL SCAMS
Special Committee on Aging: Committee concluded a
hearing to examine made in China and paid by seniors, focusing on stopping the surge of international
scams, after receiving testimony from Seto J.
Bagdoyan, Director, Forensic Audits and Investigative Service, Government Accountability Office; Nathan Picarsic, Foundation for Defense of Democracies, and Kathy Stokes, AARP Fraud Watch Network, both of Washington, D.C.; and Jacqueline
Burns Koven, Chainalysis Inc., New York, New
York.

h

House of Representatives

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Chamber Action
Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 32 public bills, H.R. 7050–7081; and 6 resolutions, H.
Res. 996–1001 were introduced.
Pages H892–93
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages H894–95
Reports Filed: Reports were filed today as follows:
H.R. 6359, to require institutions of higher education to disseminate information on the rights of,
and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for other purposes, with an amendment
(H. Rept. 119–447);
H.R. 5169, to amend the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act of 1974 to provide a clear definition of adequate consideration for certain closely
held stock, and for other purposes, with an amendment (H. Rept. 119–448);
H.R. 681, to amend the Act of August 9, 1955
(commonly known as the ‘‘Long-Term Leasing Act’’),
to authorize leases of up to 99 years for land held
in trust for the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe and the
Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah), and for
other purposes (H. Rept. 119–449);
H.R. 4386, to amend the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act to clarify entrance privileges
for vehicles with respect to the America the Beautiful interagency pass, with an amendment (H. Rept.
119–450, Part 1);

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:48 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

H.R. 3903, to exchange non-Federal land held by
the Chugach Alaska Corporation for certain Federal
Land in the Chugach Region, and for other purposes,
with an amendment (H. Rept. 119–451);
H.R. 4467, to modify the boundary of the Vicksburg National Military Park in the State of Mississippi, and for other purposes, with an amendment
(H. Rept. 119–452);
H.R. 5910, to authorize leases of up to 99 years
for land held in trust for federally recognized Indian
Tribes (H. Rept. 119–453);
H.R. 4284, to amend the Small Tract Act of
1983 to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to
convey, without consideration, certain cemeteries,
and for other purposes (H. Rept. 119–454, Part 1);
H.R. 5103, to establish a program to Beautify the
District of Columbia and establish the District of
Columbia Safe and Beautiful Commission, with an
amendment (H. Rept. 119–455, Part 1); and
H.R. 5103, to establish a program to Beautify the
District of Columbia and establish the District of
Columbia Safe and Beautiful Commission, with an
amendment (H. Rept. 119–455, Part 2).
Pages H891–92

Speaker: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he
appointed Representative Wittman to act as Speaker
pro tempore for today.
Page H721

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D14JA6.REC

D14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Recess: The House recessed at 10:47 a.m. and reconvened at 12 p.m.
Page H726
Recess: The House recessed at 12:54 p.m. and reconvened at 1:30 p.m.
Page H732
Recess: The House recessed at 3:41 p.m. and reconvened at 4:45 p.m.
Page H798
Financial Services and General Government and
National Security, Department of State, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2026: The
House passed H.R. 7006, making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, by a yea-and-nay vote of 341 yeas
to 79 nays, Roll No. 28.
Pages H734–H801
Rejected:
Roy amendment (No. 1 printed in H. Rept.
119–445) that sought to reduce the District of Columbia District and Appeals Court funding by 20%
and strike the salary and expense funding for Judges
Boasberg and Boardman’s staff (by a recorded vote of
163 ayes to 257 noes with one answering ‘‘present’’,
Roll No. 26); and
Pages H795–97, H799
Crane amendment (No. 2 printed in H. Rept.
119–445) that sought to prohibit funding for the
National Endowment for Democracy (by a recorded
vote of 127 ayes to 191 noes, Roll No. 27).
Pages H797–98, H799–H800

H. Res. 992, the rule providing for consideration
of the bill (H.R. 7006) was agreed to by a yea-andnay vote of 213 yeas to 210 nays, Roll No. 25, after
the previous question was ordered by a yea-and-nay
vote of 213 yeas to 209 nays, Roll No. 24.
Pages H728–32, H733–34

Meeting Hour: Agreed by unanimous consent that
when the House adjourns today, it adjourn to meet
at 9 a.m. tomorrow, January 14th.
Page H801
Canada–United
States
Interparliamentary
Group—Appointment: The Chair announced the
Speaker’s appointment of the following Members of
the House to the Canada–United States Interparliamentary Group: Representatives Larsen (WA),
Morelle, Omar, Thanedar and Kennedy (NY).

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Page H801

Board of Trustees of the American Folklife Center in the Library of Congress—Appointment:
The Chair announced the Speaker’s appointment of
the following individual to the Board of Trustees of
the American Folklife Center in the Library of Congress: Mr. Robert Anacletus Underwood of
Tamueng, Guam for a 6-year term.
Page H801
Congressional–Executive Commission on the
People’s Republic of China—Appointment: The
Chair announced the Speaker’s appointment of the
following Member of the House to the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:48 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

D79

Congressional–Executive Commission on the People’s
Republic of China: Representative Walkinshaw.
Page H801

United States Group of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly—Appointment: The Chair announced the Speaker’s appointment of the following
Members of the House to the United States Group
of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly: Representatives Sánchez, Larsen (WA), Norcross and KamlagerDove.
Page H801
Quorum Calls—Votes: Three yea-and-nay votes
and two recorded votes developed during the proceedings of today and appear on pages H733,
H733–34, H799, H799–800, H800–01.
Adjournment: The House met at 10 a.m. and adjourned at 7:10 p.m.

Committee Meetings
BUILDING AN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCEREADY AMERICA
Committee on Education and Workforce: Full Committee
held a hearing entitled ‘‘Building an AI-Ready
America’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Subcommittee on
Communications and Technology held a hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Federal Communications
Commission’’. Testimony was heard from the following Federal Communications Commission officials: Brendan Carr, Chairman; Olivia Trusty, Commissioner; and Anna M. Gomez, Commissioner.
EVALUATING THE OPERATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN
THE UNITED STATES (CFIUS)
Committee on Financial Services: Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit Finance, and International Financial Institutions held a hearing entitled ‘‘Evaluating the Operations of the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States (CFIUS)’’. Testimony was heard from Chris Pilkerton, Assistant Secretary for Investment Security, Department of the
Treasury.
STRIKING THE RIGHT BALANCE SHEET
Committee on Financial Services: Task Force on Monetary Policy, Treasury Market Resilience, and Economic Prosperity held a hearing entitled ‘‘Striking
the Right Balance Sheet’’. Testimony was heard from
public witnesses.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D14JA6.REC

D14JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

D80

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

WINNING THE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
ARMS RACE AGAINST THE CHINESE
COMMUNIST PARTY
Committee on Foreign Affairs: Full Committee held a
hearing entitled ‘‘Winning the AI Arms Race
Against the Chinese Communist Party’’. Testimony
was heard from public witnesses.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURE
Committee on House Administration: Full Committee
held a markup on H.R. 7008, the ‘‘Stop Insider
Trading Act’’. H.R. 7008 was ordered reported, as
amended.
EXAMINING THE INVESTIGATION INTO
THE DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE
AND REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMITTEE
PIPE BOMBS
Committee on the Judiciary: Select Subcommittee to Investigate the Remaining Questions Surrounding January 6, 2021, held a hearing entitled ‘‘Examining
the Investigation into the DNC and RNC Pipe
Bombs’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
BETWEEN A ROCK AND A HARD PLACE:
PROTECTING THE U.S. STONE SLAB
INDUSTRY FROM LAWFARE
Committee on the Judiciary: Subcommittee on Courts,
Intellectual Property, Artificial Intelligence, and the
Internet held a hearing entitled ‘‘Between a Rock
and a Hard Place: Protecting the U.S. Stone Slab Industry from Lawfare’’. Testimony was heard from
public witnesses.
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMPACT OF
FREE ASSOCIATION AMENDMENTS ACT OF
2024
Committee on Natural Resources: Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs held a hearing entitled ‘‘Implementation of the Compact of Free Association
Amendments Act of 2024’’. Testimony was heard
from Angel Demapan, Deputy Assistant Secretary,
Office of Insular Affairs, Department of the Interior;
Antone Greubel, Director, Office of Australia, New
Zealand, and Pacific Affairs, Department of State;
and public witnesses.
LEGISLATIVE MEASURES
Committee on Natural Resources: Subcommittee on Federal Lands held a hearing on H.R. 926, the ‘‘Fort
Pillow National Battlefield Park Study Act’’; H.R.
3922, the ‘‘Cross-Boundary Wildfire Solutions Act’’;
H.R. 4038, the ‘‘Wildfire Response and Preparedness Act of 2025’’; H.R. 4684, the ‘‘Star-Spangled
Summit Act of 2025’’; H.R. 6300, the ‘‘Grasslands
Grazing Act of 2025’’. Testimony was heard from

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:48 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0627

January 14, 2026

Representatives Cohen, Neguse, Kim, Kennedy of
Utah, and Hageman; John Crockett, Deputy Chief,
U.S. Forest Service, Department of Agriculture;
Tyler Clancy, Representative, District 60, Utah
House of Representatives; Matthew M. McCombs,
State Forester and Director, Colorado State Forest
Service; Pat Russell, Fire Chief, Anaheim Fire and
Rescue, California; and a public witness.
ADVANCING AMERICA’S ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE ACTION PLAN
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology: Subcommittee on Research and Technology held a hearing entitled ‘‘Advancing America’s AI Action Plan’’.
Testimony was heard from Michael Kratsios, Director, White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy, Executive Office of the President.
MEMBER DAY
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure: Full
Committee held a hearing entitled ‘‘Member Day’’.
Testimony was heard from Chairman Moolenaar, and
Representatives
Salinas,
Budzinski,
Ramirez,
Kiggans of Virginia, Costa, Moore of North Carolina, Tlaib, Moylan, Kaptur, Mannion, Davis of
North Carolina, Jayapal, Garcia of Texas, Hageman,
Mullin, Wittman, Ruiz, Vicente Gonzalez of Texas,
Moskowitz, Case, Rose, Cline, Randall, Carter of
Georgia, Raskin, Cohen, Perez, Biggs of Arizona,
Flood, Sorensen, Simon, Tokuda, Sherman, Lois
Frankel of Florida, Hayes, Newhouse, and Cloud.
REEVALUATING THE RATING SCHEDULE:
EXAMINING VA’S EFFORTS TO MODERNIZE
DISABILITY BENEFITS
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs: Subcommittee on Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs held a hearing entitled ‘‘Reevaluating the Rating Schedule: Examining VA’s Efforts to Modernize Disability Benefits’’. Testimony was heard from Nina Tann, Executive Director, Compensation Service, Veterans Benefits Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs;
Elizabeth Curda, Director, Education, Workforce,
and Income Security, Government Accountability
Office; and public witnesses.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Ways and Means: Full Committee held
a markup on H.R. 6956, the ‘‘Barcode Automation
for Revenue Collection to Organize Disbursement
and Enhance Efficiency Act’’; H.R. 6903, the ‘‘Ensuring Children Receive Support Act’’; H.R. 6431,
the ‘‘New Opportunities for Business Ownership and
Self-Sufficiency Act’’; and H.R. 6945, the ‘‘Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families Act’’. H.R. 6956, H.R. 6903, H.R. 6431, and
H.R. 6945 were ordered reported, as amended.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D14JA6.REC

D14JAPT1

January 14, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR THURSDAY,
JANUARY 15, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Committee on Armed Services: to hold hearings to examine
the nominations of Lieutenant General Francis L. Donovan, USMC, to be general and Commander, United States
Southern Command, and Lieutenant General Joshua M.
Rudd, USA, to be general and Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service/Commander,
United States Cyber Command, both of the Department
of Defense, 9:30 a.m., SD–G50.
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs: business meeting to consider H.R. 3633, to provide for a system of regulation of the offer and sale of digital commodities by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, 10 a.m.,
SD–538.
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation: to
hold hearings to examine the impact of technology on
America’s youth, 10 a.m., SR–253.
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions: business meeting to consider S. 1157, to direct the Secretary
of Health and Human Services to conduct a review to
evaluate the status of research on lung cancer in women
and underserved populations, S. 921, to direct the Secretary of Health and Human Services to issue guidance
on whether hospital emergency departments should implement fentanyl testing as a routine procedure for patients experiencing an overdose, S. 2169, to require the
development of a comprehensive rural hospital cybersecurity workforce development strategy, and S. 272, to improve the safety of infant formula through testing of in-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:48 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0627

D81

fant formula for microorganisms and toxic elements, 10
a.m., SD–430.
Committee on the Judiciary: business meeting to consider
S. 2132, to amend title 18, United States Code, to prevent and mitigate the potential for conflicts of interest
following government service, and the nominations of
Daniel E. Burrows, of Colorado, to be an Assistant Attorney General, Megan Blair Benton, to be United States
District Judge for the Western District of Missouri,
David Clay Fowlkes, to be United States District Judge
for the Western District of Arkansas, Nicholas Jon
Ganjei, to be United States District Judge for the Southern District of Texas, Brian Charles Lea, to be United
States District Judge for the Western District of Tennessee, Justin R. Olson, to be United States District
Judge for the Southern District of Indiana, Aaron Christian Peterson, to be United States District Judge for the
District of Alaska, Andrew Benson, to be United States
Attorney for the District of Maine for the term of four
years, William Boyle, to be United States Attorney for
the Eastern District of North Carolina for the term of
four years, Kevin Holmes, to be United States Attorney
for the Western District of Arkansas for the term of four
years, Brian David Miller, to be United States Attorney
for the Middle District of Pennsylvania for the term of
four years, Richard Price, of Missouri, to be United States
Attorney for the Western District of Missouri for the
term of four years, and Darin Smith, to be United States
Attorney for the District of Wyoming for the term of
four years, 9 a.m., SH–216.

House
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Subcommittee on
Communications and Technology, markup on H.R. 6505,
the ‘‘Next Generation 9–1–1 Act’’; H.R. 2076, the
‘‘LuLu’s Law’’; H.R. 5200, the ‘‘Emergency Reporting
Act’’; H.R. 5201, the ‘‘Kari’s Law Reporting Act’’; H.R.
7022, the ‘‘Mystic Alerts Act’’; and H.R. 1519, the
‘‘Public Safety Communications Act’’, 9 a.m., 2123 Rayburn.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D14JA6.REC

D14JAPT1

D82

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 14, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

10 a.m., Thursday, January 15

9 a.m., Thursday, January 15

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Thursday: Senate will continue consideration of H.R. 6938, Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy
and Water Development; and Interior and Environment
Appropriations Act. At approximately 11 a.m., Senate
will vote on the motion to invoke cloture on the bill.

Program for Thursday: Consideration of H.R. 2988—
Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings
Act.

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE

Goldman, Craig A., Tex., E39, E40, E41, E42
Gonzalez, Vicente, Tex., E41
Murphy, Gregory F., N.C., E40
Schneider, Bradley Scott, Ill., E42

Conaway, Herbert C., Jr., N.J., E42
Frost, Maxwell, Fla., E41

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Sykes, Emilia Strong, Ohio, E41
Tran, Derek, Calif., E39
Van Duyne, Beth, Tex., E39, E39, E40, E41, E41, E42,
E42

VerDate Sep 11 2014

12:48 Jan 15, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D14JA6.REC

D14JAPT1

