UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 28, 2026

No. 20

House of Representatives
The House was not in session today. Its next meeting will be held on Friday, January 30, 2026, at 10:30 a.m.

Senate
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 28, 2026
The Senate met at 11 a.m. and was
called to order by the Honorable TIM
SHEEHY, a Senator from the State of
Montana.

to the Senate from the President pro
tempore (Mr. GRASSLEY).
The senior assistant executive clerk
read the following letter:

f

U.S. SENATE,

PRAYER
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
Answer us, O God, when we call. Be
gracious to us and hear our prayers.
Look on our Nation with favor for Your
promises are sure. Lord, we thank You
that so many of our Nation’s Founders
put their trust in You. Make us worthy
of this Godly heritage. May Your presence on Capitol Hill today so influence
our Senators that the thoughts they
think, the words they speak, and the
work they do will honor You. Lord,
don’t be far from us but continue to be
our hope for the years to come. Help us
also to remember how You have sustained us in the past as You continue
to provide for our daily needs.
We pray in Your mighty Name.
Amen.

Mr. SHEEHY thereupon assumed the
Chair as Acting President pro tempore.
f

RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Under the previous order, the
leadership time is reserved.
f

CONCLUSION OF MORNING
BUSINESS
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Morning business is closed.

f

f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The Presiding Officer led the Pledge
of Allegiance, as follows:

LEGISLATIVE SESSION

I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE,
Washington, DC, January 28, 2026.
To the Senate:
Under the provisions of rule I, paragraph 3,
of the Standing Rules of the Senate, I hereby
appoint the Honorable TIM SHEEHY, a Senator from the State of Montana, to perform
the duties of the Chair.
CHUCK GRASSLEY,
President pro tempore.

APPOINTMENT OF ACTING
PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will please read a communication

CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS
ACT, 2026—Motion to Proceed—Resumed
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Under the previous order, the
Senate resumed consideration of the
motion to proceed to H.R. 7148, which
the clerk will report.
The senior assistant executive clerk
read as follows:

Motion to proceed to Calendar No. 302,
H.R. 7148, a bill making further consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY LEADER

The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The majority leader is recognized.
WORKING FAMILIES TAX CUTS

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, this past
Monday was the start of tax filing season. Now, I know most Americans
aren’t usually excited about the start
of tax season, but this year, there is
less reason for dread because thanks to
the Working Families Tax Cuts, most
Americans are going to see a lower tax
bill. That means bigger tax refunds for
a lot of Americans, as much as $1,000
more than last year, according to some
analysts.
The Working Families Tax Cuts is
literally putting more money in Americans’ pockets. As the American people
file their tax returns this year, they
will see the numerous ways the Working Families Tax Cuts benefit them.
Thanks to this legislation, Americans can count on more money in their
pockets for the long term. For most
Americans, tax relief starts with their
tax rate and the standard deduction,
which over 90 percent of taxpayers in
this country claim.
In 2017, Republicans lowered tax
rates across the board and just about
doubled the standard deduction. In our
landmark bill last year, Republicans
made that relief permanent, and then
we raised the standard deduction even
further.
On top of that, we created a bonus
deduction for seniors, an additional

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S301

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.000

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S302

$6,000 deduction to reduce the tax burden of more than 30 million Americans
over the age of 65.
Then there is the significant tax relief we delivered for families. In 2017,
Republicans
doubled—doubled—the
child tax credit. Last year, we raised it
even further to $2,200 per child. And
then, we linked the child tax credit to
inflation, which means its value will
keep pace with families’ actual costs,
and again that is also permanent.
Parents will also have the opportunity to open new investment accounts for their newborns when they
file their taxes this season. Those accounts provide another tax advantage
option for parents to invest in their
children’s future. The money can be
used after kids turn 18 for their education, to start a business, to buy their
first home; in short, to take advantage
of opportunities available to them and
get a head start on their American
dream.
Those are retroactive to 2025. So parents who had a baby last year can
apply for one of these accounts when
they file their taxes this season. Hardworking Americans are the ones who
benefit from Republicans’ landmark
tax relief bill.
Perhaps the biggest boost goes to
those Americans who earn tips and
overtime
pay.
Waiters,
busboys,
hairstylists and barbers, Uber, Lyft,
and taxi drivers are among the hardworking Americans who will be able to
deduct their tips on their taxes this
year. That will reduce their tax bills
and let them keep a lot more of the
money they earn.
The same is true of workers who put
in overtime throughout the year. Police officers, firefighters, paramedics,
and nurses work important jobs, and
that often means they have to work
extra hours during the week or come in
on holidays. Well, thanks to the Working Families Tax Cuts, they will be
able to keep more of the overtime pay
they earn for that extra time away
from their loved ones.
I don’t have to remind anybody about
the inflation crisis started by Democrats 5 years ago. Higher prices have
affected everybody. But relief is on the
way. Affordability starts with more
money in your pocket, and that is exactly what the Working Families Tax
Cuts delivers.
Whether you are just getting started
or you are raising a family or you are
trying to enjoy your golden years, the
Working Families Tax Cuts has something for you. Republicans wrote this
bill with hard-working Americans in
mind, and that is who is going to see
the benefits this tax season and in the
years to come.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant executive clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered.
RECOGNITION OF THE MINORITY LEADER

The Democratic leader is recognized.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, it has
been 4 days since Alex Pretti was murdered in broad daylight by Federal
agents in Minneapolis, and there has
been zero accountability from Donald
Trump for this horrendous act. Donald
Trump said yesterday he wants to deescalate things in Minneapolis. But as of
today, the Trump administration has
taken zero meaningful action to make
that happen—zero.
As of this morning, ICE is still roaming the streets in Minneapolis with little restraint. Operation Metro Surge,
which is what ICE and Border Patrol
call their surge in the city, is not slowing down at all. In fact, let me read a
statement that came out yesterday
from Acting Assistant Chief of the Border Patrol. Here is what the Acting Assistant Chief of the Border Patrol said:
As of this report, Metro Surge is steadystate and expected to continue as planned.

Translation: ‘‘Stand back and stand
by.’’
Trump is not deescalating things in
Minneapolis as he claims. On the contrary, his administration is telling ICE
and Border Patrol to ‘‘stand back and
stand by.’’ That is dangerous. ICE
needs to leave Minneapolis at once before another tragedy happens. It is the
right thing to do, both for the residents
of Minneapolis and for law enforcement. But that is just one step of
many.
Donald Trump has likewise failed to
call out the vicious lies that his own
administration told in the aftermath of
Alex Pretti’s murder. Yesterday on
FOX News, a DHS spokesperson refused
to deny the characterizations that Alex
Pretti was a domestic terrorist—refused to deny those characterizations.
It is absurd. A simple answer for the
DHS spokesman would have been: No,
he is not a domestic terrorist. We were
wrong, and it won’t happen again.
That is what normal people with normal discourse—Democrat, Republican,
liberal, conservative—would do. But in
this administration, where lying is
their trademark and it spreads from
the top down, lying is OK. It is too
much to ask of this administration to
reject and retract this vicious lie about
the late Mr. Pretti. It is a disgrace.
And as for President Trump, it is not
enough for Donald Trump to meekly
suggest he disagrees with the words of
Stephen Miller calling Pretti an assassin. Donald Trump is the President,
and he needs to act like it. He needs to
send a message and make an example
of his deputies who deliberately lie to
the country in moments of crisis.
But you can see, again, Donald
Trump lies all the time. We see it
every night on the news, and so all the
people below him believe it is OK to
lie, too, even vicious lies like the one

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

cast at Mr. Pretti. Instead of holding
his own administration accountable for
lying about Alex Pretti, Donald Trump
continues to blame Alex Pretti for his
own death. He said yesterday Pretti
should not have been carrying a gun.
The President seems to have forgotten the words of the Second Amendment, ‘‘the right of the people to keep
and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.’’
Apparently for Donald Trump, if you
are a Trump supporter, it is OK to be a
lawful gun owner, but if you are
against Donald Trump, it is not. You
don’t have that right.
Finally, it is outrageous that Kristi
Noem still has a job in the administration after Federal officers murdered
two American citizens in just 2 weeks.
And it is even more disgusting that on
each occasion, Kristi Noem lied about
what took place.
For the good of the country, Donald
Trump needs to fire Kristi Noem at
once. Noem is a liar. Noem is incompetent at her job, and she must go.
Many Republicans here in Congress
agree that Kristi Noem has lost the
trust of the American people. Donald
Trump needs to recognize that the tide
has turned against her and that her
presence does far more harm than good
at this point. Donald Trump needs to
show Kristi Noem the door and send
her packing.
GOVERNMENT FUNDING

Mr. President, now let’s turn to the
Senate. Tomorrow, the Senate is scheduled to take the first procedural vote
on a six-bill funding package. The right
way forward is simple: Five of these
bills are ready to go, and the Senate
should pass them as soon as possible. If
Leader THUNE agrees to split these
bills, just as JOHNSON did in the House,
Senate Democrats are ready to join Republicans in passing them and funding
96 percent of the Federal Government.
But the DHS bill, the sixth bill, needs
more work in the aftermath of Pretti’s
death, Good’s death, and the awful
abuses we have seen from ICE across
the country.
Until ICE is properly reined in and
overhauled, the DHS funding bill
doesn’t have the votes to pass the Senate. Let me say that again so the
White House hears it. Until ICE is
properly reined in and overhauled, legislatively, the DHS funding bill doesn’t
have the votes to pass the Senate.
Now, Leader THUNE knows that, and
so I urge Leader THUNE not to put all
six bills, including DHS, on the floor
but rather split them so we can focus
on what we can pass right now. Time is
short. We shouldn’t waste time on
failed votes right now or else the government will shut down.
I know both sides recognize we need
to act in response to the awful tragedies that have taken place in Minneapolis, and Senators—Democrat and
Republican—are talking and sharing
ideas.
But given how little time we have
left before the funding deadline, the
first right step for the Senate is for

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.001

S28JAPT1

January 28, 2026

Leader THUNE to split the funding bills
and put the five bills on the floor—96
percent of Federal funding—that can
pass. It is the right and expedient thing
to do to ensure that most of the government is funded in time. And if
THUNE doesn’t do it, the shutdown of
the government is on his back. If he
does it, if he puts those five bills on the
floor and leaves DHS out, then we can
have the necessary negotiation to rework the DHS bill and add commonsense safeguards to rein in ICE’s very
real and very dangerous abuses.
The bottom line is simple: The American people support law enforcement.
They support border security, but they
did not support ICE terrorizing our
streets and killing American citizens.
ICE needs to be held to the same
basic standards that any law enforcement agency is asked to follow.
Republicans must work with Democrats on legislative fixes to ensure ICE
is reined in and overhauled to protect
public safety.
I yield the floor.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The majority whip.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

WORKING FAMILIES TAX CUT ACT

Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, all
across the country, people are starting
to fill out their tax returns. Usually,
this is a time of the year that the
American people dread but not this
year. This year, it is different. It is different because of legislation that we
passed and that was signed into law on
the Fourth of July.
The reason it is different this year is
the American people will be getting
bigger and bigger tax refunds than they
have in the past. This financial relief is
the direct result of the Republicans’
Working Families Tax Cuts law. The
tax cuts are dramatic. Republicans
pledged to cut taxes. We did it for middle-class families. These are people
that need a much needed boost in the
money in their pockets. We delivered.
The Tax Foundation estimates that
the average refund this year will be
about $1,000 higher than it was last
year—$1,000 for each one of these refunds.
Treasury
Secretary
Scott
Bessent believes that the refunds will
be even larger than that. In total,
American families will receive this
year in refunds about $100 billion more
than last year. This is money going directly into the pockets of American
families. Working families know best
how to use that money. Families know
what money they want to spend, they
want to save, they want to invest.
Let’s let the American people make
that decision, not the government.
Republicans’ policies mean Americans keep more of the money they
earned. That is what they have been
telling us for years. And all of these
policies were signed into law as part of
the Working Families Tax Cuts law: a
permanent lower tax rate on Americans; a permanent increase in the
standard deduction; a permanent increase in the child tax credit—$2,200 for
each child each year; no taxes on tips

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S303

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

for waiters or barbers or bartenders or
other tip workers; no tax on overtime
for nurses and firefighters, police officers, coal miners, linemen; higher payments for millions of seniors living on
Social Security.
Importantly, all the tax changes that
I just mentioned apply retroactively. It
is on last year’s earnings, so the benefits are going to be realized in this
year’s tax returns. That means that
Americans are paying lower taxes not
just in the future but right now, today,
and just about every single taxpayer in
America is going to benefit.
Republicans’ Working Families Tax
Cuts law breaks Americans free of the
punishing
taxes
of
Joe
Biden’s
unaffordable economy. That was an administration of high prices and high
taxes. America hasn’t experienced such
a dramatic turnaround since Ronald
Reagan reversed the failures of Jimmy
Carter.
Moreover, last year, Republicans
blocked the Democrats’ goal to raise
taxes by $4 trillion. Every single Democrat in the U.S. Senate—every single
Democrat in this Chamber—voted to
increase taxes by $4 trillion. Had
Democrats succeeded, our Nation
wouldn’t see this largest tax cut; they
would have seen the largest tax increase in American history—a $4 trillion tax increase. Not a single American would say that a $4 trillion tax increase was something they could afford, but the Democrats wanted to
force-feed it down the American people’s throats.
Democrats are proven to be the party
of high taxes. It is getting worse. Last
week in Virginia, they swore in a Democrat Governor. In the State of Virginia, Democrats now control the
house, the senate, and the Governor’s
mansion, and they are determined to
steer it hard to the left. Virginia is a
roadmap to the radical policies that
Democrats want to pursue nationwide.
So what do they want to do? They
want taxpayers to fund instate tuition
for illegal immigrants. There they go
again. The Democrats—the people that
wanted to defund the police, the people
that shut down the government to support illegal immigrants—now want to
send instate tuition to illegal immigrants.
Democrats want to raise taxes anywhere they can think of it. They are
going to do it in barbershops, nail salons, drycleaners, and gyms.
Mr. President, in your home State of
Montana, how do you think this would
fly there?
Democrats want to raise sales tax by
11 percent on all firearms and ammunition. That is what the Democrats are
doing now in their effort in Virginia.
That is their model. That is where they
are heading. They even want to introduce a backdoor carbon tax—a tax that
would increase families’ electric bills
by over $1,000 a year. That is going to
wipe out the refund increases families
are going to get. The State of Virginia
wants it taken away from the benefits
people are receiving.

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

It is astonishing. You can’t believe
this. They want to ban gas-powered
leaf blowers because they don’t want to
use the gasoline. Don’t use gasoline. At
the same time, they want to tax the
battery-powered lawn equipment. So
you can’t use gas, and you have to pay
more taxes when using batteries.
These are far-left policies, and these
things just prove the Democrat Party
remains radical, extreme, dangerous,
and scary. That is where they want to
take the country. This is what their
record reveals, whether they are the
radicals now that have taken over the
government in the State of Virginia,
whether they are in New York City,
whether they are in California, or the
Democrats right here in this Congress.
Fortunately, for the pockets and
purses and paychecks of Americans,
Republicans are focused on making our
country more prosperous. We promised
to deliver prosperity for all Americans.
That is exactly what we are doing. And
the bigger refunds that Americans are
going to see this year prove it.
I yield the floor.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Oregon.
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION

Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, for the
Trump administration to stomp to
death the 1st, the 2nd, the 4th, the 5th,
and the 10th Amendments to the Constitution is not immigration enforcement. It is a totally lawless abuse of
Federal power.
The First Amendment guarantees
Americans the right to make their
voices heard and to document lawlessness by the Federal Government. It
guarantees the right to peacefully assemble and protest against those
abuses.
The Second Amendment guarantees
the right to bear arms. Regardless of
what you think about current gun law,
there is no justification for murdering
a man who was lawfully carrying a
firearm.
The Fourth Amendment protects the
American people against illegal search
and seizure of their property. That includes private data and information. I
will touch more on that in a minute.
The Fifth Amendment guarantees
the right to due process. Instead,
Trump’s masked agents are now stopping people across the country and saying: Papers, please.
Then they get thrown into unmarked
vehicles, herded into detention centers,
and deported to dangerous conditions
without due process.
The 10th Amendment limits Federal
Government overreach, and it protects
States’ rights. The recent events in
Minneapolis—the murders of Renee
Good and Alex Pretti—demonstrate exactly how the Trump administration is
breaking the law and trashing the Constitution.
Mr. Pretti was exercising his First
Amendment rights to peaceably observe and record abuses—abuses by ICE
agents. He was exercising his Second
Amendment right to lawfully carry a

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.003

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S304

firearm, and he had a permit. He was
murdered by the CBP agents.
Renee Good was sitting in her car,
exercising her First Amendment right
to peaceably observe the actions of
Federal agents. She was shot and killed
in broad daylight.
In both instances, there is ample
video evidence to disprove the Trump
administration’s idea that these Americans were domestic terrorists who
were covering up lawful killings.
I warned, when Trump began deploying Federal agents to our cities, that
lives would be at risk. That is now the
reality. So our country needs appropriate Federal law enforcement to
identify and remove those who committed violent crimes. What is not
needed is an American Gestapo
rousting tourists, immigrants, and naturalized and native-born Americans,
alike, with guns to their head.
Shooting unarmed Americans on the
street is not immigration enforcement.
It is intimidation. It is a blatant attempt to suppress free speech and anybody who tries to stand up to Trump’s
abuse of Federal power.
Trump’s ICE and CBP agents have
clearly been trained in fear tactics, instead of in legitimate law enforcement.
I have said it before, and I want to
say it again before the Senate: Kristi
Noem and the political appointees at
DHS have got to go.
So I am calling on ICE and CBP
agents in our streets to get out of our
communities. I am pushing for legislation to get them out of schools and
hospitals, places of worship, childcare
centers, courthouses, and additional
public spaces.
I am also calling for the end of ICE
locking people up who don’t need to be,
including the end of family detention
and privately run immigration detention centers. And I call on the Border
Patrol to go back to ports of entry and
get out of the business of terrorizing
our communities miles away from duty
stations.
If an individual has committed a
local crime, then local law enforcement can step up.
It is far past time that these armed
agents who have now murdered two
American citizens and shot more under
disturbing circumstances are sidelined.
ICE and CBP agents certainly have
proven they can’t be trusted in our
communities with weapons and firearms, as we have seen. If you listen to
Trump and his crowd, they seem to
think it is the American people who
ought to be disarmed.
I think most people around our country understand we need to overhaul immigration to continue the rich history
of welcoming immigrants and refugees
as we secure our border and enforce immigration laws, but that is not what
Trump’s lawless activities are about.
Right now, ICE is destroying the rule
of law, not protecting it.
I have made it clear that I cannot
and will not support more Federal
funding for Trump’s ICE unless there is

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

an end to these killings and abuses and
accountability for everybody involved.
In its current form, ICE is no longer an
immigration enforcement Agency; it is
Trump and the administration’s personal Gestapo. There can be no more
funding for ICE when it kills people on
the streets, incites violence, and defies
the law.
When Democrats have the opportunity, we will investigate and publicly
prosecute anybody complicit in these
murders, from Kristi Noem to Mr.
Bovino, all the way down to the ICE
and CBP agents who pulled the trigger
on Renee Good and Alex Pretti. It is
also important to investigate the
agents who have subjected immigrants,
including children, to extraordinary
cruelty.
Before wrapping up, I want to touch
on something else that has been missed
with regard to the abuses, and that is
data privacy.
For years, I have come to this floor
to sound the alarm on the growing appetite of ICE to exploit legal loopholes
that allow the Federal Government to
buy up troves of Americans’ most private
information,
including
geolocation data. We now see exactly
how the Trump administration is abusing that information. ICE is using
Palantir apps to collect biometric data
and run protesters through facial recognition systems. This amounts to labeling people as domestic terrorists
just for exercising their First Amendment right to peaceably protest and report on Federal agents. It is a clear
threat to the constitutional rights of
Americans, and I am working with
Senator MARKEY and others to stop
these abuses.
Second, ICE is buying Americans’
private location data from sleazy data
brokers through a legal loophole that
allows the government to get around
the Fourth Amendment. This isn’t a
red issue or a blue issue; it is a constitutional issue. The American Government has no business in purchasing
the location data of American citizens.
So I have proposed the Fourth Amendment Is Not For Sale Act. That would
put a stop to the government being
able to buy up troves of Americans’
personal data from anybody who has
got a credit card. We ought to be pushing to get it passed into black-letter
law as soon as possible so that Agencies like ICE don’t have access to the
personal information of millions of
Americans.
Finally, my investigators exposed
that ICE is using government data
from State motor vehicle departments
and other Federal Agencies. It has refused to answer questions as to how
that data is being used. So we are leading a fight here in the Senate to rein
them in.
I have warned States that care about
their residents: They had better stop
sharing DMV data and enabling ICE
abuses. ICE is using this information
to target Americans on our streets.
My view is that it is important for
the Senate to recognize that data pri-

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

vacy is now a life-and-death issue in
America. As long as Trump’s agents
are shooting American citizens dead on
the street, this administration having
access to our private location data and
other information is a threat to
everybody’s safety.
I will close with this. My parents fled
the Nazis during the very real threat of
growing authoritarianism in Germany.
What the Trump administration is offering us is, indeed, the authoritarian
playbook: Attack the weakest in order
to cow the rest of us.
My family knows a thing or two
about watching a democracy slide toward authoritarian rule. I know a little
bit about what comes next.
The American people have a right to
feel and be safe. No one should be
forced to live in a country where they
are terrified that Federal agents might
bust their door open in the middle of
the night. I hope that all Americans
who have a chance to follow this discussion and learn about it, in the days
ahead, will speak out and that all
Americans will never, never, never
yield their liberties.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
RICKETTS). The Senator from Texas.
Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, it has
certainly been an eventful several
days. Of course, across the country,
people are still shoveling out roads and
sidewalks from the dramatic snowfall
we had, and, of course, many of us have
struggled to get back to work because
of disrupted flights. Some parts of
Texas, believe it or not, had as much as
10 inches of snow. I know that is not a
big deal in the great State of Nebraska,
but it is a big deal in Texas because
Texans cannot drive on the snow and
ice. Anybody who has seen some of the
videos of people trying to drive on the
ice in Texas knows we are not used to
that.
But a severe snowstorm was not the
only thing to hit our country over the
last weekend. As we all know too well,
an ICU nurse for the VA named Alex
Pretti was killed in an interaction with
Border Patrol agents in Minneapolis.
We are still learning more about what
transpired that day, but, unfortunately, what we see too often when
tragic events like this occur is that
people jump to conclusions early without knowing all the facts.
Regardless of what we don’t yet
know, what we do know is that it is always a tragedy when a human life has
ended.
I applaud President Trump for taking
the steps to review this and for sending
Tom Homan to Minneapolis to try to
deescalate and restore law and order in
that State. The President has also indicated that he has talked to Governor
Walz and that they are working toward
a productive solution to what has become an untenable state of affairs in
Minneapolis.
One thing is absolutely clear: We
need better collaboration and cooperation—maybe a little more cooperation

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.005

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

than collaboration—between Federal
and local law enforcement in order to
ensure that our laws are being followed
while preventing further loss of life in
our country.
When State and local officials, like
the Governor of Minnesota and the
mayor of Minneapolis, use their positions of authority to vilify Federal law
enforcement officials, bad things can
happen. The Governor of Minnesota has
compared Federal agents to a modernday Gestapo. How reprehensible and irresponsible is that, particularly coming from a guy who wanted to be the
Vice President of the United States.
Obviously, Governor Newsom in California has used similar language. Governor Walz has described his State as
fighting a war against the Federal Government, and he called the Trump administration’s enforcement operations
‘‘dangerous’’ and ‘‘sensationalized.’’
I will tell you what makes situations
like those that happened in Minneapolis two times now where American citizens have lost their lives—
what makes that more likely to happen
is when Governors and mayors, people
who are supposedly in positions of responsibility, actually encourage people
to interfere with law enforcement operations. And we know that now, on at
least two occasions, they can end with
tragic results. This is completely unacceptable conduct by a Governor and a
mayor. What they should do is stop
their sanctuary policies. We don’t see
the same sort of law enforcement operations in Texas or in Nebraska; we see
it in sanctuary States and sanctuary
cities, where local and State law enforcement are denied the chance to collaborate and cooperate with Federal
law enforcement authorities. What
happens in States like Texas, which
does cooperate with law enforcement,
is when somebody is detained, let’s say,
by the police in the local jail and if
they find out they are wanted by ICE,
they will simply transfer them from
the local jurisdiction to the custody of
ICE so that ICE doesn’t have to go out
on the street and conduct raids in
order to detain people who are not lawfully here in the United States.
All this may seem like fun and games
to blue State Governors and sanctuary
city mayors until somebody gets hurt,
but now, as I said, two people have
tragically lost their lives. We have the
Governor and the mayor cheering people on to do more of the same.
This has to deescalate, and I am optimistic that Tom Homan, given his long
career as a professional law enforcement officer, somebody applauded by
President Obama for his work but obviously who also has the confidence of
President Trump—I am glad he is there
in Minneapolis, talking to the mayor,
talking to the Governor, and hopefully
trying to get them to tone down their
rhetoric and not encourage more actions which could also result in tragedy.
While we are waiting to learn more
details—yes, still waiting to learn

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S305

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

more details—about what exactly happened, I believe State and local officials have an obligation to tone down
their rhetoric because what they are
doing is they are vilifying the brave
men and women who actually are enforcing the laws that Congress has
passed. They are calling them Nazis or
the Gestapo.
Of course, maybe you should expect
this from the same crowd that called
for defunding the police—how did that
work out?—or for abolishing ICE. Abolish ICE? Are these people who want no
enforcement of our immigration laws?
Well, apparently so.
ICE—Immigration and Customs Enforcement—and Customs and Border
Protection officers whom I know personally and know well by reputation
have an incredibly difficult and dangerous job to do, especially in the face
of well-organized and paid-off leftwing
agitators.
But again, underlying all of this, are
the sanctuary city policies implemented by Governor Walz and others
that have prevented law enforcement
officials from conducting their work in
a safe and orderly fashion.
We have seen what happens when the
local police are instructed not to protect ICE officers and Border Patrol
agents doing their job as happened in
Chicago. Ordinary citizens have been
encouraged to interfere with law enforcement operations. The incendiary
rhetoric from the Governor encouraged
ordinary citizens to put themselves
into harm’s way.
Ultimately, the confrontations between citizens and law enforcement
culminated in last week’s incident that
ended in tragedy, and I sincerely
hope—I know we all do—that this does
not happen again. None of us want to
see lives lost, whether at the hands of
law enforcement or at the hands of
criminals.
What happened to Alex Pretti was
tragic, but we also need to remind people what happened to Laken Riley,
Kayla
Hamilton,
and
Jocelyn
Nungaray, that what happened to them
was also tragic and could have been
prevented. Their deaths could have
been prevented if the immigration laws
currently on the books had simply been
enforced. Each of them were killed by
people who had no business being in
this country illegally and committed
these murders because of the Biden administration’s open border policies
that just opened the door to anybody
and everybody who wanted to come to
the United States.
That is what sensible enforcement of
our immigration laws is designed to
prevent, to allow people into the country who play by the books, play by the
rules, and follow the law whom we welcome into this country.
The United States still is the most
generous country in the world when it
comes to welcoming immigrants. We
naturalize roughly 1 million people a
year who raise their hand and pledge
allegiance to the United States and

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

their willingness to support the Constitution and laws of this great country.
Legal immigration is a great boon
and great advantage the United States
has, but illegal immigration has been
an unmitigated disaster.
As I think back on the Biden era of
open borders, what breaks my heart is
the fact that 500,000 children were welcomed into the United States, so-called
unaccompanied minors, placed with
sponsors, frequently unvetted and
without adequate supervision or followup, and were simply lost. We don’t
know whether they were recruited into
gangs, used for sex trafficking, or
forced into involuntary labor.
Those half-a-million children were
victims of this open border, lawless immigration policy of the Biden administration. President Trump was elected
based on a promise to secure the border, which he has done, but we also
need to make sure that people who
have exhausted all of their legal remedies or have criminal records need to
be prioritized and removed from the
country.
Right now, there are roughly 280,000
people who are in that category. But to
have the Governor and the mayor encourage people to interfere in a lawful
enforcement operation can result in
tragedy, as we have seen.
We now know that these two tragedies are being exploited by Democrats
in the Senate who refuse to pass the
normal appropriations bills that have
now passed the House and have come
here in order to pay the bills, keep the
lights on, and keep the government
operational. They are using these incidents to threaten another closure, another shutdown of the Federal Government like they did a short time ago—
the longest shutdown in American history.
Democrats are using this tragedy as
a scapegoat to try to force changes to
government funding that they know
cannot be done in the time we have left
before the current continuing resolution expires.
This is nothing but an excuse—a
lame excuse—by Senate Democrats to
delay and disrupt the work that the
American people elected us to do. We
know that Senate Democrats have used
this playbook recently, and the American people have seen how it ends.
It solves nothing. When the government reopens, you have the same problems you had beforehand that you just
are ignoring or kicking the can down
the road, and it imposes an unnecessary burden on so many Americans who
don’t get paid, who get furloughed.
It created not only financial hardship
for millions of Americans, but this was
all for what? To simply make a political statement. But I hope for the sake
of the Texans I represent, the 32 million Texans, that Democrats have
learned something from their recent
lesson. We are using their livelihoods—
holding their livelihoods as a hostage
for political purposes. This is not the

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.007

S28JAPT1

S306

time for another government shutdown.
In order for President Trump to continue the work he started to restore
trust between local and Federal officials in Minnesota, the Department of
Homeland Security—and, yes, that includes ICE and Border Patrol—must be
funded.
We can have conversations about
what additional oversight is required,
what additional laws we should consider, but not at the expense of shutting down the government.
Again, what happened over the weekend was a tragedy, but it is not a reason to punish 330 million Americans by
shutting down the government as a political stunt.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Wyoming.
Ms. LUMMIS. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the following
Senators be permitted to speak prior to
the scheduled recess; myself for up to
10 minutes, Senator KELLY for up to 5
minutes, Senator MURRAY for up to 10
minutes.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
HOLOCAUST REMEMBRANCE DAY

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Ms. LUMMIS. Mr. President, I rise
today to remind us of what we commemorated yesterday: Holocaust Remembrance Day.
During the Holocaust, the Nazi regime and its collaborators systematically murdered 6 million Jewish men,
women, and children. Two-thirds of Europe’s Jewish population was killed in
concentration camps, death camps,
ghettos, and mass shootings. Entire
communities were wiped out, centuries
of Jewish life and culture erased.
On Holocaust Remembrance Day, we
remember not just the numbers but the
individuals. Each one represents a
world of possibilities that were destroyed. And yet, we are living in a day
and age where Holocaust deniers are
growing in number, and anti-Semitism
is on the rise.
In 2024, the FBI recorded its highest
number ever of anti-Jewish crimes,
nearly 2,000 crimes accounting for
nearly 70 percent all religiously motivated hate crimes.
This is unthinkable and totally unacceptable. Jews make up only 2 percent
of our U.S. population. Yet they bear
the brunt of religiously motivated violence.
The United States-Israel relationship
serves vital American interests. Israel
is our most reliable democratic ally in
the Middle East and shares intelligence
that has prevented terrorist attacks on
Americans here on our soil and against
American interests worldwide.
Our military cooperation advances
technology that protects American
servicemembers. Israel’s Iron Dome
and other defensive innovations were
developed with U.S. partnership and
now inform our own defense systems.
A strong Israel helps counter Iranian
influence and terrorism that threatens

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

not just the region but American citizens at home and abroad. This relationship is built on shared values, democracy, the rule of law, and human rights
in a region where these principles are
rare. Supporting Israel’s security is
supporting American security.
You can visit Civil War cemeteries,
Revolutionary War cemeteries, World
War I and II cemeteries in Europe,
Vietnam war cemeteries clear up until
today and see the Star of David on
some of those gravestones. You can see
them out at our famous cemetery here
in Washington, DC, where people who
served our Nation and gave their last
measure of devotion—and there are
Stars of David among all of them.
This is an important American value
that we must acknowledge and make
sure never happens again.
Finally, I want to say a few words
about responsibility. ‘‘Never again’’
must be more than words. It must be a
commitment backed by action. We
must speak up when anti-Semitism
rears its head on our campuses, our
streets, and online.
We must distinguish between legitimate political discourse and hate disguised as activism. And we must protect Jewish students who should feel
safe pursuing their education. We must
stand with the Jewish people—both
here and in their ancient homeland—
when they face existential threats.
History will judge us not by our
words today but by our actions tomorrow.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Arizona.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. KELLY. Mr. President, like
every American, over the past few
weeks, I have watched the videos of
Americans being shoved and beaten
and pepper-sprayed and shot and killed
by Federal immigration agents.
Over
the
weekend,
Americans
watched what happened to Alex Pretti
in Minneapolis, a U.S. citizen, an ICU
nurse at the VA who took care of veterans. He was shot and killed by Federal agents for no good reason. His
family lost someone they loved, and it
all happened in the blink of an eye.
Before that, it was Renee Good.
Renee was a mother and a wife. She
was shot and killed in her car, and her
family will never see her again.
Two Americans are dead at the hands
of their government. That should demand the highest levels of accountability. It is that simple. Instead, this
administration has lied to the American people. They have slandered these
Americans as terrorists. They have
told us not to believe what we see with
our own eyes.
They blamed Alex Pretti because he
was in lawful possession of a firearm.
They have tried to block the investigations into what happened. We also
know that these are not isolated incidents.
Just the other day, ICE conducted a
series of workplace raids at a sports

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

bar in Phoenix, places where families
go to just have some wings and watch
a game.
The agents wore masks and tactical
gear, and I watched a video of ICE officers doing a driveby, spraying a woman
in the face who was just standing on
the sidewalk.
They sprayed her with mace. She was
not doing anything wrong. They violated her constitutional rights. These
are the actions of a rogue Agency that
is storming cities, violating the constitutional rights of Americans, and
creating volatile situations where tragedies happen.
This is not making Americans safer.
It is clearly doing the opposite thing,
and it has to stop. I am the son of two
police officers. From a very young age,
I learned that law enforcement should
exist to serve and protect people.
We can enforce our laws without this
chaos. We can enforce our laws without
Federal agents killing people—killing
people in the streets of American cities.
We should demand that, as Senators,
as Republicans and Democrats, as
Americans. We should all demand better. And we should use our power to
make that happen. That is why I will
not vote for the Department of Homeland Security budget this week, because that Agency needs an overhaul
from the top down and the bottom up.
That is why the head of Homeland
Security, Kristi Noem, and the guy
who everybody knows is actually making the decisions and calling the shots
and running the show, Stephen Miller—
both of them should be out of jobs because they have lost the trust of the
American people.
And that is why I introduced the
Stop Excessive Force in Immigration
Act to rein in and stop this abuse of
power. This bill sets limits on the use
of force and the use of firearms by immigration agents.
It restricts the use of tear gas, flashbang grenades, and pepper balls. It requires body cameras to be used, and it
restricts the use of face masks. It requires accountability and transparency
so that when somebody is hurt or
killed, the American people will get
some answers. This is pretty basic
stuff. It should be what all Americans
expect from law enforcement, and it
should be something that both Republicans and Democrats alike can support, because I believe that we are better than this. I believe we can keep
communities safe without this chaos.
But that depends on all of us stepping
up right now, at this moment, before
another American ends up dead in the
streets.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Washington.
Mrs. MURRAY. Mr. President, there
are two simple truths here: One, there
is absolutely no reason for a shutdown.
Five of the bills before us, covering 95
percent of the remaining budget, everyone agrees we can pass. And, two, after

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.008

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

the horrific killing of Alex Pretti last
weekend, after so many vile, shameless
lies from Trump officials, and after the
flagrant abuses we are seeing from ICE
and CBP agents, it is painfully and brutally clear this out-of-control Department must be reined in, and Congress
must take action to make that happen.
What we have seen happening in Minnesota and all across the country is
simply un-American. Trump and Noem
sent ICE and Border Patrol into Minneapolis, not on a targeted mission to
retrieve actual criminals but to go
door to door terrorizing communities
and asking to see the papers of anyone
who doesn’t fit their idea of what an
American looks like.
Secretary Noem and her masked
agents are haphazardly dragging off
people with no criminal record, people
who are here legally, people who are
citizens. And, of course, they are even
dragging off children.
No one has to take my word for it.
We all saw them march a man—a citizen—out of his house in the freezing
cold in nothing but his underwear. We
all saw them cart away a 5-year-old
with his Spiderman backpack and a
bunny hat on. And when people protested peacefully, the Trump administration cracked down with a level of
force as brutal as it was unjustified.
Again, no one needs to take my word
for it. We all heard about the family
who had their car tear-gassed on their
way back from a basketball game, and
their baby stopped breathing and needed emergency care. We all watched the
woman who was dragged out of her car
on the way to a doctor’s appointment.
We all saw that unforgettable photo of
an unarmed man pinned on the ground
with one of Trump’s Federal officers
pepper-spraying him directly in the
face.
We all bore witness to the murder of
Renee Good, and then, last weekend,
we all saw the horrific killing of Alex
Pretti, a lawful observer, exercising his
rights, murdered in cold blood by Federal agents.
And how did Trump’s team respond?
They lied about what we all saw with
our own eyes. They slandered Alex as a
domestic terrorist. This man was a VA
nurse. He was beloved by his patients.
They falsely claimed that he wanted
to massacre law enforcement when he
was simply exercising his constitutional First Amendment rights.
They said he attacked law enforcement when he was only helping a
woman who law enforcement had assaulted. They said he brandished a gun
when he never touched it. In fact, he
was already disarmed when they shot
him in the back.
And yet, right now, the only Department they will let investigate this
tragedy is the Department that was responsible for it.
That cannot be how things work in
this country, not if we are going to
keep the democracy that we all cherish. We need real, independent investigation. We need real accountability,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S307

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

and we need real reforms. And until
that happens, until we begin reining in
this out-of-control Department, we
cannot pass the DHS bill as it stands.
The DHS bill needs to be split off
from this larger package, and that
needs to happen so we can prevent
other parts of the government from
shutting down while we work to reform
the DHS bill.
Now, I want to be straight with everyone: Not passing the Homeland bill
will not stop ICE right now. Why? Because Republicans already gave ICE
tens of billions of dollars without a single Democratic vote when they passed
their ‘‘Big Ugly Bill.’’
As the junior Senator from Kentucky
has pointed out, even without the DHS
bill, ICE will have many times its annual budget because of the bill the Republicans passed last summer.
But splitting off the Homeland bill
does ensure that Congress is forced to
reckon with this issue. It does give us
the opportunity to take much needed
action to protect Americans from this
out-of-control Department. And to be
clear, this is not just what Democrats
are demanding; it is what the vast majority of Americans are demanding.
People in this country are absolutely
horrified. They are outraged that our
government is gunning down U.S. citizens on the street with impunity. And
this just cannot continue.
With each hour that goes by, we are
seeing more and more Republicans
agree that the status quo is unacceptable, that there must be change, and
that Congress must do something. We,
Congress, must do something, and
there is a very reasonable and straightforward path here now.
There is a legislative package of six
funding bills at the desk right now,
right up here. Five of the funding bills
in this package we all overwhelmingly
agree on. We all agree on cancer research. We all agree on childcare funding. We all agree on funding roads and
bridges and housing. We agree on paying our troops and supporting small
businesses and so much else that is in
those bills. And, by the way, the House,
in fact, passed those five bills overwhelmingly.
So let’s just remove Homeland Security and pass the remaining five bills
without delay. There is no reason to
wait, and we can get to work right
away to negotiate a Homeland bill that
includes the reforms and the accountability everyone knows is needed.
I am here. I am ready to roll up my
sleeves and get to work with Chair
COLLINS and our colleagues to craft a
bill with serious oversight and accountability so we can simply rein in
the abuses that we are seeing.
But if the Republicans refuse to work
with us on DHS and refuse to put up
the remaining five bills for a vote in
the meantime, they will be choosing to
shut down the government across all of
the Agencies impacted, cutting off
funding for lifesaving clinical trials;
paychecks for troops, air traffic controllers, and so much more.

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

We should not let that happen. So
let’s pass the five bills ahead of the
Friday deadline. Let’s focus separately
on DHS, where it is clear that accountability and reform cannot wait.
We do this all the time—move forward on the areas where we have an
agreement and keep negotiating on the
other. That is what needs to happen
here and now.
And, look, if the House has to come
back to prevent a shutdown, so be it.
That is part of the job they have.
Back in 2018, after the Senate cleared
a spending bill and we went home for
the holidays, President Trump did a 180
and had the House change the bill and
send it back to us.
Do you know what we did? We came
back, and we voted.
That is it. That is our job. That is
what the House can do. So there is no
need for a shutdown. There is no need
for a delay. And there is every need for
serious reforms.
Let’s get it done.
I yield the floor.
f

RECESS
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate stands
in recess until 2:15.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 12:42 p.m.
recessed until 2:15 p.m. and reassembled when called to order by the Presiding Officer (Mr. BANKS).
f

CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS
ACT, 2026—Motion to Proceed—Continued
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Iowa.
MARCH FOR LIFE

Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, on
January 23, people from all over our
country came to Washington, DC, to
celebrate the 53rd annual March for
Life. These peaceful movements are exercising their free speech, their free association, and their right to petition
government for redress of grievances—
all First Amendment constitutional
rights. They exercise this through
using the Constitution to express their
views.
This year’s theme of the March for
Life was ‘‘Life is a Gift,’’ so they were
inviting folks to embrace the joy of innocent human life in the womb. They
marched in solidarity with mothers
who deserve better than abortion; who
deserve life, love, support, and encouragement. They marched, hoping for a
day when all people see babies as the
blessings these babies are, for a day
when the word ‘‘abortion’’ is unthinkable.
So I say to this group of marchers:
Thank you. You came to Washington
on January 23 for the 53rd year in a row
to call attention to the value of life.
Thank you for your faithful example of
what it means to be pro-life.
In Congress, we must do all we can to
support mothers and their babies, and I

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.010

S28JAPT1

S308

hope I am doing that by being a proud
sponsor of the bipartisan bill that I call
the Healthy Moms and Babies legislation, which would better support pregnant moms to receive high-quality
healthcare no matter the ZIP Code
they live in. I am also a cosponsor of
the Pregnant Students’ Rights bill—a
pro-mother, pro-family legislation ensuring pregnant mothers receive support while pursuing their dreams. I
look forward to continuing this work.
TRIBUTE TO JAMES RICE

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Mr. President, I come to the floor to
say bon voyage to a very talented and
trusted employee of mine who has
worked hard for the people of the State
of Iowa. When I say bon voyage, as I
will say later, he probably has the
prospects of being a college professor, a
think tank researcher, or maybe even a
diplomat.
So, today, I come to the floor to pay
tribute to a trusted, loyal member of
my staff whom I am honored to say has
been a member of Team Grassley for 25
years, and I am glad to have him here
on the floor with me right at this
minute.
James Rice will leave his post as my
legislative director at the end of this
month. He has devoted the past quarter
century in service to the people of Iowa
here in the U.S. Senate. Now, he didn’t
start out to be the important staffer he
is right now because he started as an
intern in 1997. That summer, he even
served in some positions that don’t get
a lot of attention because they are behind the scenes.
He served as boots on the ground during my sixth Foreign Ambassadors
Tour. For over two decades, I organized
every other summer an Ambassadors
trade tour across Iowa. I invited members of the foreign diplomatic corps
here in Washington, DC, along with
their spouses serving here in the Nation’s Capital, to join me for a
weeklong road trip to showcase my
home State’s people, our products, and
our places.
From securing overnight stays in the
homes of Iowans to keeping the trade
delegation on schedule visiting farms,
factories, and always ending at the
Iowa State Fair, this devoted team
player, James, was among the many
helping hands working behind the
scenes to make the week run smoothly.
That just might be why James first got
bitten by the foreign policy bug that
has fostered his interest and expertise
in foreign affairs and international
unity and diplomacy and why he has
been a valuable adviser to me on foreign affairs.
James is a native of Davenport, IA,
majoring in political science, history,
and government. After graduating from
Drake University in Des Moines, he
joined my staff here in Washington,
DC, 3 years after being an intern in the
year 2000.
James has referred to the Grassley
team as the embassy for Iowa. With
tireless conviction, he managed his
work with proficiency. James exempli-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

fies the Biblical ‘‘Parable of the Talents.’’ He has been a good and faithful
servant to the people of Iowa. I will
miss his very scrupulous attention to
detail and ability to finesse bicameral,
bipartisan victories for Iowa. I could
always count on his counsel and valued
his wisdom.
James has an uncommon mastery of
parliamentary procedure here in the
U.S. Senate, an encyclopedic knowledge of Iowa, and, of course, he shares
my love for history.
As legislative director, James cultivated exceptional depth of knowledge
in his policy portfolio, including education, foreign policy, and the rules of
the U.S. Senate.
When I hire people to join my staff, I
tell them I expect them to do their job
the Grassley way, and that means
adopting my approach to representative government, which is to treat people with respect, do your homework,
and go the extra mile for the people of
Iowa. James worked tirelessly to provide outstanding constituent service.
One of my priorities as the senior
Senator for Iowa is to respond to every
phone call, letter, and email I get from
Iowans. James was instrumental in his
leadership to revolutionize my constituent
correspondence
operation.
Some may say that he was a tyrant
over what we call in the office ‘‘old
mail.’’ To that, I would say he was
doing just as I asked: ensuring Iowans
receive a thoughtful and timely response to their questions and concerns.
During my 45 years of holding county
meetings in each one of the 99 counties—during those meetings, I want to
make sure things are going right in my
office. I say ‘‘Write me a nasty letter’’
if they haven’t heard back from me regarding their email or their postal
mail or if they left their name and address in a telephone call. They get a
written response. So, thanks in large
part to this man’s meticulous efforts,
that doesn’t happen very often, that I
am told somebody did not get a response to their letter.
As legislative director, he mentored
scores of legislative correspondents
over the years, many of whom climbed
the staff ladder to become legislative
assistants or pursue careers off of Capitol Hill. He also cultivated longstanding relations with Iowans, particularly educators from across the
State as well as Ambassadors from
across the world.
A rock-ribbed conservative, James
practices what he preaches. He is a
warrior for freedom and liberty. Each
year, he has hosted a tea in our office
in October to celebrate Margaret
Thatcher’s birthday because he so admired her as a leader and Prime Minister of Great Britain.
In another quirk, James also spearheaded an annual observance of St.
John’s Day—a summer solstice celebration in Estonia. That is when the Estonian people celebrate Victory Day to
mark the defeat of the German troops
in their war for independence in 1919.

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

This goes to show that James doesn’t
do anything halfheartedly. Although a
dyed-in-the-wool Iowan, he is a dual
citizen of Estonia. In fact, he loved the
Baltic nation so much, he built a house
there.
As I mentioned, James is leaving my
staff and his Senate service at the end
of this month. He will dive into academia and passion for foreign policy to
obtain a doctor of philosophy in
statecraft and strategy at the Institute
of World Politics, where he also earned
a master’s degree.
I told him I liked his speeches so
much that I hope he will continue to
keep me in mind when he feels a speech
coming on to bring much needed historical context to these modern-day
problems that we face around here.
So, James, Barbara and I wish you
all the best, a great future, and we
thank you for your decades of service
to the people of Iowa.
When you announced your departure
to your fellow staff members, you said
you will always be a part of the Grassley family, and I couldn’t agree more. I
like that you will do just that—be a
member of the family.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Massachusetts.
SHOOTING OF ALEX PRETTI

Ms. WARREN. Mr. President, ‘‘Please
get the truth out about our son. He was
a good man’’—those are the words of
Michael and Susan Pretti, the parents
of Alex Pretti, who over the weekend
was killed by masked Federal agents in
Minneapolis. I am here to be part of
getting the truth out.
Masked Federal agents shot and
killed Alex Pretti, an American citizen, in broad daylight. Alex was an
ICU nurse at the Minneapolis VA hospital—a nurse for veterans. He was a
son, a brother, a friend, a caretaker.
And he was killed while he was trying
to help a woman who had been pushed
to the ground by a Federal agent.
The last words that Alex spoke on
this Earth were ‘‘Are you all right?’’
Those are the words of a good man
trying to help someone who had been
knocked down by an out-of-control ICE
agent. Do not let anyone tell you otherwise.
And Mr. Pretti was not the first. Seventeen days earlier, ICE agents shot
and killed Renee Good, a 37-year-old
American citizen and mom dropping off
her kid at school. She had stuffed animals in her glove compartment. While
ICE agents cursed at her, her last
words on this Earth were: ‘‘I’m not
mad at you.’’
There have been more incidents. ICE
agents detained Liam, a 5-year-old boy
who was literally ripped off the streets
by the strap of his Spider-Man backpack—a preschooler.
In Massachusetts, Marcelo Gomes da
Silva, a high schooler, was arrested by
ICE on his way to volleyball practice.
And Rumeysa Ozturk, a student at
Tufts University, was cornered by six
masked agents, shoved into an unmarked van, and taken to a detention
facility in Louisiana.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.012

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

It goes on and on and on, story after
story after story.
The people ICE grabbed up, the people they shot are not threats to you
and me. They are not violent criminals
that Trump promised to go after. They
are not, as Trump said, ‘‘the worst of
the worst.’’ No, these are our neighbors. They are our friends. They are
our colleagues. They are people who
treat us when we are sick. The risk is
not from them. The risk increasingly
comes from out-of-control ICE agents
who can’t follow the basic training
manual that our local police, our State
police, and our National Guard are all
trained to follow.
This invasion by ICE is not making
anyone in America safer. If we don’t
put a stop to it, these masked agents
are going to kill more people. We are
at the turning point in our country.
What we do next now is in front of the
U.S. Senate, in front of my colleagues
here today.
This week, we are tasked with funding the government, and one part
stands out. Last summer, Trump and
the Republicans lavished ICE with $75
billion. That is more than their annual
budget for 7 years. And maybe that is
why ICE is handing out $50,000 recruiting bonuses. In this budget, Trump and
the Republicans want to reward ICE
with an additional $10 billion in funding. That is right. Donald Trump wants
us to write another check, hand it over
to ICE, and let them keep rolling in the
dough.
But here is my view: I am a no. I am
a hell no.
We cannot give one more penny to
Trump’s ICE while its masked, poorly
trained agents terrorize people all
across this country. It is time for the
U.S. Senate to step up and stop ICE’s
violence. We must stand united, and we
must fight back, and we must do it
now.
I want to be clear. If it were up to
me, Congress would completely overhaul ICE, strip the Agency down to
studs, repeal billions in Trump’s bloated spending, and end these abuses entirely. I am going to keep fighting for
that.
But there are also some immediate
commonsense steps that we can take
right now. Here is some of what I am
fighting for: One, end ICE’s violence.
No more roving patrols and profiling
people on the street. No mere treating
people like they are guilty just because
of their skin color or because they
speak with an accent. No more threatening people with guns just because
they are recording what is going on.
Two, follow the law. ICE must follow
the same rules as everyone else in law
enforcement. Get a warrant from an
independent judge before barging into
people’s homes and snatching people
from their families. And make no mistake, there should be real consequences
for anyone who knocks down someone’s
door without a real warrant. This is
the United States of America, and the
last I checked, the Constitution still
matters. We must enforce it.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S309

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

And, three, accountability. It is
about time that Border Patrol and ICE
wear a damn badge. No more masked
secret police.
Let me say it again. No more masked
secret police.
And real accountability means accountability for Renee Good; it means
accountability for Alex Pretti; it
means accountability for every other
victim of these Federal agents. DHS
must cooperate with State and local officials for real independent investigations of these shootings. End these
coverups. We need transparency and
accountability for victims of ICE’s violence.
Part of the reason that ICE’s officers
can act like they have no oversight is
that Donald Trump and the Republicans in Congress prefunded ICE for
years in their One Big Beautiful Bill.
As things stand right now, ICE can
skate by for years without getting a
budget and without any oversight from
Congress.
You know those healthcare cuts that
are closing hospitals and causing people’s health insurance premiums to
spike? That is the money that is now
being used by ICE to terrorize our communities. That is wrong. Congress has
the power to claw back those funds.
Congress needs to use that power and
take back that money so that Congress
has meaningful oversight over an outof-control ICE.
And that should just be the start.
I am urging every single Senator—
Democrat and Republican—to vote no
on
this
budget
bill
and
stop
bankrolling ICE’s abuses.
I want to put a finer point on this.
Republicans control the White House.
Republicans control the Senate. Republicans control the House of Representatives. Democrats are ready to rein in
this rogue Agency, but we need Republicans in Congress to stop this violence
as well.
I know that there are Republicans
right now who are seeing what we are
seeing in Minnesota, and they know it
is wrong. It is time to speak out. Silence is complicity. Grow a spine. Show
some
backbone.
Being
disturbed
doesn’t change anything, and the ICE
agents who are waving around loaded
guns know that. Republicans in the
Senate have the power to do something
and to start righting these wrongs.
Help the Democrats put meaningful
constraints on ICE. Help our people be
safe.
To everyone who is angry, I am angry
too. I am furious. And I am here in the
Senate to fight back for you. But it is
in moments like this that we must resist the urge for that anger and fear to
take over. It is time to turn our anger
into action.
I want to end with this. I saw a post
by Alex Pretti’s student that I wanted
to read excerpts from into the RECORD.
This is all a direct quote:
I was Alex Pretti’s final nursing student.
For the past four months, I stood shoulder to
shoulder with him during my capstone pre-

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

ceptorship at the Minneapolis VA Hospital.
There he trained me to care for the sickest
of the sick as an ICU nurse. He taught me
how to care for arterial and central lines, the
intricacies of managing multiple IVs filled
with lifesaving solutions, and how to watch
over every heartbeat, every breath, and
every flicker of life, ready to act the moment they wavered. . . . Alex carried patience, compassion and calm as a steady
light within him. Even at the very end, that
light was there. I recognized his familiar
stillness and signature calm composure shining through during those unbearable final
moments captured on camera.
It does not surprise me that his final words
were, ‘‘Are you okay?’’ Caring for people was
at the core of who he was. He was incapable
of causing harm. . . . He spoke out for justice and peace whenever he could, not only
out of obligation, but out of a belief that we
are more connected than divided, and that
communication would bring us together.
Please honor my friend by standing up for
peace, preferably with a cup of black coffee
in hand and a couple of pieces of candy in
your pocket, just as he would. . . . Step outside with your dog, breathe in the world,
hike or bike as he loved to do, and let yourself find peace in the quiet moments within
nature. Stand up for justice and speak with
those whose views differ from your own. Hold
your beliefs with strength, but always extend love outward, even in the face of adversity.
Take one step, no matter how small, to
help heal our world. Through these acts,
carry his life forward in his name. Let his
legacy continue to heal.

Like many of you, I see the video of
his death, and I am gutted. I see him
lying on the ground as two ICE agents
pump a total of 10 bullets into him. I
see his lifeless body on that cold Minneapolis street, and I feel sadness and
anger and horror down to my bones.
But here is what gives me slivers of
hope. It is every single person who is
speaking out and who is refusing to
stay silent in the face of these injustices. It is the post from his last student. It is the hundreds of thousands of
Minnesotans who haven’t been baited
into violence, but, instead, who continue to show up and peacefully protest. They are a reminder that now is
the time to dig deep, stand up, and say
clearly what ICE is doing is wrong, and
we can stop it. We must stop it.
It is time to get ICE out because if
we don’t speak up, we are complicit in
this violence. If we don’t speak up, we
are giving our OK to a Federal Agency
that is openly and aggressively violating the Constitution. If we don’t
speak up, we are giving up on our democracy and our country.
It is time to speak up. It is time to
make meaningful change. And that
change starts right here, right now in
the U.S. Senate.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
Democratic whip.
Mr. DURBIN. First, I want to thank
my colleague from the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts Senator WARREN.
That was a powerful, moving, absolutely necessary speech, and I am glad
I was here to hear you deliver it.
Thank you.
Mr. President, earlier this month,
the Nation watched in horror as social

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.014

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S310

media was flooded with images and videos of a Federal immigration officer
shooting and killing an American citizen, Renee Good, as part of the Trump
administration’s military enforcement
operation in Minneapolis.
Now, fresh on the heels of that tragedy, another one has struck. This
weekend, Federal agents gunned down
yet another American in Minneapolis,
Alex Pretti, a 37-year-old ICU nurse in
a VA hospital in Minneapolis.
I am going to show a photo of that
scene, which is graphic, but I am afraid
it is necessary to appreciate the horror
of the moment.
This photo shows the last second
when the ICE agent killed Alex Pretti
on the streets of Minneapolis. In his
right hand is his camera, and his left
hand is holding the ground—no gun obvious, no effort to resist obvious. This
was a moment when this man lost his
life. He was characterized afterward as
an assassin, as a domestic terrorist.
The photo tells the story.
The killing of Alex Pretti has further
intensified tensions in a city already
reeling from the President’s aggressive
campaign of terror. What was the
Trump administration’s immediate response when they heard of this second
killing in Minneapolis? It was not to
bring down the temperature but, instead, to rush to the American people
with one message: Don’t believe your
eyes. Don’t believe what you are seeing. It is the same playbook they used
after the killing of Renee Good and
after other Federal immigration officer-involved shootings and incidents.
Following the fatal shooting of Ms.
Good, President of the United States
Donald Trump falsely claimed she
‘‘violently, willfully and viciously ran
over [an] ICE Officer.’’
In response to the killings of both
Ms. Good and Mr. Pretti, Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem labeled
their actions as ‘‘domestic terrorism.’’
Attorney General Pam Bondi, in a
letter sent to Minnesota Governor Tim
Walz, effectively tried to blackmail the
State, demanding that the Governor of
Minnesota turn over the voter rolls of
that State in exchange for Bondi’s efforts to pull back Federal immigration
enforcement officers. In a court hearing earlier this week, an attorney representing the State described Bondi’s
request as a ‘‘ransom note.’’
Why has this President targeted this
city and other democratically led cities?
Trump claims he is targeting these
cities because local elected officials
have released ‘‘violent criminal illegal
aliens’’ from State custody. The claim
does not hold up. Governor Walz eloquently refuted it in a recent column
in the Wall Street Journal.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the Wall Street Journal editorial ‘‘Tim Walz: The Un-American
Assault on Minnesota’’ be printed in
the RECORD.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

[Jan. 26, 2026]
TIM WALZ: THE UN-AMERICAN ASSAULT ON
MINNESOTA
(By Tim Walz)
The Trump administration’s assault on
Minnesota long ago stopped being a matter
of immigration enforcement. It is a campaign of organized brutality against the people of our state. It isn’t just. It isn’t legal.
And, critically, it isn’t making anyone any
safer.
Quite the opposite: Immigration agents
have now shot and killed two of our neighbors: Renee Good and Alex Pretti. And there
are countless other stories of protesters and
bystanders being physically attacked by federal agents, to say nothing of the chaos and
violence being unleashed against the targets
of these raids, many of whom have done
nothing wrong except exist as a person of
color.
The pretext for all this is the Trump administration’s insistence that our immigration laws would otherwise go unenforced.
This federal occupation of Minnesota is, administration officials insist, about our predilection for releasing ‘‘violent criminal illegal
aliens’’ from state custody.
I can’t stress this enough: The Trump administration has its facts wrong about Minnesota.
The administration claims that Minnesota
jails release ‘‘the worst of the worst.’’ In reality, the Minnesota Department of Corrections honors all federal and local detainers
by notifying Immigration and Customs Enforcement when a person committed to its
custody isn’t a U.S. citizen. There is not a
single documented case of the department’s
releasing someone from state prison without
offering to ensure a smooth transfer of custody.
Yet the lies persist. This week, ICE
tweeted that rural Cottonwood County had
refused to honor a detainer for an alleged
child sex predator. That’s not true. The
county sheriff followed procedure and contacted ICE when the subject posted bail, but
ICE agents were too busy wreaking havoc in
the Twin Cities to do their actual job and
pick the prisoner up.
Some of the administration’s claims are ridiculous on their face. For example: it
claims that 1,360 non-U.S. citizens are in
Minnesota prisons. The truth: Our total
state prison population is roughly 8,000, and
only 207 of them are noncitizens.
Earlier this month, the administration
published what it claimed was a list of people who have been arrested as part of this
ICE sweep, asserting that this list represents
‘‘the worst of the worst’’ criminals, and implying that we have been protecting them
from capture.
Minnesota Public Radio investigated this
claim and found it to be completely false:
‘‘Most of the people on the list had been immediately transferred to ICE custody at the
end of time served in Minnesota prisons. All
of those transfers happened before ICE began
its surge of operations in Minnesota on Dec.
1, 2025, with some even happening years before.’’
In other words, ICE is taking credit for arrests that state and local law enforcement
made, activity that took place before this assault on our state even began.
Everyone wants to see our immigration
laws enforced. That isn’t what is happening
in Minnesota. In recent weeks, masked
agents have abducted children. They have
separated children from their parents. They
have racially profiled off-duty police officers.
They have aggressively pulled people over
and demanded to see their papers. They have
broken into the homes of elderly citizens
without warrants to drag them outside in
freezing temperatures.

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

That isn’t effective law enforcement. It
isn’t following the rule of law. It’s chaos. It’s
illegal. And it’s un-American.
I have repeatedly appealed to President
Trump to lower the temperature. But he refuses. I fear that his hope is for the tension
between ICE agents and the communities
they’re ransacking to boil over—that he
wants you to see more chaos on your TV
screens, protests turn into riots, more people
get hurt.
Minnesotans aren’t taking the bait. They
are protesting—loudly and urgently, but also
peacefully. They are helping their neighbors
cope with this violent, lawless assault on
people of color throughout the state—walking children to school safely, preparing mutual-aid packages, and organizing to make
sure these atrocities are well-documented so
that those responsible can face justice.
Minnesota is a state that believes in the
rule of law and in the dignity of all people.
We know that true public safety comes from
trust, respect and shared purpose, not from
intimidation or political theater.
This assault on our communities is not
necessary to enforce our immigration laws.
We don’t have to choose between open borders and whatever the hell this is. Mr.
Trump can and must end this unlawful, violent and chaotic campaign, and we can and
must rebuild an immigration enforcement
system that is secure, accountable and humane.

Mr. DURBIN. Governor Walz noted
that, in Minnesota, the State’s department of corrections honors all Federal
and local detainers by notifying ICE
when a person in custody is not a citizen.
Governor Walz wrote:
There is not a single documented case of
the department’s releasing someone from
state prison without offering to ensure a
smooth transfer of custody.

If the President wants to work together in reducing crime, count me and
Governor Walz in, but these lawless immigration operations are establishing a
reign of terror—first in Chicago, now in
Minneapolis-St. Paul—eroding constitutionally protected civil liberties
while indiscriminately rounding up
people for the crime of just happening
to be Black or Brown. Even the editorial board of the Wall Street Journal—no liberal publication—agrees. In
an editorial yesterday, they noted
that, since October, 73 percent of the
individuals taken into ICE custody had
no criminal conviction. Only 5 percent
had a violent criminal conviction.
Do you remember the rants at all the
rallies? We are talking about rapists
and murderers and terrorists, the
criminally insane and child predators
coming into the United States, and
now we are going to expel them. That
was the promise—the ‘‘worst of the
worst’’ over and over again. But when
you listen to the statistics that show
how few of the people who have been
detained or tortured are actually in
that category, you realize that it is not
the worst of the worst. They are innocent people who are being victimized
by ICE and this administration. Donald
Trump is hell-bent on punishing his political opponents in the blue States of
America and those who didn’t vote for
him in the last election. We see the
cost.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.015

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

I have come to the floor before to
share the stories of U.S. citizens who
were arrested in Chicago by immigration agents during Operation Midway
Blitz.
Take Elianne Bahena and Jax
Lopez—two U.S. citizens who worked
for a local alderman in the city of Chicago, my friend Michael Rodriguez of
the 22nd Ward. They were arrested by
Border Patrol agents in Chicago and
were held for hours without any explanation after they exercised their constitutional rights to monitor immigration enforcement in the area.
According to a recent report from the
Chicago Sun-Times, the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Chicago has brought 32
nonimmigration criminal cases to
court that are related to ICE Operation
Midway Blitz. Do you know how many
convictions there have been in those 32
cases? None, not one. This represents
precious time and resources that have
been wasted on baseless efforts by this
Agency to punish peaceful protesters
that could and should be focused instead on keeping the streets safe, on
child exploitation, on human trafficking, and on public corruption.
The time for accountability is now. I
have been calling for DHS Secretary
Noem to testify before the Senate Judiciary Committee for almost 1 year. She
couldn’t find the time. She is just way
too busy. In the last calendar year, she
didn’t show up at all. Now she tells us
that it is possible her schedule may
loosen up and that she might be able to
come before the Senate Judiciary Committee in 5 weeks, on March 3, if she
happens to still be the DHS Secretary
then. With all the violence and death
surrounding DHS, the Secretary is in
no hurry to account for her mismanagement of this national crisis.
She expects us, in the meantime, in the
days ahead, to rubberstamp her recordbreaking budget.
Over the weekend, I announced my
opposition to DHS funding. I will not
vote to fund the illegal DHS and ICE
operations that terrorize the city of
Chicago, Minneapolis, and so many
other communities. The deaths of innocent Americans and the detaining of
thousands of innocent people are a national disgrace. We need to work on a
bipartisan basis to pass the five appropriations bills that have been sent to
us by the House and then work to rewrite the DHS bill to address well-documented abuses witnessed by the
American people. Anything less than
this approach is a nonstarter with me.
If the government shuts down yet
again, it will be because congressional
Republicans have refused to place
guardrails on this reckless President
and the ICE Agency. In the meantime,
I urge my colleagues to join us in the
endeavor before Kristi Noem and her
squad take another innocent life.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that The Wall Street Journal editorial ‘‘Mass Deportation by the Numbers’’ be printed in the RECORD.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S311

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD as follows:
MASS DEPORTATION BY THE NUMBERS
(By The Editorial Board)
President Trump and Gov. Tim Walz may
be stepping back from the political brink
after a phone call Monday that both called
constructive. The best result would be for
Minnesota and the Twin Cities to cooperate
with immigration enforcement, and the feds
to reduce their footprint.
Meanwhile, let’s look at how the Trump
Administration’s deportation policy is being
implemented by the numbers. Mr. Trump
campaigned on a promise to deport criminal
migrants, ‘‘the worst of the worst’’ as the
Department of Homeland Security put it.
The policy has public support, but the migrant roundup has become far broader.
Last week Homeland Security Secretary
Kristi Noem posted on social media, ‘‘We
have arrested over 10,000 criminal illegal
aliens who were killing Americans, hurting
children and reigning terror in Minneapolis.’’
Overall, Ms. Noem says Immigration and
Customs Enforcement has removed ‘‘murderers, pedophiles, rapists, gang members,
and terrorists.’’ She told CBS that ‘‘70% of
them have committed or have charges
against them on violent crimes.’’
It started out that way. At the beginning
of 2025, 87% of ICE arrests were immigrants
with either a prior conviction or a criminal
charge pending, according to ICE data obtained by the Deportation Data Project.
Only 13% of those arrested at the beginning
of 2025 didn’t have either a conviction or a
pending charge.
But the criminal share of apprehensions
has declined as the months have gone on. By
October 2025, the percentage of arrested immigrants with a prior conviction or criminal
charge had fallen to 55%. Since October, 73%
taken into ICE custody had no criminal conviction and only 5% had a violent criminal
conviction, according to a Cato Institute review of ICE data.
Many of the criminal immigrants the Administration counts among those in detention are convicted criminals culled from
prisons. White House border czar Tom
Homan objected to Minneapolis’s sanctuary
city policy because he said it wasn’t letting
the Administration take prisoners into federal custody. ‘‘If they’d let us in their damn
jail,’’ he said, ‘‘we could arrest the bad guy
in the safety and security of the jail.’’
Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz disputes that in
his nearby op-ed, but there’s no doubt Minneapolis and St. Paul have ordinances that
bar using resources to help ICE apprehend
people based on immigration status. That
complicates ICE’s job and makes confrontations more likely.
Syracuse professor Austin Kocher, who
tracks official ICE data, finds that between
Sept. 21, 2025, and Jan. 7, 2026, single-day ICE
detentions increased 11,296. But only 902 of
those were convicted criminals, 2,273 had
pending criminal charges and 8,121 were
other immigrant violators. ICE arrests have
been trending upward since January 2025, but
criminal arrests have plateaued.
All of which means that the Trump Administrations rhetoric about deporting criminals
doesn’t match its current much broader policy of mass deportation. As ICE agents target businesses, schools and homes, scenes of
arrest involving mothers, children and longtime U.S. residents become more common.
This explains why immigration enforcement
is becoming a political liability for Republicans.
Ending migrant chaos at the border was
necessary after the Biden Administration.
But White House aide Stephen Miller’s un-

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

disciplined mass deportation and zero immigration policy is building distrust, and the
White House pitch that public safety justifies its enforcement is losing credibility.

Mr. DURBIN. I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from New Jersey.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. KIM. Mr. President, I rise today
as we debate funding for the Department of Homeland Security. It is a debate that 100 Americans allowed into
this Chamber will have a chance to do,
but that really is being had by millions
of Americans across the country in
their living rooms and their group
chats, in the comments on social
media. There are a lot of things that
we debate here that fly under the radar
that, maybe, impact a lot of people but
are not on their minds. This is on everyone’s mind. Whether we write another check to fund the Department of
Homeland Security isn’t just front
page news—it is the thing that people
who haven’t picked up a newspaper in
years are talking about.
Why is that?
It is because people can feel that
something is wrong in this country,
and they know it has to be stopped.
People can watch the videos of the
murders of Renee Good and Alex Pretti
at the hands of Federal agents and see
that something is wrong and that it
isn’t over. They can watch these videos
of masked men who are roaming
through neighborhoods or are physically assaulting people who are peacefully protesting and see that something
is wrong. They are absolutely right in
that feeling. How can you watch any of
that and not see that it is wrong?
I hear from people whom I know—
some friends of mine—who are telling
me that they are now carrying their
passports around with them because
they are afraid of getting stopped and
being targeted by Federal agents. I
have heard from constituents who are
anxious, who don’t feel safe leaving
their houses, who are afraid of door
knocks at their houses, and are just
afraid that this moment of fear will
never end.
The tragic irony of this is that we
are nearly 25 years in from the establishment of the Department of Homeland Security—25 years from another
moment when people felt an incredible
level of anxiety and unease. I was in
college when 9/11 happened. It was a
moment that led me toward public
service. It was a crisis that brought me
into a career in national security,
working to keep our country safe. One
of the things I have learned is that
safety isn’t our ability to project force
or the tools we have at our disposal.
Those things can make us safe, but if
they are used improperly, they can
make us less safe and less secure. And
that is exactly what we are seeing from
this administration. It is what Donald
Trump, Stephen Miller, Tom Homan,
and Kristi Noem are doing every day.
They are using the tools that were
meant to keep us safe and are distorting them to grow their own power,
to fuel their own corruption.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.017

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S312

What we are debating here today is
whether we should continue to fund
their efforts to use these tools against
the American people and for their own
twisted agenda. And, to that, there is a
simple answer: We must say and vote
no. We need to vote no on funding the
DHS as this bill currently stands because it is not going to make us more
safe and secure.
Everyone in America who has been
carrying this feeling around with them
for the past few days and weeks knows
that. They know that they have been
lied to by this administration. They
know that the masked men who are
flooding into our communities are not
accountable to them. They know people like Stephen Miller, whom I have
often called and said that he is the
most dangerous person in our country,
are not accountable to them. The
American people are tired of it, and
they are tired of the lies. They see
right through them. They are tired of
feeling like they have no say in this
horrible feeling of insecurity and uncertainty.
How is it that, in the richest, most
powerful country in the world, we have
this much unpredictability and this
much anxiety that hangs over us? But
that can end today; that can end right
here because, even though the millions
and millions of people who are struggling to make sense of this moment
aren’t able to get into this Chamber
and have a vote, there are 100 of us who
do and who represent all of the other
Americans in this Nation.
There are things that this administration can do today to restore that
sense of safety and security. For instance, they can pull ICE and CBP
agents out of their operations in Minnesota and in Maine and deescalate the
fear that American communities are
facing. The provocations are dangerous
right now and the concern of powder
kegs of what is going to happen next. It
is not that we see this in the rearview
mirror with the murder and the killing
of Alex Pretti and Renee Good. People
are wondering: Is this just the beginning? Is this going to continue and for
how long? Is it going to get worse?
That is the fear that people are feeling,
which is something that this administration can immediately bring down if
they pull these agents out.
This administration can also allow
and clearly articulate the need for
independent investigations into the
murders of Renee Good and Alex
Pretti—actually, in terms of all 12 of
the shootings that DHS agents since
September of last year have conducted.
That deserves the same level of transparency and accountability. The reason
we need this is that there is no trust
right now. There is no trust right now
from the American people in having
DHS or this administration as a whole
investigate themselves. It is antithetical to our understanding of transparency and accountability if that is
the case. So we demand true independent investigations.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

This administration can also fire
their leaders who have clearly zero
credibility—zero credibility—with the
American people right now—Stephen
Miller, Tom Homan, Secretary Noem,
and
others—who
have
purposely
weaponized our government for their
own political agendas. The American
people demand accountability. Forward movement as a nation in these
troubled times cannot happen while
having these administrative officials
still in power, still in their jobs.
There are many other things we need
to think through, but these are three
things that can happen right now by
this administration to show that we
can try to turn a corner on this incredibly chaotic and dangerous moment for
our country.
But even if that all happens, we owe
it to the American people to take a
stand, we owe it to them to give them
the security they deserve, and we owe
it to them to vote no on this appropriations bill.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Connecticut.
Mr. MURPHY. Mr. President, I appreciate the remarks of my friend from
New Jersey. Mine will sound very familiar.
Listen, ICE is out of control right
now. They are killing American citizens. They are endangering the safety
of our cities—in particular, Minneapolis. They are just lawless.
This Nation was horrified when they
saw the video of Alex Pretti, exercising
his First Amendment rights, gunned
down in cold blood, but I will be honest: They were just as terrified by the
response from the administration. Almost within minutes, before any investigation took place, this young man,
an ICU nurse who cared for veterans,
was being called an assassin, was being
named as a domestic terrorist.
It is chilling to the American public
that the people in charge of our Federal Government would lie this willingly, this casually. It is chilling that
anyone who opposes this President or
participates in organized protests is
immediately labeled a ‘‘terrorist.’’
That is what happens in despotic, totalitarian countries—anyone that opposes the regime is labeled a ‘‘terrorist.’’ That is not what is supposed to
happen in the United States of America.
So the focus of this country right
now is squarely on Minneapolis.
By the way, there has been a lot of
ink spilled over the last 24 hours about
the administration’s deescalation in
Minneapolis, substituting one leader
for another. Tom Homan is not an avatar of reasonableness, listening and
parsing the President’s words as he
tries to distance himself a little bit
from the most outrageous things that
people like Stephen Miller have said.
But if you talk to our colleagues from
Minnesota, they will tell you that
nothing has changed. Today is just like
yesterday.

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

In a nursery school today, there is
blinds down, recess canceled, signs on
the door: All of our staff have been vetted by ICE. We have no one illegal
here.
Kids don’t know what is going on as
they are ushered in by escorts to their
nursery school classroom. They are
made to feel like prisoners inside.
Why? Because there are masked, armed
men hunting them—and not hunting
people who snuck into the country;
hunting people who are here legally—
who are here legally.
I want you to understand that as
much as we are watching Minneapolis,
as much as we are feeling for those
children locked in their nursery school
classrooms today, fearing the bad men
outside that are trying to take them
away and send them to prison, it is not
just Minneapolis.
Last week, I went down to Texas to
inspect two facilities, one of which is
entitled ‘‘the baby prison,’’ ‘‘the baby
jail.’’ It is where they put the 2-yearold kids. I didn’t show up unannounced.
I am the ranking Democrat on the Appropriations subcommittee that funds
Homeland Security. We all have a constitutional right to do oversight, but I
have the title, I have the responsibility. I gave them a day-and-a-half notice, and I was still denied entry. Why?
Because they are hiding something.
Thirty people have died in ICE custody
and detention in the last year.
So, instead, I went to a courtroom in
San Antonio, an immigration courtroom, and I sat in on proceedings for
half a day. What I saw was just absolutely outrageous. It is not on cameras—the country is not watching it
like they are watching Minneapolis—
but it is just as inhumane, and it is
just as illegal.
The people that show up to this
courtroom in San Antonio are immigrants who are complying with the
law. These are people who came to the
United States, immediately applied for
asylum—many of them made an appointment through an official government website to show up and apply for
asylum—and they have been showing
up for all of their hearings and court
appointments since.
So I would watch as these individuals
or families walked in, went through
their legal court proceedings, knowing
that outside that door were half a
dozen civilian, plainclothes ICE officers waiting to disappear them.
That is what happens in San Antonio.
The individual who is here legally
shows up as part of their court process.
They walk out the door, and they are
grabbed by ICE, put on a bus that is
waiting outside, and they are never to
be seen again. They go to one of these
detention facilities. They are basically
not allowed to see a lawyer. Sometimes, their family doesn’t even know
where they are. They are very quickly
sent out of the country, either to the
nation that they came from, where
they rightfully fear potential violence,
or to third countries. Families are split
up.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.018

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

While I was there, I was asked to accompany two young parents and their
2-year-old daughter out of the courtroom to see if maybe, because they
were talking to a U.S. Senator, ICE
wouldn’t take them—a 2-year-old. The
lawyer said: If you weren’t here, one of
two things was going to happen—that
2-year-old was going to end up in jail
with their parents or they were going
to separate the parents from the
child—separate at least the father from
the child.
That is inhumane. That is wrong.
And that is why people all across this
country are demanding that if we are
going to fund the Department of Homeland Security, we only fund a Department that is acting lawfully and morally.
What we are asking is reasonable and
impactful. What we are saying is that
these roving patrols in Minneapolis,
the profiling of people just based upon
their skin color or their accent, the
show-me-your-papers enforcement, has
to end.
ICE and CBP are fundamentally not
trained to do that kind of work—just
roaming the streets, trying to find people who they believe to be in the country illegally. We need warrants, and, in
fact, that has been the practice until
this administration. The practice up
until now had been that you had to get
a warrant in order to try to lock up
somebody who you believed to be here
illegally.
And the roving patrols and the
profiling.
Second, no more secret police. This is
the United States of America. This is
the United States of America. We don’t
allow in this country masked, unidentified men to be wandering up to you
on the street and ripping you into a
car. We need masks off. We need body
cameras on.
Lastly, we need accountability. Man,
it looks like there was a crime committed. It looks like that was murder.
But the only way you will know is if
you have an impartial investigation
and, potentially, prosecution. That always happens at the State level. It
can’t be some whitewashed, secret
process inside the Department of
Homeland Security. No. Our justice in
the United States of America happens
in public; it does not happen in private.
We aren’t Russia. We aren’t Saudi Arabia. Justice is administered in a court
of law through a process that the people can see, and that should apply to
you whether you are an ICE officer or
whether you are just a citizen of Minneapolis.
So think about what we are talking
about here—really reasonable things
that, frankly, should unite Republicans
and Democrats.
I have a much longer list of reforms
that I want. The illegality is just off
the charts at the Department of Homeland Security, but I understand that we
are not going to be able to get common
ground on that long list. So what we
endeavor to do is put on the table three

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S313

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

things that we can find common
ground on, that we must find common
ground on because to defend this—for
Republicans’ position over the rest of
this week into next week to be no reforms, no changes on how ICE operates—it is unsustainable. It is not close
to where the center of this country is.
So what we are talking about are
three reasonable projects: Stop the roving patrols of our cities, no more secret
police, and accountability. I believe we
can find a way to get that done.
I know there is an instinct here—and
we suffer from it too—if Democrats are
for it, then Republicans just have to be
against it, and if Republicans are for it,
Democrats just have to be against it. I
fall prey to that instinct. But this
seems to be a moment where the country has just decided that what is happening in Minneapolis is wrong. The
country would like us to come together
on a series of reforms that will make it
less likely that there will be another
murder in cold blood of an American
citizen.
Right now, we are on a pace for it to
happen again. ICE is still there. There
are more ICE officers in Minneapolis
than there are police officers. The police aren’t even doing their job any
longer because all they do is respond to
the problems that are being created by
untrained, unqualified ICE officers.
I think we can find a way to come together on a set of reforms that the
American people are demanding.
I guess I draw my inspiration from
that trip I took to Texas.
Late one evening, I met with a group
of families that had recently been detained, and they all had little kids—little kids that were in what they call
baby jail. I met with two boys—elementary school-age boys about 8 years
old and 10 years old—that had been
locked up for 6 weeks. Six weeks these
little kids had been locked up for nothing. They were complying with the law.
They and their father were going
through the legal process of applying
for asylum. They were told to show up
for court. Their mom dropped them off.
Their backpacks for school were still in
the back seat. The two young boys and
their father went into the courtroom
for their appointment that they were
told to show up for, and they never
came back to the car. Their mom had
no idea where they went.
It ended up that they were in detention, that the little kids had been put
in prison. They called their mom every
day as Christmas approached and said:
Mom, maybe tomorrow they will let us
out. Maybe the next day. Christmas is
coming up, Mom. I don’t want to be
here for Christmas.
Well, they stayed right through
Christmas, and they didn’t get out
until just a week ago. These children
were alive on the outside, but you
could tell they were dead on the inside.
One of the two little boys—the older of
them—sat during our time together,
and he just stared straight ahead. He
didn’t make eye contact with anybody.

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

His brain, you could tell, had been
poisoned by the inhumanity that had
been visited upon him by a policy that
makes no sense other than for the purpose of torturing these kids.
This is the United States of America.
We shouldn’t stand for that. You can
enforce the laws of this Nation without
putting kids through that kind of hell,
without the kids of Minneapolis today
languishing in nursery schools with the
doors locked, with no recess and the
shades down.
We were sitting around a round table,
and on the other side from the two
dead-eyed children who had just left 6
weeks’ detention was another child. He
looked about 10 to me.
The two boys who were in detention
told their mother in all those phone
calls that maybe their greatest worry
was that their friends were going to
forget about them.
Mom, I have been here for a week.
Mom, I have been here 2 weeks.
Mom, I have been here for 6 weeks.
What if I go back to school and none of
my friends remember who I am?
This is what goes through the brain
of an 8-year-old who has been in jail for
nothing—for nothing—for 6 weeks.
Do you know what happened? Their
friends didn’t forget about them.
That other little boy sitting on the
other side of the round table—10 years
old—was one of their friends, and he
noticed that his two friends were missing day after day after day, and he remembered that they were in immigration proceedings. So this 10-year-old
boy went to his teacher and his mom
and said: I think something is wrong. I
think my friends might have been
taken.
The teacher and the mother reached
out to a local legal aid agency, and
that legal aid agency tracked down the
boy and the father, and eventually, the
two boys and the father were let out.
That 10-year-old boy, their friend,
had compassion. He believed in right
versus wrong. But he also believed that
he wasn’t powerless. He believed that
he could do something to help find his
missing friends. For him, that was
alerting adults, because he knew that
maybe they would help.
And I am sure he was nervous about
speaking up, about going to talk to his
teacher, because doing the right thing
often comes with risks. But to him,
doing the right thing was worth the
risk. To him, he knew he wasn’t powerless in the face of the immorality that
he feared had happened to his friends.
And I just tell you that story because
it is a lesson for us. It is a lesson for us
to not feel powerless, for Democrats to
stand up for what we believe in, to not
settle for less than a Department of
Homeland Security that complies with
the law; and a lesson for Republicans,
who I know fear retribution by this
President when they stand up for what
they believe is right, rather than what
Donald Trump says is right.
We aren’t powerless on the Democratic side, and you aren’t powerless on

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.019

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S314

the Republican side. We can find a way
to come together and protect our citizens from an Agency that is operating
outside the bounds of the law and outside the bounds of morality.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Maryland.
Mr. VAN HOLLEN. Mr. President, on
Saturday, the Nation learned the name
of Alex Pretti. Alex was an ICU nurse
at the Veterans’ Administration, fulfilling our Nation’s sacred promise to
care for our wounded warriors. Many
have probably seen the video of him
paying final respects and honors to one
of our fallen veterans.
Alex was also a neighbor who cared
deeply about his community, and because of those values, Alex was an observer, recording and bearing witness
to the actions of ICE and Customs and
Border Patrol as they descended upon
his hometown, stopping and detaining
individuals without judicial warrants.
We all saw video of Alex’s final moments, when he stopped to help a fellow observer, a woman who had been
pushed by Federal agents, before those
agents sprayed him with chemicals,
disarmed him of the gun he legally carried, and shot him in the back, firing 10
shots in less than 5 seconds. We all saw
this on video—in fact, multiple videos
from multiple angles from other civilians on the street that day bearing witness.
But this administration—the Trump
administration—immediately lied to
us. And when I say ‘‘us,’’ I mean the
American people. They called Alex a
‘‘domestic terrorist.’’ They called him
a ‘‘would-be assassin.’’
This administration must think the
American people are really stupid, telling them not to believe their own eyes.
This was the killing of an American
citizen exercising his constitutional
rights, and you would think that that
by itself would spur a reckoning with
the actions of the Department of
Homeland Security.
But this isn’t one isolated event.
This isn’t even the only killing committed by DHS agents in Minnesota
this year. On January 7, a Minneapolis
mom, Renee Good, was shot and killed
as she attempted to drive away from
immigration agents who aggressively
approached her, contrary to DHS’s useof-force policy, and, ultimately, killed
her, and then prevented her from receiving immediate medical assistance.
They lied about her case, as well, accusing her also of ‘‘domestic terrorism,’’ despite the evidence that people across this land could see with
their own eyes.
This is not a case of just a few untrained bad apples. It is the result of an
out-of-control Federal Agency that has
directed its agents to act with impunity, to detain and deport scores of
people who pose no risk to our communities in so many cases and have no
criminal records, including small business owners, pastors, parents taking
their kids to school, neighbors walking
their dogs, children.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

This is an intentional policy coming
out of the White House—from Donald
Trump to Stephen Miller, to the Secretary of Homeland Security, Kristi
Noem. JD VANCE, the Vice President,
said the agent who shot Renee Good
was ‘‘protected by absolute immunity.’’ That is what the Vice President
of the United States said. He should
know better.
And they have deliberately cut funding for offices at DHS that monitor the
conduct of immigration officers to protect civil rights and civil liberties.
They are giving agents a license to kill
with impunity.
Secretary Noem should be fired immediately—if not fired, impeached.
Stephen Miller has now tried to point
the finger at others, when he has been
the ringleader in the White House.
He should be fired.
DHS operates at the direction of the
White House and the President with orders to meet arbitrary quotas, to detain and deport not just the worst of
the worst but anybody. They conduct
masked raids in unmarked vehicles and
refuse to show identification. They arrest people without warrants, use force
to enter homes, and lock people up
without due process. They sweep up
citizens, legal immigrants, and immigrants without deportation orders.
And when they are confronted with
their abuses, they lie. They tell us not
to believe what we see with our own
eyes.
I want to salute the people in Minneapolis and across the country, including in Maryland, who are taking
videos and working to hold these Federal forces accountable. Think about
what would have happened if there was
no video in these cases. These videos
have complicated the Trump administration’s effort at a coverup, even as
the Trump administration refuses to
work with State and local law enforcement to investigate these killings.
In my State of Maryland, DHS lied
about the circumstances surrounding a
nonfatal shooting, and they were exposed in their lies because of a local
county investigation that showed that
DHS was plain wrong.
DHS has restricted access to detention centers, preventing congressional
oversight into inhuman conditions,
where we know at least 30 people have
died in custody, including one death in
Texas that has been ruled a homicide.
And as they view the actions of
peaceful protestors and observers as a
personal offense, they have reacted
with violence and labeled them domestic terrorists for practicing their constitutional freedoms and rights.
In Minnesota, these Federal agents
hurled chemical irritants at peaceful
crowds who are simply exercising their
First Amendment rights to freedom of
assembly and peaceful protest. They
view whistles as weapons. In Portland,
they claimed to be threatened by people wearing frog costumes.
My colleagues, Republicans in Congress, have fueled this surge in illegal

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

activity by exploding the DHS budget
with $165 billion as part of what Donald
Trump called the Big Beautiful Bill.
Remember, that is the bill where the
richest people in the country were
given permanent tax cuts. That is the
bill that made deep cuts in healthcare
for tens of millions of Americans. And
in that bill was also this huge slush
fund for DHS.
ICE, by itself, is now the Nation’s
highest funded law enforcement Agency and has more funding than the militaries of most countries in the world—
including Italy, Israel, and Brazil. ICE,
by itself, has more funds than the armies of those countries, and now they
are spending those funds to hire more
agents and are putting more of them
out on the streets with limited training.
They are preparing to turn warehouses into so-called processing sites
and detention centers, including one in
my home State of Maryland, doing it
against the will of the community. We
see DHS spitting in the face of local
communities across the country.
In Maryland, we had a rally with
hundreds of people on a very cold day,
sending a message to ICE and to the
Trump administration that the people
in that community did not want a
warehouse for detainees right there.
Within days of that demonstration, the
Trump administration—ICE—signed a
deal for $100 million of our taxpayer
money to purchase a warehouse where
they say they can keep up to 1,500 detainees.
I can tell you Maryland taxpayers
don’t want their money going to that
purpose, and I will bet you the great
majority of taxpayers around this
country don’t want to see their tax dollars used in that way as well.
And now, despite the fact that they
are already clearly misusing these taxpayer dollars, as American citizens are
killed on the streets, our fellow Republicans, our Republicans in the Senate,
want to give them even more in the bill
that would be up on this floor this
week—in fact, another $10 billion more
for ICE and over $18 billion more for
Customs and Border Patrol, while refusing to rein in these abuses—another
blank check for lawless activity, another blank check that results in the
killing of Americans, another blank
check with no accountability.
That would be madness. We cannot
green-light the actions of an Agency
that is already terrorizing our communities and executing our neighbors
with billions of dollars in new funds
without any regard to their constitutional rights.
Again, President Trump said he was
going to go after ‘‘the worst of the
worst.’’ That has not been their focus,
and we can see it with our own eyes.
And we cannot accept the administration’s claim that these agents have
some kind of absolute immunity and
are free from the consequences of their
actions. That is why an independent investigation into the killings of Renee

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.021

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

Good and Alex Pretti have to happen,
and I appreciate my colleagues from
the other side of the aisle who have
called for one. But that should be a
standard situation. That should be the
standard operating procedure in a situation like this. State and local law enforcement should, of course, be partners in that effort. The Feds should not
be trying to hide evidence from those
local and State law enforcement officers.
We must do that, but it is not enough
to take the word of the Trump administration that they will do that. We
can’t simply trust an administration
that has repeatedly lied to the American people, as if, this time, they will
try to do better.
And, again, we wouldn’t be here,
probably, but for that video. The administration would have thought that
it got away with its lies.
So let’s not be naive. We are not
going to give away our responsibility
as legislators to put real reforms right
into the DHS bill to prevent this lawlessness, to prevent these killings, to
protect our freedoms, and to assure
real accountability.
Our most important job is protecting
the life and liberty of the American
people. It is sadly too late to protect
Alex Pretti and too late to protect
Renee Good, as they should have been
protected, but it is not too late to act
on behalf of the rest of the American
people.
So, this week, we have before us a
package of appropriation bills that includes the work of six appropriations
subcommittees—including
Defense;
Transportations and Housing; Labor,
Health and Human Services; Foreign
Operations; and Financial Services.
These are not perfect bills, and I have
serious concerns with some of them
that I would like to see addressed. But
it is also clear that there is enough
support in this body to pass them. We
could pass them today if they were separated out.
In fact, when those bills went
through the House of Representatives,
they considered the Department of
Homeland Security bill on its own merits. They didn’t bundle it in with everything else and say: You know, you
have got to vote for this whole package
at one time.
So the House, after they passed it individually, they pulled all those bills
together and sent them in a bundle
over here to the U.S. Senate. But, my
goodness, that doesn’t mean the U.S.
Senate has to take it that way from
the House. This is supposed to be an
independent branch of the Congress. I
don’t know why we would surrender
our responsibilities to the House of
Representatives. And they should get
right back into Washington if we
change this bill and pass it to prevent
a shutdown of those Agencies. That is
their responsibility.
The House needs to perform its duties, and we need to perform ours. And
ours involve making sure that we sepa-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S315

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

rate out those five appropriation bills
that I mentioned from the Homeland
Security appropriations bill. In fact, I
would argue that we should also take—
as part of the package of five bills, we
should take FEMA and TSA and the
Coast Guard, which are part of the DHS
bill, and we could send all of those
back to the House for immediate passage to go on to the President.
But, instead, Republican colleagues
here are wasting time. We could take
up that package today, if there was the
will to do it among my Republican colleagues. But, right now, instead, we are
holding all of those other Agencies—
the Defense Department, Health and
Human Services—hostage to holding
onto the Department of Homeland Security bill that needs to be changed
dramatically.
I don’t think that a single person in
this body would argue against deporting those who have committed serious
crimes—‘‘the worst of the worst’’—but
that is not what this administration
has been focused on. Nothing about
this has been targeted. And Trump’s
ICE has not focused, as they promised,
on ‘‘the worst of the worst.’’ They are
stopping and arresting people who are
citizens, who are legal residents, who
have legal pending asylum claims, just
because of how they look or their accent. And they are wreaking havoc on
communities across the country, including on peaceful protestors, two of
whom have now given their lives to
protect our freedoms.
And do you know what? They are not
just using their own agents as part of
this indiscriminate dragnet. They are
bringing in other Agencies as well, distracting them and redirecting them
from critical missions. Senator WARNER released data that showed nearly
half of the FBI agents in its largest
field offices have been redirected to immigration, away from fighting drug
trafficking, terrorism, and violent
crime.
It is time for us in the Senate to do
our job. This isn’t going to go away
with the couple hours of extra training,
personnel reassignments, or administration statements. Let’s make this a
moment for real change and not give
DHS another huge blank check.
I, for one, will not vote for one more
dime for this lawless DHS operation
that we are witnessing at this time.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Missouri.
Mr. SCHMITT. Mr. President, we are
at an inflection point in this country,
and what happens over the next few
months will ring onward, far into the
future.
We have all seen the scenes in Minneapolis—the riots, the violence, the
bitter chaos. You have seen the headlines, the TV monologues, the nightly
news reports, and the pundits’ spin. If
you weren’t paying close attention, it
might seem like all of this noise just
exploded out of nowhere, a month or
two ago.

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

But the story of what is happening in
Minneapolis didn’t begin last month. It
didn’t even begin last year when President Trump took office. It began on
January 20, 2021, the day Joe Biden became President. The Biden administration did something that has no precedent in American history. They intentionally opened our border to a fullscale invasion and actively sought to
block any attempt to fight back.
Millions upon millions of illegal
aliens entered our country illegally,
flooding in from some of the most violent places on Earth, in direct violation of constitutionally enacted immigration laws passed by multiple Congresses and signed by Presidents of
both parties. It was the most egregious
betrayal of Federal law in American
history.
Trump ran and won on fixing this. It
wasn’t some minor footnote in his platform; it was one of the most fundamental defining policies of his 2024
campaign. If you went out in the street
and grabbed 10 Americans at random in
November of 2024 and asked them what
Donald Trump was running on, just
about every single one of them would
give you the same exact answer: the
economy and illegal immigration.
Here is the thing: He won. Donald
Trump won. Let me repeat that for my
Democratic colleagues. He won. He won
the electoral college. He won the popular vote. He swept all the battleground States running on the promise
to end the invasion and send the illegal
immigrants back home. The promise
was one of the key reasons the American people sent him back to the White
House. That was democracy in action.
You know, we hear a lot of talk from
the other side about democracy. Well,
if democracy means anything at all, it
means that this administration must
be allowed to carry out the agenda the
American people voted for—enforcing
our immigration laws, securing the
border, and deporting immigrants who
are here illegally.
This is not a new concept, by the
way. Democratic Presidents for the
past 20 years have done this. But the
other side never had any intention of
letting this happen. President Trump
moved forward with his agenda. They
were never going to let us enforce our
immigration laws against those who
had broken them.
Why is that? Well, because mass migration is not just one policy preference among many of today’s Democratic Party; it is the policy priority,
the fundamental organizing principle
of their entire agenda. It is the foundation of their platform and the final end
of their world view.
Not one single Democrat has called
on leftists in the streets to stop impeding law enforcement with their cars or
to stop physically attacking law enforcement—not a single one. They have
zero interest in lowering the temperature. At this point, it is so obvious, it
almost feels silly to say.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.022

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S316

In Minnesota and here in DC, Democrats are actively and intentionally
adding fuel to the fire.
The mayor of Minneapolis, Jacob
Frey, has claimed his city is ‘‘invaded,
under siege, occupied.’’
The Lieutenant Governor of Minnesota, Peggy Flanagan, declared that
‘‘our neighbors are being disappeared.
. . . It is just called kidnapping’’ and
publicly called upon Americans to ‘‘put
your body on the line’’ and ‘‘not go silently into the night.’’
Governor Tim Walz compared the
ICE presence in Minnesota to a Nazi
occupation and likened residents of
Minneapolis to Anne Frank. On Monday, Walz published an op-ed in the
Wall Street Journal declaring that the
‘‘Trump administration’s assault on
Minnesota is a campaign of organized
brutality against the people of our
state.’’ Just last week, he stood behind
the metal gates of the Governor’s mansion with a bullhorn and told the crowd
of protesters outside to go and cause
‘‘trouble.’’
These aren’t unique examples; they
are par for the course. Over the last
month, we have heard similar things
from just about every powerful Democrat in this country. I don’t know what
is in each and every one of their hearts.
I don’t know that. I don’t know if they
really believe that we are at war or
that ICE is the Gestapo or that Minneapolis is under Nazi occupation. But
whether or not they believe it, many of
the people who hear them and are listening to them do. Now, many of those
people are taking these ideas to their
final, logical conclusion. That is exactly what the people in power on the
left actually want. They want the confrontations. They want the chaos. They
want their conscious political strategy.
That is what this is, their conscious
political strategy. They have decided
that leaning in and ratcheting this up
as far as it can go serves their political
and ideological interests, so they are
all in.
By the way, might I just point out
that they are about ready to shut the
government down again. They shut it
down the first time because they wanted healthcare for illegal immigrants.
Now they are willing to shut the government down, including FEMA funding and TSA funding, because they
want to stop deportations of illegal immigrants. It is the single organizing
principle of their party right now.
Think about that for a moment.
Really sit with this. Think about what
it says about the kinds of people we are
dealing with at this point.
In a better era of American politics,
we used to say things like: We all want
what is best for the country; we just
have different ideas about how to get
there. When you hear statements like
the ones that I just rattled off, it seems
harder and harder to believe that right
now.
These radicals are people who fundamentally do not believe America deserves to be a sovereign nation, a na-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

tion that gets to decide who comes
here and for how long and when you
have to leave. These radicals have opposed the efforts in Minnesota and
across the country to take criminals
off of our streets—criminals like Kou
Lo Vang, a criminal illegal alien from
Laos convicted of first-degree murder;
Phuc Trong Nguyen, a criminal illegal
alien from Vietnam convicted of possession of a weapon and rape; Pedro
Ornelas, a criminal illegal alien from
Mexico convicted of sexual assault and
rape; Abdi Gelle Mohamed, a criminal
illegal alien from Somalia convicted of
sexual abuse of a minor. That is just a
small sample of the last few weeks of
arrests in Minnesota.
These radicals are people who will
cynically wax poetic about democracy
in one breath and then deploy organized mob violence as a weapon to undermine the express will of the people
when democracy doesn’t go their way.
My colleagues on the left are currently threatening to shut down our
government, shut down the Department of Homeland Security, if they
don’t get their way.
What is their way?
Mr. MERKLEY. Will the Senator
pause for a question?
Mr. SCHMITT. No.
What is their way? They demand we
defund law enforcement Agencies like
ICE and CBP. They demand we force
ICE agents to dox themselves so that
their families can be harassed and
threatened in their homes. They demand that we cripple Federal law enforcement’s ability to enforce our immigration laws.
This is not about oversight; it is
about paralysis. And the objective is
mass amnesty, rewarding those who
broke the law and punishing the men
and women sworn to enforce it.
My colleagues on the left are smart
enough to know about the trail of
American victims that mass immigration has left in its wake, but they made
a conscious decision to sneer and roll
their eyes and pretend like it is all just
a hysterical rightwing fantasy to advance their agenda.
What is really going on here? Well, it
is a desperate and intentional thirst for
power at all costs—padding their numbers by importing new voters and illegally adding people to the census rolls
to distort congressional apportionment
in the electoral college, even if Americans are less safe and it destroys our
way of life in the process.
I want my Republican colleagues in
particular to hear me on this. Nobody
wants to see American citizens being
shot and killed. On a basic human
level, it is a tragedy. Every time a life
is lost, it is a tragedy. The lives lost in
Minnesota have been tragic.
But what we are seeing in the streets
of Minnesota—it is not on ICE, it is not
on the Border Patrol, and it is certainly not on President Trump. If it
were, we would be seeing the same
chaos in every city where ICE and Border Patrol carry out these operations,
but we are not.

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

There have been large-scale deportation operations in red States all across
the country. Most Americans probably
never heard of them because they went
off without a hitch. In fact, when we
measure ICE arrests in each State last
year against the State’s share of the
national illegal alien population, 21 out
of the top 25 States are red. Only 3 blue
States, plus Washington, DC, crack the
top 26. One of those States was Virginia, which had a Republican Governor who was willing to work with
ICE at the time.
A recent analysis found that just
nine counties account for nearly twothirds of all violent confrontations
with ICE in America over the past
year. The number of violent confrontations in those counties was twice as
high as the total instances of anti-ICE
violence from the remaining 3,134 counties combined. Anti-ICE violence was
590 times more likely to occur in those
9 counties than in any other county in
America. All nine counties are deepblue sanctuary jurisdictions run by
Democrats.
We hear the left tell us that ICE and
Border Patrol are agents of chaos and
terror. The data tells a very different
story. It is not ICE or Border Patrol
that is causing this terror; it is the
militant leftists and their enablers in
the Democratic Party.
Yet, in the face of all of it, the agents
of ICE and Border Patrol continue to
do their job, courageously carrying out
their duty and running towards the
fire. They are not villains. They are
American heroes. They are on the
frontlines of the fight to save our country, and we owe them absolute, unequivocal, unflinching support.
I want to close by reading a message
from a DHS agent on the ground in
Minneapolis that was shared earlier
this month. Here is what he wrote:
It is about negative 20 in Minneapolis right
now. Negative 31 with wind chill.
I was leaving the building we are all holed
up in. I think we’ve stacked close to 2,000
people in a building designed for 500.
I ran into a grunt officer who’s been sent
here from Miami. He clearly had just got
back from an operation. Dude looked absolutely exhausted.
We talk a little [smack] about how bad the
weather sucks, how tired everyone is from
the op[eration] tempo.
We get outside, I ask him point blank how
he feels about risking his life going up
against arctic temperatures, criminals, rioters. . . . He stops, looks at me, and says
‘‘doesn’t matter. We do the job.’’ Then he
walks off and jumps in the car to get on ANOTHER target.
No less than 10 seconds later, one of the garage doors where teams are staging at opens,
and about 15 [to] 25 guys roll out in full kit
and hop in cars for a different target set.
Guys are risking it all in [minus] 40 temperatures to grab foreign invaders, getting
attacked by the very same countrymen they
are trying to protect, with an entire city mobilized against them.
They don’t even think of stopping for one
second. They don’t eat, they barely sleep,
they survive on nicotine and black coffee and
the occasional MRE. Not one of the dozens if
not hundreds of men I’ve talked to even
thinks about quitting.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.032

S28JAPT1

January 28, 2026

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Everyone, even senior leadership, is out
there right now. [The] equivalent of general
officers are out there on the ground making
arrests and fighting through protesters
alongside their guys.
I’ve never seen commitment like this before. These men are genuine heroes. . . .
They’re putting it all on the line every second of every day. They know that the political winds can shift and that all the work
and sacrifices and danger could be for nothing. They even know they’ll probably face serious retribution for doing the right thing.
But they don’t care, they’re still getting
after it.
Please, keep these men [and women] in
your prayers. They are a force of 20,000 going
up against 20 million.

Mr. President, that is courage. That
is heroism. It is a heroism that the
cowards hiding behind their guarded
mansion gates will never understand.
The ICE and Border Patrol agents are
risking death every day. The small
men who sneer and bark at them from
the sidelines are not men of virtue but
men who defy our rule of law.
The deportations must continue.
Sanctuary cities must end. The era of
fake deals is over. There will be no
fake ‘‘comprehensive immigration reform’’ because a nation does not need
new laws to enforce the ones it already
has. President Trump demonstrated a
basic truth of self-government: Law
without enforcement is not law at all.
Congress criminalized illegal entry.
The executive branch is obligated to
enforce it. And that is exactly what
will happen—the systematic removal of
those who violated Federal law by entering this country illegally—no theatrics, no apologies, no amnesty, just enforcement.
So protest all you want, but let law
enforcement do their jobs—enforcing
the immigration laws that Republicans
and Democrats passed. Let our men
and women in law enforcement get
home safe to their families.
The only way out is through.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon.
Mr. MERKLEY. I asked my colleague
from across the aisle if he would pause
for a question not to address all the
lists of particulars he threw out to all
47 of his colleagues on this side of the
aisle but to simply make one point.
That is, he said, that Democrats want
to shut down the government.
Did he forget that Republicans are in
charge of this Chamber? Did he forget
that all 47 of us here said that we are
willing to vote today on the five spending bills? Did he miss that somehow?
Republicans are in charge of the Oval
Office. They are in charge of the House
of Representatives, and Republicans
are in charge of the Senate.
Mr. SCHMITT. Will the Senator yield
for a question?
Mr. MERKLEY. Yes. When I complete my remarks, I will be happy to
address the question.
We are ready to vote now on those
five bills. So, if there is a shutdown, it
is clear where it is coming from. It is
coming from the Republican leadership
and the President of the United States
of America.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S317

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

I have been profoundly disturbed by
what I have seen in the way that the
agents from Customs and Border Protection and ICE have acted across this
country. I held 17 townhalls in very
conservative, Republican counties, in
super red counties, in blue counties, in
purple counties. People came out from
across my State to say they are
shocked and that they are disturbed by
what they are seeing happening across
our entire Nation.
They came to my townhalls to say
one simple thing: No more must this
conduct occur. So I have come to the
floor now to say: No more. No more
rogue patrols of Federal agents accosting people based on the color of their
skin or their accents. No more intrusions and violations in the sensitive
places like churches, mosques, synagogues, schools, daycare centers, hospitals, courthouses, and polling places.
No more secret police tactics in which
agents hide their personal identities,
hide their Agency identity, cover their
faces, use unmarked vans so people
don’t even know if they are being confronted by someone who has legitimate
authority. No more Federal agents arresting people and, in fact, knocking
down doors without warrants.
May I remind my colleagues that
there is a Constitution of the United
States of America and that it says you
cannot knock down doors without a
warrant?
It is shocking to see a memo from
this President saying the executive
branch can tell other parts of the executive branch they can violate the
Fourth Amendment and knock down
doors—violating
a
fundamental
premise of the privacy and security and
freedom of the people of the United
States of America.
No more blatant lies from Kristi
Noem when citizen victims have been
assaulted. She is quick to immediately
say they are terrorists or they are
would-be assassins when she has absolutely no evidence to support that, and
immediately you know there will be
nothing close to an independent or fair
investigation. Immediately you know
she is making it up because she hasn’t
collected the information. Then the
videos come out, and they show that
she lied to the American people not
once, not twice, not three times, but
time and time and time again. The
American people have witnessed the
truth with their own eyes thanks to
the citizens who were responsibly
videotaping the interactions.
No more corrupt Federal investigations that blame ordinary citizens for
ICE thuggery. No more blocking Members of Congress from touring immigration facilities or stonewalling congressional oversight. No more abducting
children off the street, including a 5year-old in a hat with little puppy ears
on it.
No more terrorizing our community.
No more executions of our citizens like
Renee Good and Alex Pretti.
Colleagues, ICE has failed to follow
the law. They have failed to honor the

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

Constitution. They have destroyed
their own legitimacy and integrity.
Democrats have said: We are ready to
vote on all five of the spending bills
that do not involve ICE. Do it right
now.
Republican leadership says: Hell no.
We want to shut down the government.
Wow. Then they want to blame
Democrats. Let’s have an honest conversation about who is responsible if
there is a government shutdown, and
that lays across the aisle to the right.
The DHS bill must be separated because these issues must be debated and
addressed. If the goal of my Republican
colleagues is to avoid a debate over the
misconduct of Customs and Border
Protection and ICE, then they are not
fulfilling their responsibilities as representatives of the citizens of the
United States of America, who value
their freedom, who value their privacy,
who never want to see the Federal Government knocking down their doors
without a warrant.
Kristi Noem has so failed in her honesty with America. She must go.
As the Senate eventually considers
the Department of Homeland Security
bill, they must enact serious, meaningful reforms, including ending the roaming patrols with all the violations they
have been involved in, unmasking the
secret police, ensuring accountability
and fair investigations.
Let me remind you that in Trump’s
so-called Big Beautiful Bill—you remember the one. That was the bill that
cut nutrition, that cut healthcare,
making it far more expensive for mega
millions of Americans in order to give
$75 billion to ICE, kind of advanced
funding it for, like, 5 years into the future. And they want additional money
for ICE now with no debate on the floor
of the Senate? They want to suppress a
legitimate conversation about defending the privacy and rights of all Americans and about defending our Constitution? No, absolutely not.
So, to every Senator, in recognizing
they already have—ICE that is—mega
millions in their pocket or, actually,
billions—$75 billion—not one more dollar for ICE thuggery.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Minnesota.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Mr. President, I
want to thank Senator SMITH and my
colleagues for being here today to
stand up for the State of Minnesota,
for our Nation, and for our Constitution.
In the last year, we have too often
come to the floor to discuss tragedies
in our State. This summer, an assassin
killed our friend Melissa Hortman, the
former speaker of the Minnesota
House, and her husband Mark. We
were, once again, shaken to our core
when a mass shooter attacked Annunciation Catholic Church right in the
middle of mass—children in their first
week of school—when 2 children were
murdered, with 21 more people injured,
including 18 kids.
In recent weeks, Minnesota has, once
again, been at the center of America’s

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.033

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S318

heartbreak, but we are also at the center of America’s courage and hope. We
honor Renee Good today—Renee Good,
who left behind three children, including a 6-year-old, when she was shot and
killed by an ICE agent.
Her wife said this: ‘‘Kindness radiated out of her. . . . She literally sparkled’’ and asked everyone to ‘‘honor
her memory by living her values: rejecting hate and choosing compassion.’’
We also honor the memory of Alex
Pretti, a VA intensive care nurse who
did one of the most selfless jobs people
can think of: caring for our veterans,
often in their final hours. He was a
man described by his friends and family as a kind-hearted soul.
Both Renee and Alex should be alive
today.
It is not just these horrific killings.
The administration, through its surge
of thousands of ICE and Border Patrol
agents to Minnesota—outnumbering
the 10 largest metropolitan police departments combined in the Twin Cities
and outnumbering the sworn officers in
the Minneapolis-Saint Paul departments by 3 to 1—has repeatedly violated the constitutional rights of the
people of Minnesota. The fact is that
anyone who cares about federalism,
about freedoms, about liberties should
be horrified by what is happening.
If you care about the Constitution, I
say to our colleagues on the other side
of the aisle: You should be horrified because what is happening in our State
has been a violation of the First
Amendment—the right to assemble—
and the Second Amendment. Alex was
a lawful gun owner, but he was immediately criticized for that when, in
fact, the video showed very clearly—
very clearly—because eyes don’t lie—
that his gun was firmly in its holster
and that it was taken out by Border
Patrol agents.
They have been violating the Fourth
Amendment, ramming into people’s
homes without having a judicial warrant. Agents have been demanding,
without even reasonable suspicion,
that Minnesotans show proof of citizenship just based on how they look.
This administration is also going
after the Fifth Amendment—the right
to due process—as it has denied detainees’ access to counsel. As the chief
judge in the district of Minnesota—a
former clerk to Justice Scalia and a
George Bush appointee—has made
clear, they have been defying court orders.
So I say to our Republican colleagues: If you are a defender of liberty, you must defend it when it
counts, not just when it is convenient.
Federal immigration agents bashed
upon a door and detained a Hmong
elder, who is a U.S. citizen and whose
mom was one of the most loved nurses
who took care of our troops during the
Vietnam war. They held him at gunpoint without a warrant. They took
him out of his home in his underwear.
He had nothing but Crocs on his feet.
They put him in a car and drove him

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

around for an hour. Then they later
discovered they had the wrong guy. In
fact, the guy they were looking for had
been in jail all along.
We have all seen the photos of 5-yearold little Liam, who was standing
there, scared in his blue rabbit hat
with floppy ears and Spider-Man backpack, as agents apprehended him.
This administration sent a 2-year-old
to Texas despite there being a pending
court case. The order was issued, but
they didn’t want to wait for that. They
sent the 2-year-old to Texas when her
mom was waiting back in Minnesota.
Thanks to the late-night work of my
staff and several local lawmakers, she
has been reunited with her mom. But it
should never have come to this. A
court case was pending, but it was disregarded.
In another instance, a U.S. citizen
was forced to the ground, placed in a
choke hold, and held in a detention
center for hours. He offered multiple
times to show his U.S. passport but was
ignored.
This has gone so beyond any original
reason for Federal agents. It has gone
well beyond the fraud investigation.
That was a good reason to bring people
to help, but that is not what this was—
not the 2-year-old, not the 5-year-old,
not the Hmong elder. It has gone way
beyond apprehending violent offenders—not the 2-year-old, not the 5-yearold, not the Hmong elder.
This has turned into a Kristi Noemand Greg Bovino-driven shock and awe
public spectacle that is meant to intimidate our State. In fact, Pam Bondi,
on the same day Alex was killed, sent
a letter to the Governor of Minnesota,
saying the administration would remove these 3,000 ICE agents if Minnesota would violate the privacy of its
citizens by turning over their personal
voter data—something Republican secretaries of state in States like Georgia
have refused to do. The Justice Department has actually sued 24 States for refusing to turn over the data, including,
as I mentioned, Georgia and also New
Hampshire. Three district court judges
have dismissed these cases. It is clear
that our State is being targeted, but
they have tried to get this data in 24
States. They say: We will bring out the
ICE agents if only you will just give us
that data.
There are 3,000 Federal officers in
Minnesota, and I cannot state it more
unequivocally: ICE must leave Minnesota. Law enforcement has made this
clear. They can’t do their jobs—they
can’t do their jobs. They can’t investigate burglaries. They can’t help on
some complex cases because they are
being called to people’s homes all the
time because of the ICE agents hanging
around homes of just regular citizens,
in parking lots chasing people down.
Local businesses, business leaders
have come out and said: Enough. Police
chiefs in our State have joined together. Police chiefs across the Nation
have joined together and said: We believe in proper police procedures and

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

the rule of law. But the biggest story
out of this is the everyday people, the
ordinary people doing extraordinary
things.
They have rallied together, brought
food to their neighbors, drove other
kids to school, showed up for small
businesses and marching 50,000 strong.
I was there. I saw it. Fifty thousand
peaceful marchers in 10-below weather.
You know, 250 years ago, our Nation
declared independence from a King.
Our Nation was born from the deep revulsion to the idea of an illegal occupation, a standing army of British troops
literally taking over our streets, demanding to see papers, acting with cruelty, resorting to violence.
In those times, newspapers shared
what was happening. Well, today,
Americans are seeing it firsthand on
video. Americans heard Renee Good’s
final words to the officer who shot her:
‘‘I’m not mad at you.’’
They saw Alex spend his final moments trying to help a woman who had
been shoved to the ground. His last
words: ‘‘Are you OK?’’
And just as Americans fought for liberty 250 years ago, they are standing up
for liberty now. People across the
country are speaking out against this
cruelty. And, of course, it is good that
Bovino was removed. Other people have
to be removed too. Kristi Noem
shouldn’t be in her job anymore. But
mostly we need these ICE agents out of
Minnesota, and we hope that happens
soon. Border Patrol, they began that
removal, but the ICE agents have to
get out of Minnesota. It is a very dangerous situation.
I spoke with Alex’s parents the next
day after we lost him. Through the
tears, they talked about what he was
like, and they wanted the world to
know the truth and how much it hurt
them to have senior administrative officials call him a domestic terrorist,
call him a would-be assassin.
Alex’s sister said:
Alex always wanted to make a difference
in this world, and it’s devastating he won’t
be here to witness the impact that he was
making.

We must stand up. And so we are asking our colleagues—they know the
White House. We have all done our best
here—but to tell them it is time for
those ICE agents to come home. There
must be new leadership in the Department of Homeland Security now, and
there must be major reforms to these
Agencies before this Congress should
approve another cent.
First, we need to stop these roving
bands. This means coordination with
State and local law enforcement and no
more bounties that encourage immigration officials to detain individuals
even without cause.
We need proper training and a code of
conduct that includes transparent investigations and meaningful accountability for when agents break the law
or violate the Constitution. This also
means use-of-force policies that are the
same for local police.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.035

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

Immigration agents, like all law enforcement, should comply with the
Fourth Amendment.
This bounty system—we have had
stories. We have hundreds of cases in
our offices right now where people were
stopped: a White guy, Latino. They
said to the Latino: Where are you
from? The Latino says: I was born in
America. They put him in the car,
drive him a few blocks, let him out or
take him to the detention center and
then let him go.
Bonuses?
Bounties?
The
masks
should come off, and the body cameras
should go on.
There must be thorough, objective,
and independent investigations into
these killings. The Justice Department
refused to cooperate with local investigators in Minnesota after Renee’s
death, and over a dozen career prosecutors in Minnesota and Washington resigned rather than take part in a miscarriage of justice.
After Alex’s killing, the Federal Government blocked State law enforcement from accessing the crime scene. I
know because I got panicked calls—because I used to be a prosecutor in the
county—about what was going on.
A Federal judge, appointed by Donald
Trump, had to issue an order preventing the Federal Government from
destroying evidence.
I am opposed to this ICE funding bill,
and I am very appreciative that people
are starting to talk about reforms to
this Agency. But the money that was
passed this summer, $75 billion, making this Agency bigger than the FBI—
that was wrong. I opposed it, and so did
my Democratic colleagues.
The costs continue to mount. Right
now, our Federal, State, and local governments are spending an estimated $18
million a week on the surge in Minnesota alone, and what do you get out
of it? Two out of three of the shootings
resulting in death in Minneapolis—two
out of three—were caused by Federal
agents.
I appreciate Senator SCHUMER. I appreciate my colleague Senator SMITH
and so many others for saying no to
this, and I truly appreciate that a number of our Republican colleagues have
started to say that what ICE is doing is
wrong. A few have said Kristi Noem
should no longer be in her job.
ICE needs to leave Minnesota.
It was in 1776 when future First Lady
Abigail Adams wrote to her husband
John Adams describing the retreat of
British ships from Boston, saying their
numbers were so large ‘‘they looked
like a forest.’’ But despite their force,
it was the determination of those demanding liberty that won that day.
For Minnesotans right now, every
corner, everywhere that you drive—
really, it is not just the city; suburbs,
shopping malls, rural areas—they see
an ICE agent. The people are scared
every single day, and it feels like that
forest, but out of that forest comes
these people of our State that are willing to stand up, citizens that are will-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S319

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

ing to stand up to help people they
may not even know because they understand what is at stake for the liberties of this country.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SCHMITT). The Senator from Minnesota.
Ms. SMITH. Mr. President, I thank
my colleague Senator KLOBUCHAR and
all of our colleagues who are joining us
on the floor this afternoon.
We are here today because we have a
full-blown, dangerous emergency unfolding in Minnesota.
It is happening right now as I speak,
and we need your help to end it. America needs your help. The Nation has
been appalled by what we have seen
happening in our State of Minnesota,
the stories that have captured everyone’s attention.
Two innocent U.S. citizens, Alex
Pretti and Renee Good, shot and killed
on the street in broad daylight by Federal agents just as they were trying to
help their neighbors and document
with their telephones what was going
on, the brutality of it.
A 5-year-old in a Spider-Man backpack, Liam Conejo Ramos. So Liam is
coming home with his dad and the
agents are there and Liam is trying to
get inside. The agents try to use Liam
as bait to lure the mother outside.
Liam is still in detention. He is still
in Texas—a 5-year-old, 1,000 miles away
from home.
Colleagues, my head is so full of stories, so full of stories that might not
have gotten all the attention but tell
the tale of the brutality and illegality
of Operation Metro Surge in Minnesota.
This is about a U.S. citizen, a young
man, who is walking out of his place of
work to get lunch, and he sees an ICE
agent. He is concerned. He is afraid
that he might get targeted so he turns
around and walks the other way. The
ICE agent runs after him and tackles
the guy. He is a U.S. citizen, throws
him to the ground, injures him, and detains him for hours, all the while this
young man has documents to prove
who he is.
It is about a teenager in Willmar,
MN. Willmar is a smaller regional center in Minnesota. It is place where the
Jennie-O turkey processing plant is. It
is an incredible community.
Here is a teenager in Willmar who is
stopped by ICE. She is beaten. She gets
a concussion, and she is detained for 2
days, and she is a U.S. citizen.
So imagine—it is hard to imagine
this. But imagine you are in your
neighborhood, and there are those roving vans of Federal agents. They have
no identification. They drive around in
black Suburbans. They have masks
over their faces, and at the drop of a
hat, they just leap out, and they go
after people. They are restraining
them. They are hitting them. They are
spraying them with chemical agents,
and then people are just shoved into
Suburbans and driven off.

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

And nobody really knows what happens to them. This is happening in
Minnesota, if it isn’t happening in your
neighborhood. I want people to understand this is not just Minneapolis-St.
Paul where so many of the TV cameras
have been.
It is Rochester, MN, where the
schools are reporting a huge falloff of
kids going to school because they are
so afraid. Their families are so afraid
to send them to school.
It is in Mankato, MN, which is in the
southern part of the State. It is another regional center, a farming community. I heard today on the public
radio station that the local immigrant
rights organization is getting 400 calls
a day from people who are trying to
figure out what their rights are, what
to do: A family member of mine is detained. I don’t know where they are.
This is happening in dozens of cities.
So what we have here, colleagues, is
a campaign. It is a campaign not about
public safety; it is a campaign about
fear and intimidation. This is about secret police roaming in our cities with
no identification and no name tags.
What they do is they overtly target
individuals because of the accent that
they have, the skin color that they
have. I am not just imagining this is
their motivation because these agents
are telling people this is what is going
on.
I mean, this is the story of a Hmong
woman that I met in Hmong Village
just last week who, in tears, is telling
me that her son has been detained. He
has been gone for days and days and
days, and she doesn’t know when she is
going to get him back.
Where is he?
This is about ICE agents going to a
suburban restaurant in the Twin Cities, having lunch, and then after lunch,
they go into the kitchen to detain the
folks that are working in the kitchen.
We are seeing this happen every single day; battering down doors, breaking car windows. There literally—there
is no pretext. There is no warrant.
They are targeting people, not because
they know that they have committed
some crime, but because of what they
look like.
There is this thing that we have in
the Twin Cities now. They are called
ghost cars. What is this? This is a car
that is left in the street, the middle of
the street sometimes, the door open,
the engine running, the keys still in
the car, and nobody is there. People
know what happened. ICE came and
got whoever was driving the car and
took them away.
You know, if you are going through a
legal immigration process in this country, you go through a process, and it is
your obligation—your legal obligation—to check in with the Federal authorities.
What is happening now is that you
are getting—folks are getting—legal
residence getting a letter to appear.
They have a choice. They know that if
they don’t comply, they are breaking

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.036

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S320

the law, so of course they comply. But
when they go to the courthouse, what
happens is an agent is waiting outside
the courthouse. An agent is there waiting to detain that person who is following the law, who has done nothing
wrong. In fact, they are doing everything they possibly can do to comply
with the law, and yet they are being
detained.
These are not, my colleagues—these
are not what you hear from this administration about the so-called worst of
the worst. These are people that are active, contributing members of our community. These are legal residents who
hold green cards who are being flown to
Texas with no legal representation, no
access to counsel.
And you know what happens sometimes? They get down there; they go
through another screening; and the
Federal agents say: OK. Sorry about
that. We made a mistake. And they
just dump them on the streets of Houston or wherever they may be.
No documents, no identification—
how are they going to even get home?
That is happening in this country right
now. And if they are not released, because not everyone is released—if they
are not released, people have died in
custody. People with no criminal
record have been deported to countries
that they have never even known.
So this is happening in Minnesota,
but this is not just Minnesota. I think,
because Minnesota has resisted so
strongly and because the tactics of Operation Metro Surge have been so brutal, we have gotten so much of the attention, but this is not just a Minnesota problem.
I ask you, colleagues, to consider
how these dangerous and poorly
trained and unaccountable ICE agents
have been treating Americans who
have been exercising their constitutional right to peacefully speak and to
demonstrate. These Americans have
been intimidated. They have been
taunted. They have been beaten. They
have even been killed.
We have seen the images of people
being maced at point-blank range. You
can see this in the final pictures of
Alex Pretti before he is killed.
We know that they are tracking demonstrators with facial ID technology,
following them home to intimidate
them. And, in fact, I have heard stories
from demonstrators who have been led
home by ICE agents—so that those
agents are communicating: We know
where you live. We know who you are.
We want you to be quiet—pepper balls,
tear gas.
And this is not just happening, colleagues, in situations of civil unrest. I
am not talking about riots here. I am
talking about a family that is trying to
get home. They have six kids in the
car. They have been at basketball practice, and they end up with a can of tear
gas thrown under their car. It explodes.
It lifts the car up off the ground, and
that family ends up in the emergency
room. They need to be decontaminated
from the poison.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

Now, I am telling you these stories
because I want you to understand a
very important thing: What is going on
in Minnesota is not about public safety. It has nothing to do with public
safety. In fact, what is going on in Minnesota is hurting public safety. As Senator KLOBUCHAR said, police chiefs of
suburban communities have come forward and said: This is not sustainable.
This is dangerous.
A police chief told the story about
how one of his own officers, who was
off duty, was stopped for no reason by
ICE agents, and they threatened to get
her out of the car and take her away
before she finally tells them. She decides: I have to tell them that I am a
police officer. And they leave her
alone.
This is about people dialing 911 because an ICE agent is at their home,
and they are so scared about what to
do.
So I want to be clear: We are pro-public safety in Minnesota. We have
worked often with Federal authorities
to catch bad guys and lock them up.
But we need ICE out of Minnesota.
What is really going on here is a systemic and organized campaign of fear
and intimidation.
This is government police, sanctioned at the highest levels of our government, completely unbound, beating
and attacking and detaining and arresting and killing American citizens.
This is what America looks like with
an authoritarian government, with no
laws.
But here is what is happening not
only in Minnesota but around the
country. Our constituents, the Presiding Officer’s constituents are watching these videos, and they are hearing
these stories, and they are reading
these reports. And what is happening is
a sense of moral outrage is rising up,
that feeling that you have in your gut
when you—that feeling of anguish and
anger and disgust, when you know that
you are seeing something that is just
wrong. You know that it is wrong and
that you can’t look away from it.
And we are uplifted by this moral
outrage and the incredible courage of
Minnesotans, but we know what we are
seeing here. And people are responding
everywhere. I have talked to hundreds
of people, over the past few weeks,
about what is going on in Minnesota—
people who are organizing mutual aid
to get groceries and diapers to families; but smalltown folks that hate to
see this happen to their neighbors; and
local mayors and farmers and small
businesses; Democrats, Republicans,
people who aren’t political at all; law
enforcement officers, faith leaders,
Second Amendment supporters, and
civil libertarians.
And there is the man in the truck
that I saw when I was in Minneapolis,
taking groceries to people on Monday.
He is in the truck, and I drive up. He is,
at first, kind of concerned that I might
be ICE. Then he is worried that I am
going to think that he is ICE. And we

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

start to talk, and he said of the President: I voted for him. I told my kids. I
talked my kids into voting for him.
And I am so upset. I am so embarrassed. I never thought that this would
happen. This is so messed up.
This, colleagues, is the coalition of
the horrified, the people who see this
and feel a sense of moral outrage, people who are bound together not by politics or faction or identity but by that
feeling in your gut that what you are
seeing is wrong and that we have to do
something about it, that this can’t be
how we operate.
So that brings us to here, today, in
this august Chamber of the U.S. Senate, and we ask ourselves: OK, what do
we do? What is our place here?
We have all worked really hard to get
here, and we all are here, I believe, because we love this country. And I suspect that almost all of us who serve in
this Chamber understand. They see the
threat. We see the threat that this
poses to the very underpinnings of our
country.
And I am so grateful to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle, Republicans and Democrats, who have
spoken out, who have called for a fair
and impartial investigation, who have
called for changes of leadership. I agree
with that. That is all really important.
But, colleagues, that is not going to
be enough to stop this. This is a crucial
moment in our country, not just for
Minnesota but for our entire country,
and our answer to the question of what
we do in the face of this illegality, this
brutality—our answer to all those people, all those constituents who feel
that sense of moral outrage, who are
begging us to stand up for them—our
answer can’t be that we are not going
to do anything. It can’t be the status
quo. It can’t be: Well, the procedures of
the Senate and the House make it really impossible for us to get something
done. So there is really not that much
we can do right now.
That is not acceptable.
But, colleagues, I can see a path forward. And, look, I want to be really
clear. In my view, we need to start over
with the Department of Homeland Security. I think it should be ripped down
to the studs and that we should start
over. But that is not the question for
today. That is not the question for
right now. Right now, we need to take
immediate, commonsense steps to stop
the worst of the violence and the violations that Americans are suffering.
So, to be clear, I will not vote for any
funding for DHS, if we do not take action to stop this emergency unfolding
in my State.
And I truly believe that we can find
agreement on both sides of the aisle for
a path forward. It will not solve all of
these problems, but we can address the
worst of the assault.
We need to end these roving patrols
of Federal agents that are detaining
and arresting people that have done
nothing wrong. You can’t break down
someone’s door and arrest them without a warrant.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.037

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

We need accountability. ICE agents
should be required to abide by the same
set of laws, the same use-of-force
standards that your local police department abides by. We need a fair and
unbiased investigation, and we need no
more of this secret police—no more
masks and agents without proper identification, and body cameras.
I mean, to me, this seems like pretty
simple and commonsense and reasonable reforms that can only be achieved
through the force of law. We are long
past the moment where any letter or
Executive order or promise can secure
our trust. This is our path forward.
I am thinking about, as I wrap up
this speech—I am thinking about all of
my colleagues who are here to speak
with such intention about what is happening. I want to just take a pause to
acknowledge my beloved Minnesota.
I am so proud to be your Senator,
and, you know, so many people around
the country are looking to you—to us—
for hope, and you are showing the
world how to respond to violence and
how to stand up to bullies with
strength and with dignity and with
peace. You are putting your own safety
and your own bodies on the line to protect your neighborhoods and your democracy. You are risking your own
safety to document the emergency and
the inhumanity unfolding on our
streets. And you are even—you are
even—sometimes doing it by singing.
In Minnesota, we show up for our
neighbors. We help people out. We
don’t give in to bullies. We stand
strong. We stand in the park with a
candle in our hands to mourn but also
to kindle hope. And I know that Minnesotans are going to stay strong because, as Dr. King preached, we know
how to put our faith into action.
As Dr. King said, ‘‘Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. We are caught in an inescapable
network of mutuality, tied in a single
garment of destiny.’’
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Hawaii.
Mr. SCHATZ. Mr. President, I want
to thank the Senators from Minnesota—the junior and senior Senators
from Minnesota—for their incredible
leadership in serving as a ballast not
just for the people of their State but
for the whole country. Tyranny is tyranny, and the people of this country,
whatever our other differences, don’t
want anything to do with it.
You might be a liberal; you might be
a conservative. You might be for immigration, or you might be against it.
You might think that guns should be
more readily accessible, or you might
think that guns should be harder to
purchase. But when the U.S. Government is killing your fellow citizens in
your name, none of that matters, because tyranny is tyranny, no matter
the tyrant. Overreach is overreach, regardless of cause. And state violence is
state violence, and it is against everything that this country stands for.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S321

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

There is a reason that a very unusual—an unusually broad—coalition
of unlikely partners quickly converged
in the wake of the tragedy, and it
wasn’t some organizing strategy. This
was organic, across the country and
certainly across the great State of
Minnesota. It was liberals. It was conservatives. It was gun owners. It was
clergy members. It was business executives. It was libertarians. It was Trump
voters.
Why the new unity? Because people
from different places and persuasions,
faiths and financial situations understand that, at least on the very narrow
question of freedom and liberty, our
fates and our futures are intertwined.
No one is free until everyone is free.
In my Jewish tradition, during the
Passover seder, it is customary to recount the story of the Israelites’ exodus from Egypt. And the reason the
story is told anew every year is to remind us that the struggle for freedom
is not confined to the past and limited
to others but instead has to live inside
of all of us. The Haggadah says:
We were slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt, and
the Lord, our God, brought us out of there
with a strong hand and an outstretched arm.

Not ‘‘they’’—not ‘‘they’’—but ‘‘we’’—
the point being that no matter how
many generations removed we are from
that story, we are still obligated to see
ourselves as though we were personally
freed from slavery in Egypt.
No one is freed until everyone is
freed. Our Founders knew that too. The
Constitution deliberately begins with
‘‘We the People.’’
The Declaration of Independence
promises
equality
and
‘‘certain
unalienable Rights’’ that we hold to be
‘‘self-evident.’’
Collective responsibility to protect
freedom and liberty is central to the
American experiment. It always has
been, which is why in the summer of
1963, sitting in a dark jail cell in Birmingham, AL, in the throes of the battle for civil rights, Martin Luther
King, Jr., wrote:
Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice
everywhere. We are caught in an inescapable
network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny. Whatever affects one directly affects all indirectly.

No one is free until everyone is free.
That same spirit of solidarity has
united people for generations.
In Hawaii, it was the sugar plantation workers, in the 1940s, tired of
being overworked and underpaid, who
organized across ethnic lines for fair
conditions. Up until that point, they
had been divided by the plantation
owners into separate camps—Chinese
camp, Japanese camp, Filipino camp,
and so on—and paid different rates for
the same work. And so they came together, vowing to treat an injury to
one as an injury to all. They went on
strike and won, altering the trajectory
of workers in Hawaii to this day.
An injury to one is an injury to all.
No one is free until everyone is free.
If there is a lesson in this collective
outrage and widespread condemnation

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

of ICE’s conduct, it is that people don’t
want state-sponsored violence on their
streets in their names.
It is not a question of whether you
voted for Trump or Biden.
It is not a question of whether you
agree with Joe Biden’s immigration
policy.
And the idea that the immigration
enforcement has to be accompanied by
enthusiastic cruelty is so far out of the
mainstream of American society. Nobody wants this, save for a handful of
people intoxicated by power and deluded by their own fantasies.
Thuggery is not strength. Strength
must be used to protect people, to give
a voice to the voiceless, and make people feel safe. That is impressive and
noble and important precisely because
it is harder to practice and harder still
to come by.
But that is what makes the response
in Minnesota of ordinary Americans—
taking it upon themselves to stand up
for their neighbors—so extraordinary.
I want to read a little bit of what
Adam Serwer observed in The Atlantic
about the mistaken assumptions that
fed this administration’s brutality. He
wrote:
The secret fear of the morally depraved is
that virtue is actually common, and that
they’re the ones who are alone. In Minnesota, all of the ideological cornerstones of
MAGA have been proven false at once. Minnesotans, not the armed thugs of ICE and the
Border Patrol, are brave. Minnesotans have
shown that their community is socially cohesive because of its diversity and not in
spite of it. Minnesotans have found and loved
one another in a world atomized by social
media, where empty men have tried to fill
their lonely soul with lies about their own
inherent superiority. Minnesotans have preserved everything worthwhile about Western
civilization, while armed brutes try to tear
it down by force.

Look, I get that we are all divided
and distracted and exhausted and that
it is not going to resolve overnight.
But in the wake of the tragedies in
Minnesota, in Minneapolis, a bright red
line has emerged. We can argue about
everything else, but we will not tolerate tyranny.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Delaware.
Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER. Mr. President, I rise today in disbelief of where
we are as a country. I will tell you, in
listening to the speeches that came before
me—such
powerful
words—I
thought to myself, What can I actually
contribute to this moment? As a matter of fact, when my colleagues said
that they were going to schedule this
floor bloc, I never thought about what
I would say; I just said yes.
And in my mind, there are a few
things I do want to say. First, I want
to start off by thanking my sister Senators, Senator AMY KLOBUCHAR and
Senator TINA SMITH, as well as former
colleague Representative ILHAN OMAR,
for your strength and leadership in
such a trying time.
Secondly, I want to acknowledge the
people of Minnesota who have been

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.038

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S322

through so, so much. I recall years ago,
going to Minnesota myself for the memorial service for George Floyd and
being with the community to have conversations about community policing,
and then witnessing the tragedy of Melissa Hortman, and so much that has
happened in that State. And so, to the
people of Minnesota, I want to say
thank you for showing us strength, resilience, what it truly means to be
your sister’s keeper, your brother’s
keeper, and to show up for your neighbors. You are truly inspirational.
I guess what has been on my heart is
the history of this country. We will be
celebrating Black History Month, and
at a time where history is trying to be
replaced—erased—I think it is important to think back on the things that
we have been through.
And what it took to make it through
those times were not necessarily our
eloquent speeches, but it was that everyday people did something. And so,
right now, the words that are ringing
through my head are that they had
their time; this is our time. We didn’t
ask for it, but we are prepared for it
whether we know it or not.
And the three words that stick in my
head right now is: Now we must. It is
our time. It is our time to stand up for
our brothers and sisters across this
country.
When the administration first signaled their goals to do these kinds of
interventions across the country, it
was to arrest violent criminals. That is
what I heard. But in reality, when you
see a mother of three shot, when you
see an ICU nurse who works for the
Veterans’ Administration shot and
killed, when you see children and families and pastors and priests and people
across the country—not just in Minnesota—concerned to even walk in
their own neighborhoods, maybe because of their color or their accent,
that is not the way it is supposed to be.
So that means each and every one of
us has to do what we can in this moment to prevent this lawless chaos that
is happening on our streets.
I will say that what we are trying to
put forward as Democrats, again, is
just common sense, practical—actually
safety measures to keep our country
safe. And so as we think about the fact
that right now there are armed cars
roving, people in masks that we don’t
even know who they are—they should
be identified. People shouldn’t have to
worry about carrying their papers with
them.
When we think about the process,
people shouldn’t be knocking on your
doors and pulling you outside of your
house—you don’t even get a chance to
put on your clothes, and they don’t
have a criminal warrant. They should
be following the same rules as our
State and local police officers follow in
our States. Because what we are hearing is their efforts right now are making it even more difficult for law enforcement to do their jobs and keep us
safe.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

And so there are, in this moment,
things that each of us can do, and I
hope that our Republican colleagues
will join us. I hope they will join us in
making sure that not only do we continue to have public safety that includes the public and our law enforcement, but that we reform an Agency
that has received over $75 billion as a
slush fund. We want to make sure that
money is targeted, that people are
trained, and that they are doing what
is right and that they are doing at
least what our State and local police
officers do.
And, again, I want to end by just saying that I didn’t come to give a big formal speech. I came to say that each
and every one of us in this moment can
do our part.
Our Senators—again, thank you so
much to AMY, thank you so much to
TINA for your strength and for your example.
Again, I encourage our Republican
colleagues to join us as we reform and
change that Agency, meaning ICE and
DHS. But more importantly, I think
what is at the core of all of this is that
we still have a democracy when it is all
said and done.
And so my call, again, is for each of
us to just do your part, to stay strong.
And I will not be voting for this package if we do not pull out DHS and have
those reforms that we spoke of.
And I, again, want to just say: It is
our turn. Now we must.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MORENO). The Senator from Virginia.
Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, thank you
so much, and what an honor it is to be
together with our colleagues from Minnesota to appreciate their leadership
and how they stood in the gap for Minnesotans who have really suffered in
these last weeks, to be together with so
many colleagues on the floor to talk
about this most existential moment.
You don’t have to be a spiritual or
religious person to—when you see a
mother murdered and her last name is
‘‘Good’’, the murder of good—it should
make all of us step back and look in
the mirror and ask what it means. You
do not have to be a spiritually attuned
person to watch a VA employee ICU
nurse get 10 bullets in his back and
step back and ask: Who are we?
These images are going around the
world, and people are not looking at
these images as who a particular person or administration is. They are
looking at this as: Is this who America
is? And that is what this debate is
about.
I take this very personally. From
birth to age 2, I was a Minnesotan. I
was born at St. Joseph’s Hospital in St.
Paul, MN. I still have family connections in Minnesota.
I, then, was a Kansan until I was 26,
and my more persuasive Virginian wife
convinced me to become a Virginian.
And now, 42 years later, I still have
these strong feelings and ties about the
State where I was born.

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

And as I watch the events and I hear
the pain and I get the dispatches from
friends and family who are in the midst
of this sharing with me the stories,
much as my colleagues have shared
them today, I realize this isn’t just
about Minnesota. It could be anywhere
in our country.
Although, I will express this question: Could it be anywhere? Because it
does seem as if the administration is
targeting this kind of rogue violence in
certain communities, not others. And
when the Attorney General of the
United States, our Nation’s chief law
enforcement officer, by letter suggests
that the rogue activities in Minnesota
could stop if Minnesota would only
turn over its voting rolls, it does make
you wonder, as my colleague Senator
SMITH asked: Is this really about law
enforcement?
But the fear that immigrant communities and others who want to peacefully assemble and present grievances
about government—a right guaranteed
in the First Amendment—that fear is
something that isn’t just in Minnesota;
it is in my community too. I live in
Richmond, VA. The Commonwealth
has a population that is about 12 percent immigrant. The church I go to is
heavily a Congolese parish. It is a
Catholic parish. Many folks in the
Congo are Catholics, and we have seen
a refugee population grow in my parish.
We have immigrant communities all
over. The meeting I had right before I
came to the floor was with a Cub Scout
group from McLean, VA, and they
talked to me about the rights of immigrants because so many of them or
their parents are immigrants.
And the fear in our immigrant communities is palpable even when there
haven’t been roving patrols. Will they
start tomorrow? You see reduced attendance at childcare centers. You see
reduced attendance at church events
because people hear rumors that, if
they go, they might be targeted. The
fear is palpable.
What I want to just say, Mr. President, that I hope we will kind of bear
in mind, and this is: We all come to
this place with different life experiences, and a life experience that I have
had that is, you know, different than
some is I have been a mayor and Governor and know what it is to have a police force.
When I was the mayor of Richmond,
we had a police force. When I was the
Governor of Virginia, we had the Virginia State Police.
Let me tell you something police
forces don’t like: They don’t like roving bands of people with masks and
without IDs roving through their communities without coordinating.
In Virginia, this kind of started a
couple of months back in a couple of
our courthouses who are patrolled by
deputy sheriffs. The court function and
jails are run by sheriffs in Virginia,
and they are there to provide security.
And in courthouses in Chesterfield
and Albemarle Counties in Virginia,

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.040

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

they started to see masked, unidentified folks show up to grab people. Now,
these are courthouses that are guarded
by deputy sheriffs with weapons who
are there to provide stability and security. And when there are masked people coming into the courts to grab others who don’t identify themselves or
coordinate with local law enforcement,
you raise the risk of a horrible—horrible—injury or accident or tragedy occurring.
Now we see this happening in Minnesota and elsewhere.
At a minimum, the mayor and Governor in me says we should not be allowing these roving patrols to run
roughshod in local communities without fully getting the approval and coordination with State and local law enforcement authorities. Anything short
of that treats State and local law enforcement as if they are the enemies
instead of partners in trying to promote public safety.
The other thing that I would point
out before handing it off to my next
colleague is something that is just so
common. It is so common in law enforcement at the State and local level.
If there is an officer-involved shooting
in virtually every law enforcement
agency in this country, the officer involved in the shooting is immediately
put on administrative leave. That is
not a judgment that they were wrong;
it is just a judgment that shooting is
so serious that there should be an investigation before that officer is allowed to return to duty. This is standard operating procedure in tiny town
police offices that have a handful of officials in Virginia and elsewhere. Yet
that is not what is being done at the
Federal level.
In fact, the Washington Post ran a
wonderful story yesterday that analyzed many instances of DHS officials
shooting folks, and before an investigation was even done, the administration
was out vindicating them, not putting
them on administrative leave, and, finally, even blaming victims, calling
them domestic terrorists and assassins.
That is the last thing I want to say.
The scale of the lie goes up depending
upon the depth of the shame and guilt
feeling. So when someone is killed and
a key Cabinet Secretary jumps out—or
a key White House official—to label
them as a domestic terrorist or an assassin, clearly contradicting all the
available evidence that every American and every person in the world can
see, you know that the lie is being
magnified to cover up the depth of
shame and guilt that individual is feeling.
It is time for us to do right by reforms, but it is also time to stop lying.
Stop lying about these people who are
standing up and trying to be good
neighbors and protect their fellow man.
Stop calling them domestic terrorists.
Stop calling them would-be assassins.
Stop trying to trash their memories,
pour salt in the wounds of their parents
and their loved ones and their children

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S323

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

to cover up your own lack of responsibility and your lack of accountability.
We are going to hold you accountable. We are going to make sure that
you are accountable—not based on a
promise of future action by this administration.
We need to get the five bills done. We
can get them done and then turn to a
DHS reform that is put in law, that is
signed by the President, so that when
the President or his cronies decide
later to break it, we can go to court
and enforce it.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Michigan.
Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, on Saturday, America witnessed another horrific tragedy in Minneapolis when Alex
Pretti was shot and killed by Department of Homeland Security law enforcement agents.
By all accounts—all accounts—Alex
was a dedicated member of his community. He served as an intensive care
nurse at the Veterans Affairs clinic in
Minneapolis.
On Saturday, he was simply exercising his rights as an American—the
very same rights for those veterans
that he fought to protect. He used his
First Amendment right of free speech
to show up for his community and
record interactions between Homeland
Security officers and his neighbors.
When agents became violent with a female protester, he stepped in to protect
her.
He also exercised his Second Amendment right to bear arms. Despite no
evidence that he was threatening anyone or holding anything but a phone in
his hands, officers still shot him repeatedly and killed him.
The American people have watched
the videos. They have seen with their
own eyes the evidence of DHS’s unjustified behavior and excessive use of
force. But mere moments after the
shots were fired, DHS officials jumped
to the claim that Mr. Pretti was a domestic terrorist and an assassin who
wanted to massacre law enforcement.
I want to be very clear on this. Those
statements are lies. They are lies used
to justify the unjustifiable actions of
some DHS officers.
The blatant lies of DHS leadership
and misconduct by the officers involved in the killings of Alex Pretti
and Renee Good are indefensible, and
they cannot stand. They violate the
public trust and stand in direct opposition to the values and the professionalism of many Federal law enforcement officers who follow the law and
serve with integrity every day.
Since these tragic events, people
from every corner of America have
made their voices heard. My office has
heard from thousands of Michiganders
about their outrage at the fatal shootings of both Renee Good and Alex
Pretti.
The American people’s message is
loud and it is clear: They are fed up
with the Trump administration’s mis-

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

handling of immigration enforcement,
and they are demanding—they are demanding—that we do something about
it.
Americans have every right to be enraged. I am outraged, and every Member of this Chamber should also be enraged. This is certainly not the country that I grew up in, and this is certainly not the country that we can
leave to the next generation.
In this moment, we have no choice
but to stand up for our communities,
for Renee Good, for Alex Pretti, and for
the very principles that our country
was founded on. That is why I will be
voting no on the bill before us unless—
unless—DHS funding is stripped out or
unless critical reforms are incorporated into the bill.
If the leader put the other five appropriation bills on the floor today, they
would pass. They would pass with bipartisan support—overwhelming bipartisan support. The DHS components
have unique but important functions
beyond immigration enforcement—securing our borders, combating human
trafficking, seizing deadly narcotics
being smuggled into our country, and
facilitating trade and travel—but personnel from these components have
been pulled from their core missions
and have instead been pressured to
focus exclusively on arbitrary quotas
and removing immigrants from our
country, even those who pose no serious threat to public safety.
This corruption of DHS’s mission has
directly contributed to the chaos and
violence we have seen in Minneapolis
and communities all across our country. That is why Senate Democrats are
calling for commonsense reforms—reforms like ensuring DHS officers wear
clear identification so people know
who they are dealing with in law enforcement and can hold them accountable; requiring DHS personnel to wear
body cameras so we have proper recordings of their conduct in immigration
enforcement; and requiring proper investigations after tragedies occur like
the recent shootings of both Renee
Good and Alex Pretti.
These are just a few of the examples
of
commonsense
practices
that
strengthen accountability and help ensure the safety of both law enforcement and our communities. Our local
law enforcement personnel already follow them, and we shouldn’t expect anything less from our Federal law enforcement.
There is no question that immigration enforcement is necessary, but we
must conduct it in a way that is both
humane and safe. Clearly, that is not
how this Agency is operating today.
Now—now—is the time to act, and I
urge our Republican colleagues to join
us in putting real guardrails in place
and not just acting as a rubberstamp
for the Trump administration.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Vermont.
Mr. WELCH. Mr. President, first, I
want to acknowledge my colleagues

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.041

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S324

from Minnesota Senator SMITH and
Senator KLOBUCHAR.
You have conveyed to us the deep
pain and anguish that you feel and that
every Minnesotan feels about the
shocking shootings that occurred in
your State. This follows on tragedies
that occurred before this. The pain of
your community is the pain of this
U.S. Senate. My deep appreciation—
and I know I express this on behalf of
all of my colleagues—to you for putting this in a human, real perspective.
Thank you very much.
Second, this is shocking. Two people
got shot for no reason—absolutely no
reason. Renee Good was a 37-year-old
mom of three kids. She was protesting.
That officer walked from the back of
her car to the side of her car to the
front of her car and shot through the
front windshield and then moved to the
side and shot two shots in the driver’s
side window. That is what happened.
Alex Pretti was out with his cell
phone camera observing what was
going on and was shocked, I am sure,
to see that an ICE agent was pushing a
woman into a snowbank, and he came
over to try to get between them. There
was a scuffle. He was in total subjugation by the officers who had him on the
ground. He was disarmed—never using,
by the way, or even threatening to use
the gun that he had legally in his possession. ICE officers—2 of them—shot
him 10 times. Ten times. That is what
happened.
Why aren’t we all just totally
shocked? That is not acceptable.
Then that is all done with the authority of the State—with no restraint.
Then the Secretary of Homeland Security, who is responsible for the training and the discipline and the mission,
blows this off and says that these two
people were domestic terrorists—no accountability, no expression of sadness,
no expression of remorse.
How is this acceptable to any one of
us here? How is that acceptable?
Yet what we are hearing when we are
saying ‘‘Let’s look into this. Let’s get
some reforms in place that allow our
citizens to feel safe, for there to be accountability’’—we are being told that
it is too complicated because we already have a bill and we will have to
divide it, and that means procedural
hassles; that means, oh, the House will
have to come back.
Are we serious? That is called doing
your job. It is called accountability. It
is called taking responsibility.
I want to pay tribute to the people of
Minnesota. We are actually having a
discussion
about
inconveniencing
House Members because they have to
get on a plane and come back if we act
to do something that every American
knows we should do: Pass the bipartisan bills where we have five bills
done, and take on the burden of responsibility that we have as a U.S. Senate
to put reforms in an Agency that needs
reform.
Folks in Minnesota—it is 20 degrees
below zero—are out in the streets.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

They are out protesting peacefully.
They are out providing coffee and
cocoa and some warm soup to each
other so they can get through this.
Why are they doing it? Do you know
what? They care about the right of assembly. They care about the First
Amendment. They care about their
constitutional rights. But the reason
they are doing this is they care about
each other. That is who they care
about.
In this U.S. Senate, our job is to care
about every single American. We have
an Agency that is totally out of control, with a leader that is—you know, I
would say incompetent, but the cruelty
of that remark, to dismiss two innocent people who died as ‘‘domestic terrorists,’’ tells me there is not an inkling of acceptance of responsibility
that goes with the enormously important job of being Secretary of Homeland Security. So I am not going to
vote and give a blank check when we
are not even willing to have a discussion about what the reforms are.
I want to say that I know every one
of us here is shocked by what happened. This is not a Republican or a
Democrat deal. This is about seeing
two innocent people shot when they
didn’t need to be.
You know, one of the things that is
so important for us if we have a family
and if we live in a community is to act
in a way in which the people around us
can be confident that we have got their
backs; that we won’t hurt them or
harm them; that we notice what their
struggles are and that we will try to
help.
You know, all of us here have such
admiration for law enforcement and
the work they do—it is such an incredibly hard job—but more than anyone
else, the people who have contacted me
in Vermont to express their shock at
what happened in Minnesota have been
people in law enforcement. They know
the job is hard, but they have accepted
the responsibility to be a guardian, to
be protective.
We can accept our responsibility,
wherein we are the 100 people in this
country who are in this Senate, who
have the opportunity to provide some
reassurance in safety and in confidence
to the people that each and every one
of us represents.
So, yes, let’s do our job.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from California.
Mr. PADILLA. Mr. President, I join
my colleagues who have spoken. I say
that, really, my heart goes out to my
colleagues from Minnesota—the senior
and junior Senators from Minnesota—
and the people of Minnesota for what
they have been through in these last
few weeks and how they have responded in these last few weeks as they
have mourned and as the country has
been watching.
January 7 feels like so long ago now,
but just a few weeks ago is the day
that I never would have imagined. That

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

day, Renee Nicole Good—a mother, a
daughter, a poet—was out in her community, observing, helping to document, as allowed by the law, what was
happening when she was alerted about
these ongoing, indiscriminate raids in
her community.
As several of my colleagues have
said, the administration’s response to
the Federal agent’s killing of Renee
Good was not one of ‘‘well, hold on;
let’s really assess what has happened
here.’’
It was one of blaming her. The response was so faulty by the administration. Forget the investigations that
should have taken place—I will talk
about that in a minute—but the President of the United States and the Vice
President of the United States responded to an incident like that by
messaging to Federal agents: Don’t
worry. You have complete immunity.
First of all, that is not true. Second
of all, it is the opposite of the message
that we should be sending if we are trying to deescalate tensions and make
sure that law enforcement abides by
the law.
I remind us of that because, sadly, it
is not shocking when we reflect on
what happened on January 24. This
time, Alex Jeffrey Pretti—a son and an
ICU nurse at the local Veterans’ Administration hospital—was out, lawfully and peacefully observing and
helping to document more of this ICE
and CBP activity in Minneapolis when
he was shot in the back and killed—
two U.S. citizens dead at the hands of
Federal law enforcement in the span of
21⁄2 weeks. They are dead because ICE
and the CBP have been encouraged by
the White House to act with impunity.
Colleagues, it was about 7 months
ago that I stood here on the floor to
warn all of you and the American people that the Trump administration, at
the time—so this goes back to last
June—that the Trump administration
was using Los Angeles as a test case. It
was testing how far Federal agents
could go in this indiscriminate, increasingly violent, and cruel mass detention and deportation agenda; how
far they could go before exporting this
model throughout the country.
I never in my life have wanted to say
more than I do today that I wish I were
wrong, but for the better part of the
last year, communities across the
country have been subjected to this relentless
aggression—Los
Angeles;
Washington, DC; Chicago; Portland;
Charlotte; others; and now Minneapolis. You have seen the videos. I
have seen the videos. We have all seen
the videos. How dare this administration slander the names of the dead and
tell the American people not to believe
what we can all see so clearly with our
own eyes? How dare this administration act as if the laws passed by this
body do not apply to them?
So, yes, colleagues, it is time to say:
Enough. This is not just about immigrant families and immigrant communities now living in fear. This is about

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.043

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

all of us. No one in this country—immigrant, citizen, veteran—should fear
for their lives for exercising their constitutional rights, for standing up for
their neighbors. This is not a political
or a policy disagreement about immigration. This is about decency. This is
about humanity. And this is about the
rule of law.
Instead of pursuing independent investigations and seeking to hold officers accountable as warranted, this administration has doubled down.
Let’s take a moment on this because
our colleague Senator KAINE from Virginia talked a little bit about his experience as Governor and mayor and
what normally happens after an officer-involved shooting—normal practice, standard practice, best practices
after an officer-involved shooting in a
local agency, in a State agency. It is
not just the officer’s being placed on
leave. Initially, there is an administrative review of what happened.
Was it not just consistent with policy
but with the law and the Constitution?
And, if not, what is the consequence?
Absent that, under normal circumstances, we have the Civil Rights
Division at the U.S. Department of
Justice that can conduct an independent investigation and bring forth
accountability as and when warranted.
Sadly, that is not the case with this
administration—not the objective, internal review; not the Civil Rights Division at the Department of Justice review. Instead, they tell officers, ‘‘You
have complete immunity,’’ and they
double down. So the abuse has continued.
By the way, it is not just on the
streets. The videos you have not seen
are of the abuse and inhumane treatment that continue inside some appalling and inhumane private detention facilities, where, colleagues, if you
haven’t heard, 32 detainees died last
year—the most deadly year for those in
ICE detention facilities in a long, long
time. An additional six this month
alone are already on track to exceed
last year’s most deadly number. I am
talking about the people held in detention centers like the one that Senator
SCHIFF and I visited just last week in
California City. Many there are being
denied basic medical care, even urgent
medical care. People are being denied
easy access to legal counsel, to due
process, to fundamental dignity.
And how has the Republican majority in Congress responded to this cruel
and vindictive mass deportation campaign? With silence—inexcusable or unacceptable silence.
And for those who have not been silent, I have heard a cheering on of
what the administration is doing.
Colleagues, since last July, there
have been dozens of incidents involving
excessive force by Federal agents, including at least 17 shootings. Instead of
asking questions and demanding accountability, our Republican colleagues here have applauded the administration and chosen to give the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S325

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Department of Homeland Security billions more dollars, and now they are
suggesting that DHS needs even more.
How much more must our communities and our country endure before
our Republican colleagues join us in
saying ‘‘Enough’’?
How much more, colleagues, before
you agree to impose the real guardrails
on a DHS that chooses to investigate
itself, that stonewalls oversight, that
even fights court orders to preserve
evidence in the killing of an American
citizen?
Not destroying evidence should go
without saying. It shouldn’t be compelled by a Federal judge. It is just like
having true, objective, independent investigations after incidents like this
should go without saying.
But we are not living in normal
times. We continue to see ICE and CBP
behave as though they are above the
law because this administration has
told them they are and because Republicans in Congress have not told them
that they are not.
But we have an opportunity to
change that; to collectively, on a bipartisan and a bicameral basis, let those
agents know that no one is above the
law. It is not just an opportunity but
an obligation that we have in this moment. Public safety depends on legitimacy, and legitimacy depends on accountability and speaking the truth.
Our laws mean nothing if those who
are assigned to enforce the laws believe
that the laws don’t apply to them.
So, colleagues, let’s realize that we
are not powerless in this conversation.
Congress is an equal branch of government in the United States of America,
and it is about time we acted like it.
That is why I support imposing serious
reforms and real oversight and accountability on ICE and the CBP before
this body provides them any more taxpayer dollars.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Rhode Island.
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President, I
have served as my State’s attorney
general. I have served as a U.S. attorney for Rhode Island. I used to lecture
at the police training academy in
Rhode Island. I know a little bit about
police work, and I know bad police
work when I see it.
What we are seeing in Minnesota is a
level
of
violence,
a
lack
of
deconfliction,
and
flatout
unprofessionalism that is dangerous.
Trust me, it is not just me. Let’s
start with Minneapolis’s own police
chief, who described ICE’s behavior
this way:
It looks very untrained. It looks unprofessional. It looks very chaotic.

He described it as ‘‘poor tactics and
really unconstitutional practices.’’
He put some good context on it. He
said:
Minneapolis Police Department went the
entire year last year, recovering 900 guns
from the street, arresting hundreds and hundreds of violent offenders, and we didn’t

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

shoot anyone. This is the second American
citizen that’s been killed, this is the third
shooting within three weeks.

It is not just up in Minnesota. In
Maine, a sheriff said that this is ‘‘bush
league policing.’’
Another Minnesota sheriff said:
I am seeing . . . people being stopped, questioned and harassed solely because of the
color of their skin.

A Philadelphia sheriff said that these
agents are ‘‘made up, fake, wanna-be
law enforcement.’’
A chief in St. Paul described ‘‘traffic
stops’’ that are ‘‘clearly outside the
bounds of what federal agents are allowed to do.’’
A former police chief said:
Their tactics are unsound. I question their
training, if any.

All the way in Montana, a police
chief said:
We do not do business in that manner. . . .
When you see those types of tactics being
used, we don’t use those.

In Texas again, the former head of
the Combined Law Enforcement Association said:
Newly recruited, masked agents no doubt
damage and destroy the reputations of our
proud and professional officers.

A law professor and former police officer described their conduct as ‘‘egregiously deviating from professional
norms of policing.’’
So what we are hearing out of law enforcement professionals around the
country is disgust with the lack of professionalism with which ICE and CBP
are discharging their responsibilities.
I will close by talking about
deconfliction because that is probably
the most dangerous mistake that law
enforcement can make. That is how
you get blue-on-blue violence. That is
how things get dangerously out of
hand.
With respect to deconfliction, a sheriff in Maine talked about ‘‘unmarked
cars’’ and masked individuals, ‘‘men
with guns in the yard’’ frightening
residents, and his office had no idea it
was taking place. They hadn’t disclosed to local police that they were
going to do a weapons-out, armed raid
in their jurisdiction.
In Brooklyn Park, the chief said that
his own officers were being pulled over,
the deconfliction was so bad. He said:
If it is happening to our officers, it pains
me to think how many of our community
members are falling victim to this every
day.

In Austin, TX, the chief described
how they are not warned ahead of time
by ICE when they are going around.
That threatens to create dangerous
misunderstandings between local and
Federal law enforcement Agencies.
We are short on time, so I am going
to end there. But nobody in this body
should believe that what is happening,
what we are seeing with our own eyes
on the streets of Minneapolis, is legitimate or professional law enforcement.
It simply is not. It has gotten out of
hand, and nobody knows it better than
real cops.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.044

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S326

I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from California.
Mr. SCHIFF. Mr. President, in just 1
year and 1 week—that is, 373 days—
Donald Trump and his administration
have changed what it means to walk
down the street in America.
Three hundred and seventy-four days
ago, an American citizen did not need
to worry about carrying a passport or
worry that they would be pinned to the
ground for being unable to prove that
their hometown was, in fact, the only
home they have ever known.
Three hundred and seventy-four days
ago, immigrant families didn’t need to
call on their neighbors or rely on the
help of Good Samaritans to grocery
shop for them, to take their kids to
school, to have access to what we value
in life—all because they are afraid to
open their door.
Three hundred and seventy-four days
ago, standing up for your First Amendment rights, your Fourth Amendment
rights, even your Second Amendment
rights was not in itself a provocation
in the eyes of the Federal Government.
But in so little time, so much has
changed. In this America, we see
masked agents hiding their faces from
the world and even hiding their identification,
terrorizing
communities
across the Nation, smashing car windows and dragging mothers and fathers
from their vehicles in front of their
kids—in front of their kids—often taking those kids and separating them
from their parents, breaking down
doors, and detaining citizens and noncitizens alike.
As for warrants? No. Apparently,
DHS lawyers now claim you don’t need
a judicial warrant to break through the
door of a U.S. citizen and haul them
out in their underwear in the dead of
winter, only to later release them
without charge, without apology, only
with newfound terror courtesy of the
U.S. Federal Government.
Agents with just 47 days of training
are sweeping through American cities;
agents with barely over a month of
training—just 47 days. And why 47? Because it is a nod to the vanity of the
47th President rather than allocated to
the need to be instructed on how to,
say, use, or avoid using deadly force.
Agents with less training than a
teenager getting their driver’s license
are now badgering, beating, and even
killing Americans on our streets in the
name of the President while his chosen
enforcers smugly walk through American cities cosplaying their favorite
uniforms from the 1930s and 1940s.
DHS is now building databases of
Americans, detaining and even disappearing people off of corners in Minneapolis, Chicago, Portland, Nashville,
Los Angeles, and far too many communities across the Nation.
The Trump administration demanded
that Republicans deliver a $170 billion
taxpayer-funded slush fund for these
misbegotten efforts, taking that money
away from your healthcare and taking

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

that money away from food for hungry
families to spend on weapons for enforcement agents and billions on detention centers to imprison people who are
undocumented but who have committed no crimes and have no criminal
records at all.
This is the America that Donald
Trump has created, but it is not the
America that we will accept. We will
not accept the labeling of Renee
Good—a mother of three, a loving and
caring member of her community,
caught on camera showing compassion
to Federal agents even as she protested
them—we will not accept that she was
killed and then later falsely designated
a ‘‘domestic terrorist.’’
We will not accept that Alex Pretti—
a 37-year-old Veterans’ Administration
ICU nurse—exercising his constitutional rights and stooping to help a
woman who had been pushed to the
ground, can be labeled as an ‘‘assassin’’
merely hours after being shot in the
back in cold blood nearly a dozen
times.
These were not labels given by some
arrogant agent in the field. This was
not some bad apple using this terminology amongst otherwise upstanding
immigration officials. No. These labels
were applied by the highest ranking officials of this operation in President
Trump’s White House—the Cabinet
Secretary overseeing these raids, Kristi
Noem; the architect of this campaign
of fear and mass arrest and detention,
the ‘‘racist in chief’’ Stephen Miller.
This impunity that we see on our
streets, this violence—it comes from
the top; gaslighting amplified by the
Vice President and the President himself.
This brazen denial of rights and facts
is in the water at DHS headquarters,
and it is increasingly clear that this
has become the culture of ICE and Customs and Border Protection.
That is why I am standing here this
week to say clearly: not another dime
for this kind of lawless immigration regime. We will not add to the slush fund
that Republicans gave Kristi Noem and
Border Patrol Chief Greg Bovino last
year
to
fulfill
Stephen
Miller’s
dystopian vision of America. We require real reforms, in statute—not
promises of change, not Executive actions worth less than the paper they
are printed on.
Look out on the streets of Minneapolis, where two American citizens
have been gunned down in as many
weeks, where tear gas flies through the
air and doors fly off their hinges under
the banner of this administration. In
those streets stand Agencies backed by
billions of dollars still to be spent—billions that can arm them, billions that
can detain and oppress.
This is an America in regression,
where the color of your skin could be
the only pretext for getting pulled
over, detained, or worse—a reality that
has persisted for Blacks, Latinos,
Asians, and others notwithstanding the
progress made in my lifetime.

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

As a child of the generation that
shone a light on and helped pass laws
to end such racist tactics, for most of
my life, we have made strides to ensure
that we moved past that America. But
now we are returning to an America
that I do not recognize, nor is this an
America that I can accept.
We have the power in this body to do
something about it, and until we do,
my vote will reflect my complete and
utter rejection of this lawless and cruel
regime. This cannot become the status
quo. This cannot become the new normal for America, for Alex Pretti and
Renee Good, for the Californians detained without cause and without convictions, like those suffering in detentions facilities like California City
whom I met, along with ALEX PADILLA,
last week.
For all of them—for their dignity, for
their children, for their families, for
their friends, for their safety—and for
this country, we must act.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Louisiana.
TAXES

Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, I get
it. I think most of us get it. A lot of
moms and dads throughout America
tonight are going to lie down and try
to sleep and not be able to. And when
moms and dads throughout America lie
down to sleep and can’t, more times
than not in America today, they are
worried about the cost of living. I get
that.
These high prices started under
President Biden. But that is not why I
am here today. I don’t want to blame
this on anyone. It is what it is. I just
know that you shouldn’t have to sell
blood plasma in America to go to the
grocery store. I just know that you
ought to be able to afford a home in
America as part of the American
dream. The costs have gotten way out
of hand. When you are having to pay
$500,000—if you can get a loan—to buy
and live in a refrigerator box behind
Outback, something is wrong in our
country. And don’t get me started on
the cost of healthcare and health insurance and all the other daily expenses
that moms and dads have.
They are worried, and I understand
they are worried. That is why I want to
talk for a few minutes, before I talk
about Minneapolis—because I do want
to address that—that is why I want to
talk for a few minutes about taxes.
I know some may be thinking, you
know: Why does KENNEDY—KENNEDY
just talked about the cost of living in
America. Why does he want to talk
about taxes?
I know people are thinking: I don’t
like paying taxes.
They are thinking: You know, I
would rather have to listen to O.J.
jokes for the rest of eternity than to
have to pay taxes.
Nobody likes to pay taxes. It is the
price we pay to live in a civilized society.
But this year, we have some good
news with respect to taxes, and it is a

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.046

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

result of changes to our Tax Code—the
Presiding Officer knows this well—that
we made in the One Big Beautiful Bill.
We are told not to call it the One Big
Beautiful Bill anymore. There is a new
name for it. But, frankly, I think the
American people are smart enough to
know what we are talking about no
matter what name we give to it.
As a result of the changes that we
made, and when I say ‘‘we,’’ I don’t
take any joy in having to point out
that this was done with only Republican votes. We tried to entice our
Democratic friends to join with us.
They chose not to. That is their choice.
It is a free country. But the tax
changes that we made were made solely with Republican votes, and I am
proud of them. And I hope both Republicans and Democrats take advantage
of them.
As a result of these tax changes, the
American people are going to receive
up to $100 billion in tax refunds—$100
billion—not million, $100 billion.
What am I talking about? Many people, as the Presiding Officer knows,
who are in the hospitality business are
no longer going to have to pay for their
2025 taxes, taxes on tips. Not everybody. I don’t want to overstate the
case, but many of our people in the
hospitality industry who made most of
their income from tips, as a result of
the changes we made for 2025—‘‘we’’
meaning Republicans—are not going to
have to pay taxes on a portion of those
tips.
Many folks in 2025—not everyone, but
many people in 2025 who worked overtime—are not going to have to pay
taxes, income taxes, on that overtime.
That also is contributing to this $100
billion that is going to be returned to
the American people in tax refunds.
In our One Big Beautiful Bill, we also
increased the standard deduction. For
a two-income household, we increased
the standard deduction by $1,500. It is
going to mean a lot of money back in
people’s pockets. The standard deduction for joint filers is now $31,500.
As we were making these tax
changes—and we, again, regrettably,
did it with only Republican votes. We
had to. But as we made these tax
changes, we also put in a tax deduction
for our seniors. People over 65—not everybody, but many Americans over 65—
are going to get a new $6,000 senior reduction.
What else did we do? Well, if you pay
State and local taxes, real estate taxes,
for example, property taxes, we
changed the deduction from $10,000 to
$40,000. So that means you have a higher deduction on your taxes. It means
your taxes are going to go down.
We increased the child tax credit. It
is now $2,200 for every child you have.
We increased it by $200 per child. Many
folks, again, and I won’t overstate the
case, but many folks who have borrowed money to buy a car and are paying interest will get to deduct a portion of that interest that they pay on
their automobile purchase as a result

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:38 Jan 29, 2026

S327

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

of the changes we made in the One Big
Beautiful Bill. And I could go on about
other changes we made for small businesses, one in particular. If you are a
sub S corp, subchapter S corporation,
or you are a limited partnership or
what we call an LLC—in Louisiana,
that stands for Louisiana limited liability corporation, which means that
you are taxed directly on the income
that your small business earns—we
made permanent 20 percent reductions
or distribution of business income for
LLCs and LLPs and sub S corporations.
So if you add all of these tax changes
up—and, again, I didn’t talk about all
of the tax changes in the One Big Beautiful Bill, but if you added the ones up
that I talked about, that means an
extra $100 billion in people’s pockets
throughout America, Democrats, Republicans, Independents.
And most people, most people have
more money held out of their check
than they owe the IRS, and that is not
unusual, particularly when we make
tax changes. I mention that because
this means that $100 billion, people are
going to get checks from the Federal
Government. They are going to get
money back. God bless them. They deserve it.
Now, I have got a couple of tips about
how you can get that money back
quickly, if you are able to do three
things:
If you file early, file your tax returns—if you want your money back as
quickly as possible, file your tax returns early.
No. 2, file electronically. I know for
some that is a pain. I don’t much like
it. I like to file the paper return. But
some people like to file electronically;
some people don’t. But if you do file it
electronically, you are going to get
your money back from the Federal
Government more quickly.
The third thing you need to do is to
tell the Federal Government that you
don’t want a paper check; you would
like your money deposited directly
into your bank account.
If you do those three things: file
early, file electronically, and tell the
IRS that you want the money sent directly, electronically, into your bank
account, then you are likely to get
your tax refund within 2 to 3 weeks,
your portion of that $100 billion,
thanks to the One Big Beautiful Bill
that Republicans in the House and the
Senate passed.
That is going to help a lot in terms of
dealing with the cost of living in America, and I am very proud of our effort.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. President, now let me say a word
about Minneapolis. There is a lot we
know; there is a lot we don’t know. I
want to talk about three things we do
know.
No. 1, the loss of life in Minneapolis
was a tragedy, and if you can’t admit
that, you have a padlock on your heart.
It was a tragedy. We don’t have all the
facts. I know everyone has seen the
videos, but the people involved haven’t

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

been interviewed. There are a lot of
facts we have but a lot of facts we
don’t have, and I am not going to rush
to judge. I am not going to rush to
judge.
President Trump has promised a full
and thorough and transparent investigation, and I thank him for that. But
regardless of what we find out, we all
have to concede, we all should concede
that the loss of life in Minneapolis was
a tragedy, and I am sorry it happened.
No. 2, this is the second thing that I
know. You don’t have to be Einstein’s
cousin, you don’t have to be a senior at
Caltech to know that illegal immigration is illegal. Duh. It is illegal.
And those of us who believe that no
one is above the law—we all say we believe that, I believe it—those of us who
say that no one is above the law have
to concede that people in our country
illegally are not above the law either.
The law applies to them as well. Our
immigration statutes are not secondtier laws. They matter just as much as
the other statutes that have been
passed by the elected Members of Congress. And just like the other laws, the
immigration laws have consequences
and should have consequences if you
violate them.
Now, so I guess what I am saying is
I support enforcement of our immigration laws. Now, how you enforce those
laws, how you enforce those laws matters. Those laws, like all laws, have to
be enforced in accordance with due
process.
Those immigration statutes, like all
laws, have to be enforced in accordance
with equal protection. Those laws have
to be enforced in accordance with a
well-known Supreme Court case, 1968,
called Terry v. Ohio, which sets forth
the standards—reasonable suspicion is
the standard chosen by the Supreme
Court—by which someone can be
stopped and questioned when a law enforcement official doesn’t have probable cause.
Terry v. Ohio has to be followed. So
No. 1, illegal immigration is illegal. We
should enforce our immigration laws,
but how we enforce them matters.
Third and final point, you have the
right to protest in America. Let me say
that again: You have the right to protest in America. You do not have the
right to protest violently. And, in fact,
violence as you protest undermines the
morality of the thing that you are protesting over.
Let me say that again: Violence, if
you choose violence when you protest,
that undermines the morality of the
movement that you say your movement is based upon. Do you know who
else understood that? Dr. King. King
understood it. Gandhi understood it.
Mandela understood it. Violently protesting—not protesting—but violently
protesting undermines the morality
that you say your cause is built upon.
It is also dangerous. It is dangerous,
and it is stupid.
It is a 12-piece bucket of stupid because when you protest violently, when

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.047

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S328

you interfere with a cop or an ICE officer, it is not going to end well. It is
not.
Under the best of circumstances,
these officers are trying to enforce
Federal law, and the people with respect to whom they are trying to enforce Federal law are, in most cases—I
am not going to say all cases—but in
most cases are criminals. Not criminals because they are here illegally,
though that, too, is a violation of our
law, but criminals because they have
violated other laws. In many cases,
felonies, and those ICE officials, those
cops are scared. They are scared. They
are dealing with someone who could be
armed, someone who could be dangerous.
So you have got a powder keg, and
when protesters choose to protest violently and harass those ICE officials
and blow whistles in their ears and
block their way and spit in their faces
and curse them and curse their children, they are giving off sparks in a
powder keg.
And it is not going to end well in
many cases.
And the truth of the matter is, it has
been my experience in life, most—I am
not going to say all—most cops will
leave you alone unless you do illegal
stuff.
So as we go forward in America and
try to enforce our laws in conformity
with the U.S. Constitution, as we go
forward together in America, and while
we are respecting people’s constitutional rights, we respect our law enforcement officials who are doing a
very difficult job—as we go forward in
America today, as the President has
promised to have a full and fair and
transparent investigation of the tragic
loss of life in Minneapolis. I hope we
can keep those three things that I
think all of us can agree upon in mind.
I am sorry we are at this point, but I
believe that our future can be better
than our present and certainly than
our past.
I yield the floor to my esteemed colleague.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. JUSTICE). The Senator from Wisconsin.
Ms. BALDWIN. Mr. President, I rise
on behalf of the thousands of Wisconsinites I have heard from in the last
few days. My constituents are not only
saddened by what they see happening
in Minneapolis, they are angry. This
weekend, we watched masked agents
kill a second U.S. citizen in Minneapolis in just 3 weeks. Alex Pretti,
just like Renee Good, should still be
with us.
We also watched the Trump administration’s reaction to this tragedy. Instead of turning down the temperature,
the Trump administration threw gasoline on the fire and lied to the American people.
In the hours after Alex Pretti was
shot 10 times by Federal agents, the
Trump administration, without knowing the facts, said that Alex was a ‘‘domestic terrorist’’ and an ‘‘assassin,’’

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:03 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

and somebody who ‘‘tried to murder’’
ICE agents. Those are despicable lies.
Fortunately, Alex’s community and
loved ones are setting the record
straight, and so am I. That is why I am
here on the Senate floor this evening.
We have to remember Alex Pretti for
who he was, not for who the Trump administration wanted him to be to fit
into their narrative.
Alex Pretti grew up in Wisconsin and
graduated from Preble High School in
Green Bay. In recent days, his classmates have reached out to me and his
friends and his teachers to share with
me and the world who Alex really was.
Jose from Green Bay met Alex in the
ninth grade. They became fast friends,
participating in theater and show choir
together. Jose shared about Alex that,
‘‘even as a fellow student, I saw him as
a role model.’’
JD, who also knew Alex in high
school, wrote to me:
Everyone I knew looked up to him as a role
model—effortlessly cool and unfailingly
kind. Everything I know about his life since
those days and even his final act aligns completely with the person I knew—a genuinely
good person who sincerely wanted to serve
his community.

Another classmate, Michael, described Alex as ‘‘generous with his
time, welcoming by nature, and the
kind of person who made you feel included without trying. He deserved to
grow older, to keep showing up for people the way he did for me.’’
And Alex did show up for people. He
went on to become a nurse, serving veterans at the VA Hospital in Minneapolis. His coworkers, friends, and
patients described him as a good man—
someone who cared about others in his
community. We all saw Alex’s last act
was an act of service, putting himself
between a group of masked agents and
a woman who had been shoved into a
snowbank.
He was not a threat. He was not an
assassin. He was not a domestic terrorist. This administration is asking
Americans not to believe their own
eyes.
As his parents wrote:
The sickening lies being told about our son
by the administration are reprehensible and
disgusting.

They implored all of us:
Please get the truth out about our son. He
was a good man.

Well, I, for one, plan to do just that.
I will not allow the Trump administration to lie and smear Alex. But I also
plan on doing everything I can to ensure that Alex and his family get justice. We must get some accountability
for what happened. No other American
should lose their lives because the
Trump administration thinks that ICE
can operate with ‘‘absolute immunity.’’
Congress has a choice this week. My
Republican colleagues can sign over
another blank check to Kristi Noem
and ICE and endorse this chaos and
lawlessness, or Congress can do our job
and stop these lawless, masked, armed
agents from terrorizing another community.

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

People want action. Alex deserves action. I intend to take that action, and
I call on my Republican colleagues to
join me.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Washington.
Ms. CANTWELL. Mr. President, I
come to the floor to join my colleagues
today to talk about the events of the
last several days, and to say to my colleagues here in the U.S. Senate on both
sides of the aisle: I have talked to
many Washingtonians, and they are
very worried about what has transpired
in Minnesota.
They are very worried about what
has transpired in Minnesota because
they think that someone has lost their
life that didn’t need to lose their life,
and they think that the President of
the United States, instead of basically
creating a system where that kind of
overreach of power would be investigated, instead he is basically accusing the victim here—and basically,
really, even attacking Second Amendment rights.
So I am here to join my colleagues to
say, what are we going to do to fix this
system? What are we going to do to
make sure that tragedies like this
don’t happen and that we investigate
the truth—not make up something
about the situation minutes after it
has happened?
I say this because my State has
struggled with these issues of justice,
particularly civil liberties and the civil
rights of individuals. We had two tragic
cases in our State. One, a Native American was just carving on a corner, basically whittling away, didn’t understand, as he got up to move to another
corner, that a policeman in the neighborhood thought, ‘‘What is he doing?’’
and accidentally—basically when the
Native American failed to stop from
just moving from one corner to another
to continue his whittling, was shot
dead.
We had a case in Spokane where a
disabled man basically went to his
daily ritual of going over to get a soft
drink at a supermarket, and on the
way there, somebody said, ‘‘I think
he’s acting a little strange,’’ and called
the police. And the police showed up,
and as he was reaching for a soda in
the bottom compartment of the freezer, the police told him to stop. And he
didn’t really understand what they
were even saying to him. What was he
doing? He was just coming to get his
daily soda. And they beat Otto Zehm
and killed him.
So yes, in the United States of America, since 1957, we have had a Civil
Rights Division, and we have had a Department of Justice that has enforced
the civil liberties of Americans by having oversight of police departments
that overreached and basically did
something, like they did in the Seattle
case against the Native American
carver John T. Williams and in the
Spokane case against Otto Zehm.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.049

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

Yes, the Department of Justice had
an oversight division and a consent decree with the Seattle Police Department and the Spokane Police Department to get your act together and do
training so that you are not killing
people that don’t deserve to be killed.
And that is the same situation with
Mr. Pretti. Mr. Pretti didn’t deserve to
be killed in this situation, but let’s at
least have an investigation. Let’s at
least have a Department of Justice to
do something about this. But that is
not what the Trump administration is
doing.
The first Trump administration tried
to roll back the requirements. In fact,
the then Attorney General basically
said, ‘‘I don’t even want to use this
consent decree power, because it’s one
of the most dangerous things, and it’s
an exercise of raw power.’’
Well, the reason why the Department
of Justice has this responsibility is because it is their responsibility to make
sure somebody doesn’t abuse power,
particularly in a law enforcement situation like this, and intervene on the
civil liberties of Americans. So that
Department of Justice, literally in the
first Trump administration, basically
did not do its job and tried to basically
subvert the responsibilities.
Now, here we are today in the second
Trump administration, and what are
they doing instead of really trying to
look at patterns of abuse and patterns
of malpractice or States in which law
enforcement agencies aren’t properly
using force in these instances? What
are they doing about this misconduct?
Well, the second Trump administration
makes the first Trump administration
look like it was going easy on this situation.
Not only are they taking the money
away from the Civil Rights Division,
they are basically saying, ‘‘Look, we
don’t even want you to do that job. We
want you to go out and prioritize protecting other issues instead.’’
And basically, we have had most of
the Agency and individuals who were
there doing the civil liberties work and
doing this oversight work—they are
gone. So now, what we are seeing is
that lawsuits are being dismissed. Settlement agreements, you know, issues
that really would have been brought to
light are just being dismissed.
So the reason I am asking this is because my colleagues now have a chance
to say whether they really believe in
this function of the Department of Justice and the rights of Mr. Pretti and
Otto Zehm and John T. Williams and
whether you want to do something
about it.
Now, I personally think that the Department of Homeland Security and
ICE should be, in this instance, investigated. I think they should be investigated. And we should know the answers, and we should know that we are
upholding the civil liberties of Americans, particularly in the right to express themselves and have free speech
and go to a rally without being—or go

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:03 Jan 29, 2026

S329

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

to express their views, in this case in
Minnesota, without being killed.
So the question is, what are we going
to do about this use of force? So my
colleagues are out here saying, It is a
tragedy. I agree it is a tragedy. They
are out here saying that this situation
shouldn’t have happened. I agree. I
don’t think ICE should be in Minnesota. I guarantee the Obama administration rounded up a lot of people and
deported them. I know because I had
constituents who complained about
that.
But the Obama administration didn’t
go out and just try to make quotas on
people. The Obama administration
didn’t go out there and say, We are not
going after the violent people; we are
just going to go after anybody to make
up the numbers. The Obama administration didn’t use force against peaceful protesters. They didn’t do any of
that. And so now we are acting like
that is the mission, and yet, the Biden
administration and the Obama administration did deport violent people out
of the United States. Yes, they did.
So what is different here is that we
have crossed a line. We have crossed a
line, and we have allowed ICE to go
here and prey on U.S. citizens and basically, in this case, use this power of
force. And my only question now is
whether my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle are going to stand up
for the role and responsibility the Federal Government plays in oversight, in
investigation, and upholding the civil
liberties of Americans in the United
States of America when these incidents
happen.
The rest of this is just debate. The
rest of this about how ICE operates,
about how the Department of Homeland Security operates, about what you
want to do about immigration, whether
you want immigration reform, the rest
of it is just debate.
The real question is, do you believe
in these civil liberties of Americans or
not? And when police or power by the
Federal Government is used in an excessive way and it means the loss of
life, do you believe in having an authority that investigates that and is
transparent with the American people
and holds that system accountable?
I know this: The Seattle Police Department is a better police department
because of those consent decrees, and
so is Spokane. And the incidents that
happened in those two individuals losing their life may not happen again because we went through that process.
The question is whether there is
going to be another Alex Pretti sometime soon, where another U.S. citizen
loses their life because of this overreach of power, because we are not investigating, we are not protecting
these civil liberties, and we are not understanding that we have an administration that is diminishing the very
Agency whose roles and responsibilities
are to oversee this.
So I want to know, do my colleagues
believe in this? Do they believe in this

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

role or responsibility? Or do they not?
Because I can tell you, that is the only
way we are going to move forward in
the information age. The information
age has laid this bare. We might have
had people shot and killed by overuse
of power, in many instances, in the 20s,
30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s, and beyond, but you didn’t see it. Now, you
are seeing it now. You have got to deal
with the reality. You have got to deal
with reality that is right in front of us.
So the only question is, do my colleagues really believe in enforcing the
civil liberties and civil rights of Americans by investigating this situation,
having an aggressive investigation and
holding people accountable?
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The bill clerk proceeded to call the
roll.
Mr. SANDERS. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. SANDERS. Mr. President, let’s
be honest. Let us face up to reality and
let us acknowledge that most Americans understand that our great Nation,
once the envy of the entire world, is
now in the midst of a deep decline. And
for the sake of our children and future
generations, we must end that decline
and turn this country around in very
fundamental ways.
Not so many years ago, the United
States of America was admired, respected by people throughout the world
for our generosity, for our concern for
the poor of the world, for our democracy, for our Constitution, for our rule
of law, for our way of life. We were admired, respected. People around the
world said: Do you know what? We
would like our country to be like the
United States of America.
Tragically, that is no longer the case.
I was just on the phone this afternoon
with an elected official in Europe who
literally could not believe what is happening to our country today. And I fear
that millions of people throughout the
world—on every continent of this
world, in every country in this world—
are looking at the United States of
America and saying: What in God’s
name is happening to that great country?
But it is not only our standing in the
world and our increased isolation from
other countries that I worry about. We
used to have the highest standard of
living of any country on Earth. That
was it. America, strongest middle class
in the world. We used to be a country
where the American dream said that
our young people will do better than
their parents.
My dad came to this country at the
age of 17, having dropped out of school
at the age of 14, from Poland, with the
dream that his son—his sons—would do
better than he did. My mom graduated
high school with the dream that maybe

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.051

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S330

her sons would have a college education.
That was the dream of millions of
people: We work hard so that our kids
would do better.
The reality today, according to a
number of studies, is that, everything
equal, unless we turn it around, our
younger generation will have a lower
standard of living than their parents.
They will own their own home at a
much older age than their parents.
And when we talk about America
being in a state of decline and the need
to bring about fundamental transformation of this country, understand
that two-thirds of the American people, according to a New York Times
poll the other day—two-thirds of the
American people now believe that a
middle-class lifestyle is out of reach.
We used to be a country of the middle
class, and now two-thirds of the American people say, no, the American middle-class lifestyle is out of my reach.
We used to be the best educated
country on Earth, best public school
systems on Earth. That is not the case
anymore. We used to have the best
healthcare system of any country on
Earth. Not anymore. We used to provide good, affordable housing for our
people. Not anymore. We used to have
the most advanced transportation system in the world. Not anymore. Just
take a look at how the city of Washington is dealing with the current
snowstorm.
In many respects, our great Nation is
falling further and further behind other
countries, and we must not allow that
to continue.
The United States, our people, have
faced horrific crises in the past, going
back to the very beginning, the origins
of this country, when a small number
of people dared to have the dream and
the courage to take on King George III
and the British Empire and the most
powerful military in the world because
they wanted their independence, and
they wanted their freedom. That was a
crisis, and they prevailed.
In the 1840s, there were people who
were saying slavery is an abomination.
It is immoral. We can’t talk about a
Declaration of Independence that says
all men are created equal and enslave
millions of people. We have to end slavery. And they struggled and struggled,
the abolitionists, and it was a horrible
civil war, where so many people died.
Finally, we ended the abomination of
slavery.
The struggle continued with Martin
Luther King, Jr., and the civil rights
movement and the end of segregation.
This country went through the Great
Depression, where 25 percent of our
people were unemployed and government had to redefine itself and we did
that.
When the Japanese attacked Pearl
Harbor in 1941, December of 1941, we
were not prepared to fight a war in the
East or a war against Hitler in Europe.
And yet, within a few years, because
the country came together, instead of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:03 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

building cars, we built tanks, and we
built fighter planes. We ended up winning that war. We won a war on two
fronts.
Bottom line, in all of these crises and
others, the Nation came together and
prevailed. We did it then, and I have
little doubt, if we do not allow people
to divide us up by where we were born
or the color of our skin, we can, once
again, overcome the crisis that we are
in right now, which, in my view, is the
most serious crisis in the modern history of our country.
Let me just say a few words about
what is happening in Minneapolis right
now as I speak. Let me be very clear.
America is not about and must never
be about a domestic military force
called ICE, which as we speak at this
moment is occupying—a military occupation—of one of our great American
cities, Minneapolis, and is terrorizing
the occupants in that city.
America is not and must never be
about Federal agents shooting American citizens down in cold blood, breaking down doors to arrest people, or
sending 5-year-olds to detention centers—all in clear violation of our Constitution. That is what takes place in
dictatorships, in authoritarian societies where there is not a rule of law. It
does not and it must not be allowed to
take place in the United States or any
democracy on Earth.
So let me be very clear. ICE must get
out of Minnesota now. ICE must get
out of Maine now. ICE must stop terrorizing the American people. Not another penny should be given to ICE or
Customs and Border Protection unless
there are fundamental reforms in how
those Agencies function and until there
is new leadership at the Department of
Homeland Security and among those
who run our immigration policy. To be
clear, Kristi Noem and Stephen Miller
must go.
But Trump’s movement toward
authoritarianism is not just about the
use of his domestic army against the
American people; it is about his attack
against Venezuela in direct violation of
the Constitution and international law,
where he not only lacked congressional
authorization but where no one in Congress had any knowledge about what
was taking place.
Trump’s authoritarianism is about
disrupting the 100-plus-year alliances
we have had with our allies in Europe
and, insanely, threatening to seize
Greenland from our longtime ally Denmark. Does anyone in their right mind
believe that the United States of America should threaten violence against
our longtime allies?
Trump’s authoritarianism is about
attacking Europe—every day, one attack or another—because it is a continent of democratic countries that are
all very different, but they are democratic countries which actually elect
their leaders. Apparently and increasingly, Europe and these countries will
not simply do Trump’s bidding—will
not come to him with all kinds of

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

gifts—while at the same time, as he attacks Europe every day—demeans Europe, insults Europe—he is busy
cozying up to his autocratic friends in
Saudi Arabia who have helped line his
pockets with billions of dollars from
cryptocurrency and real estate deals. It
is not a problem that the head of Saudi
Arabia is a murderer, who our intelligence Agency believed was responsible for the death of Washington Post
correspondent Jamal Khashoggi. He is
our ally. He has got a lot of money—a
trillionaire
family—the
wealthiest
family on Earth—that can do the
Trump family a lot of good. It is not a
problem that one of our allies is
Binyamin Netanyahu, who has engaged
in atrocities against the people of Gaza
and is now under indictment by the
International Criminal Court as a war
criminal. He is a good ally. Those are
the kinds of guys we want, those who
are war criminals and trillionaires who
put dissenters in jail—Saudi Arabia, a
dictatorship.
Trump’s authoritarianism is about
his repeated threats to make Canada—
Canada—I live 50 miles away from the
Canadian border—which is one of our
closest and most dependable allies, the
51st State. I mean, just think for a
minute. We have been allies for decades
and decades—close friends—and you go
around insulting this country and saying: You are going to become our 51st
State.
What world does Trump live in? How
does his mind tell him to do that?
Let’s be clear. The American people
want us to ally ourselves with democracies around the world, not dictatorships, not authoritarian societies. They
do not want to be allied with or put
American lives on the line for dictatorships like those that exist in Saudi
Arabia, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates or, least of all, Putin’s Russia.
Everyone in this Chamber, including
my Republican colleagues, understands, when Trump usurps the power
of Congress, when he attacks the
courts, when he threatens and intimidates the media and universities and
perhaps, most significantly, when he
brings criminal charges against his political opponents, be they liberal
Democrats or conservative Republicans, that this man is a danger to everything this country stands for. My
Republican colleagues know this, and
the time is long overdue for them to
begin speaking out against Trump’s
dangerous
movement
toward
authoritarianism. We can disagree on
the issues—we do disagree on the
issues—but we should and must agree
that this country will not move toward
being an authoritarian society, with
more and more power put in the hands
of the President of the United States.
In that regard, let me applaud Chris
Madel, who was a leading Republican
candidate for the Governor of Minnesota, who recently ended his campaign because he could not defend the
national Republican Party in the face
of what was happening in his own State
of Minnesota.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.052

S28JAPT1

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Mr. Madel said:

large, profitable corporations now earn
350 times what their average worker
makes.
Meanwhile, in America today while
the very rich become obscenely richer,
60 percent of Americans are living paycheck to paycheck. They are unable to
afford the skyrocketing costs of housing, healthcare, education, childcare,
groceries, electricity, or other basic
necessities. The very rich are becoming
phenomenally richer while tens of millions of Americans are struggling to
pay for their basic needs.
Let
us
understand
that
the
oligarchs—the
multibillionaires—do
not simply put their money under their
mattresses. Not only do they want to
own and control our economy, they are
determined to own and control our corrupt political system as well. As we all
know, Mr. Musk spent at least $290 million to elect Trump. Do you think you
are living in a democracy when one guy
can spend $290 million to elect his
buddy to be President? The 100 richest
people in our country spent $2.6 billion
on the 2024 election—100 people.
Yes. You average American, you get
the right to vote, but billionaires can
spend hundreds of millions of dollars in
super PACs to defeat the candidates
who stand up for the working class and
elect those people who stand with the
oligarchs. That number—the amount of
money being spent in these super PACs
by the oligarchs—is growing and growing every day. I should point out that
it is not just the Republican Party; it
is Democratic billionaires as well. This
is a bipartisan effort on the part of the
billionaire class.
Just recently, a super PAC representing the crypto industry just announced that it has $193 million in cash
at its disposal for the 2026 election. In
other words, do you have concerns
about crypto? Well, you are going to
have to face a barrage of 30-second ads
from extraordinarily wealthy people.
Big Tech oligarchs in Silicon Valley
have already pledged to spend at least
$200 million on a super PAC that is
sympathetic to the AI industry, artificial intelligence—an industry that
threatens to displace tens of millions
of American workers. Are you worried
about AI? Are you worried about robotics? Are you worried about the fact
that tens of millions of jobs are going
to be lost during the next decade? Are
you concerned about it? Do you want
to have some regulations? Well, guess
what? These guys have got hundreds of
millions of dollars to spend on a campaign.
That may sound like democracy to
somebody, but it does not sound like
democracy to me. It sounds like a very
corrupt system owned by the very
wealthiest people in the world. That is
why, if we are going to come out of our
decline—if we are going to turn this
country around—probably there is
nothing more important that we can do
than to end the disastrous Citizens
United Supreme Court decision, abolish
super PACs and move to the public

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

When U.S. citizens, particularly those of
color, live in fear, and U.S. citizens are carrying papers to prove their citizenship, that
is wrong. Driving while Hispanic is not a
crime, neither is driving while Asian.

Mr. Madel is right, and more Republicans need to speak out if they care
about protecting the values this Nation
was founded upon.
When
we
talk
about
authoritarianism, we must also talk
about the Big Lie—the lies that are
told over and over again, that black is
white and white is black. It is a constant barrage of lies that comes from
the White House. We can disagree on
the issues, but you cannot have a democracy when the President of the
United States lies profoundly every
single day.
No, Mr. President, Renee Good was
not a domestic terrorist. She was the
mother of three, sitting in her car
when she was shot.
No, Alex Pretti was not a would-be
assassin as Trump’s administration has
suggested.
No, last night’s attack on Representative ILHAN OMAR, while she was conducting a townhall meeting, was not
staged. Somebody attacked her—
threatened her.
No, the January 6 insurrectionists
were not conducting peaceful demonstrations. They were attempting to
overthrow the results of an election.
No, the 2020 election was not stolen
from Donald Trump. He lost that election by over 7 million votes. Yet
today—today—as we speak right now,
Trump’s FBI has raided an election office in Georgia to seize their ballots.
This is, by the way, after the Attorney
General of the United States demanded
that Minnesota hand over its voter
rolls as a pretext for ICE’s stopping its
assault on that State.
President Trump’s unacceptable actions are raising the question in the
hearts of millions of Americans as to
whether or not there will be free and
fair elections in 2026 and 2028.
But
it
is
not
just
Trump’s
authoritarianism that concerns me and
millions of Americans very deeply. I
worry very much about the growing
economic and political power of the
oligarchs in this country—the multibillionaires who are side by side with
Trump, who were in the front row when
he got inaugurated. I think all of us
will remember Mr. Musk there, Mr.
Zuckerberg, Mr. Bezos, and some 14
other billionaires sitting there when he
was inaugurated.
Today, in America, we have more income and wealth inequality than we
have ever had in the history of our Nation. Unbelievably, Elon Musk—the
wealthiest man alive—now owns more
wealth than the bottom 53 percent of
American households. One man—one
man—now owns more wealth—some
$700-billion plus—than the bottom 53
percent of American households. The
top 1 percent now owns more wealth
than the bottom 93 percent. CEOs of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:03 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

S331

funding of elections. If somebody wants
to run against me who might disagree
with my ideas, fine—go for it—but we
should not have a system where candidates are backed by billionaires who
can outspend heavily those candidates
who are standing up for working people. That is not democracy; that is oligarchy. In a democracy, elections must
be about one person, one vote, not billionaires buying politicians.
But that is not all.
When we look at what is going on in
America—and it is important that we
do that—take a look at our broken
healthcare system. We are spending
twice as much per capita on healthcare
as the people of any other nation. Yet
we are the only major country on
Earth not to guarantee healthcare to
all. We have got 85 million Americans
who are uninsured or underinsured, and
over 60,000 people die each year because
they can’t afford to see a doctor on
time.
Do you want to turn that around in
America? Do you want to end our decline? We are the richest country on
Earth, and we spend more on
healthcare per person than any other
country. Let us have the best
healthcare system in the world—guaranteeing healthcare to every man,
woman, and child.
That is what we should be doing, and
that is why we should pass a Medicare
for All single-payer system. And when
we talk about America being in decline, we are talking about the skyrocketing price of housing and the fact
that tens of millions of Americans cannot afford to buy a home.
We are seeing young people right now
living with their parents because they
can’t even afford an apartment of their
own, married couples who will buy
their own home at a much older age
than their parents.
Today, we have 800,000 Americans
who are homeless—800,000, including
people a few blocks from the U.S. Capitol. And 20 million households are now
spending over half of their limited incomes on housing.
Let us reverse this decline. Instead of
giving tax breaks to billionaires, let’s
build the low-income and affordable
housing
this
country
desperately
needs. In the wealthiest country on
Earth, it is not a radical proposition to
say that every American should be able
to live in decent, affordable housing.
When we talk about America being in
decline, we are talking about the crisis
in our education system. Several decades ago, the United States was the
best educated country on Earth. The
United States used to lead the world in
the percentage of adults with a college
degree. We were No. 1.
Today, we are in 11th place behind
countries like Japan, South Korea,
Australia, the UK, and Canada. Today,
the United States ranks 28th out of 37
developed countries in math, 12th in
science, and 6th in reading.
This is the United States of America,
the richest country on Earth. Our kids

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.053

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S332

should be leading the world in science,
in reading, in math, not being in 28th
place.
If we are going to come out of our decline and successfully compete in a
global economy, we need the best educated workforce in the world, which
means we need to revamp our educational system from childcare to
graduate school. Believe it or not—people don’t know this—70 years ago,
major public universities in the city of
New York, California, great universities were tuition-free.
Maybe instead of spending a trillion
dollars a year on the military, we
make sure that every kid in this country has the opportunity to get a higher
education because we make our public
colleges and universities tuition-free.
In New York City, in New Mexico,
now there is significant movements toward making childcare free and universal, and that is a lesson all of us
have got to learn right here in the Congress. That should be our goal.
When we talk about America being in
decline, we are talking about the fact
that we have a retirement crisis in our
country today. In America right now,
over 20 percent of seniors are trying to
survive on an income of less than
$15,000 a year.
Got it? Twenty percent of seniors are
trying to survive on $15,000 or less. One
guy is worth over $700 billion.
Half of seniors are trying to get by
on less than $30,000 a year. These are
the people who built this country.
These are the people who raised us. We
need to treat them with respect and
dignity. That is why we should expand
and strengthen Social Security benefits and bring back defined benefit pension plans that guarantee a secure income in retirement.
A great nation like the United States
should not have the highest rate of
childhood poverty of almost any major
country. We should not have one of the
highest rates of senior poverty of almost any major country.
And when we talk about the decline
in the standard of living in America,
the fact that 60 percent of the people in
our country today are struggling, as we
speak, to put food on the table, we
must understand that in our country
right now, Big Tech oligarchs are
working overtime to become even
wealthier by throwing American workers out on the street and replacing
them with robots or artificial intelligence.
Nobody knows exactly what the impact of AI and robotics will be, but
there are some very sophisticated studies that would suggest that tens of millions of jobs will be replaced by AI and
robotics, and we are in no way prepared
for that.
That is why I have called for a moratorium on new AI data centers until we
make sure that the economic gains of
these revolutionary technologies benefit the working families of this country and not just a handful of multibillionaires in Silicon Valley.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:03 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

AI robotics are neither good nor bad.
It depends on how they are utilized. If
they can improve life for ordinary people, it is positive. If they can reduce
the workweek, it is positive. But if
they simply throw millions of people
out on the street, that is not a positive.
In my view, we are living through
one of the most difficult moments in
the modern history of our country. But
the truth is that throughout our Nation’s history, we have faced great
challenges as well. This is not the first
great and difficult challenge that we
face.
We have been through an American
revolution. We have been through a
civil war. We have been through a suffrage movement that demanded full
citizenship and the right to vote for
our women. We have been through the
Great Depression, where 25 percent of
our people were unemployed. We have
been through World War II. We have
been through the Civil Rights Movement and the effort to end segregation,
and here we are today.
At every moment of crisis in the history of our country, the American people came together and chose democracy over authoritarianism, chose justice over greed, and chose solidarity
over division. They understood, in the
past—and we understand today—that
when we stand together, no matter how
much money the oligarchs have, no
matter how much political power they
have, we have the people.
At the end of the day, people coming
together is far more powerful than the
billionaires and all of their money. If
we summon that same courage today,
if we stand together against fear and
hatred, if we defend democracy and
take on the power of the oligarchs,
there is nothing that this great Nation
cannot accomplish.
That is how we end the decline; that
is how we renew our democracy; and
that is how we build a future worthy of
our children and generations yet to
come.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Michigan.
Ms. SLOTKIN. Mr. President, I rise
today because of what is going on in
Minneapolis. As we have all seen in
realtime with our own eyes, Alex
Pretti, 37 years old, nurse at the VA,
shot multiple times and killed by Border Patrol while he was exercising his
right to peacefully assemble.
The video shows us what happened.
He was disarmed at the time that he
was shot, defenseless, not a threat
when he was shot and killed. Before
him was Renee Good, shot and killed
by ICE agents in her car on January 7.
Separate from those 2, we have 32
people who have died in ICE custody in
2025, including one in Baldwin, MI—
more fatalities in 1 year than in more
than two decades.
These folks shouldn’t be going
through this, but the deaths that we
saw in Minneapolis are the culmination
of something much bigger. We are ex-

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

periencing a cultural moment in the
United States of America that cuts to
the heart of who we are as Americans,
and it relates to the behavior of Federal forces in our streets. It strikes to
the heart of who we are as Americans.
Now, this isn’t about any one thing,
but I do think that it is important for
Americans to understand that despite
some of the rolling back that the President has done over the last few days,
ICE agents are still in Minnesota, still
acting 3,000 strong in ways that I believe run against the American consciousness.
So I am going to list out some of the
things that I have heard and we have
seen, and I want Americans to think
about how they would feel if these very
things were going on in their own
towns, in their own States, in their
own communities.
Imagine being pulled over and asked
for your papers as you pull into the
parking lot at Target. Imagine Federal
agents waiting at the top of off-ramps
from the highway where you have to
stop, determining by looking at you if
you might be an illegal alien and asking you to pull over and show your papers.
Imagine you are at the airport trying
to depart on a flight to go overseas and
ICE agents are at the boarding area
asking to see your papers, and when
you ask them: Are you just indiscriminately pulling us aside and checking
our status, they threaten you with a
$10,000 fine for obstructing Federal
agents.
Imagine, in your kid’s elementary
school on the playground, agents are
shooting tear gas. Imagine being held
at gunpoint in your own home, taken
to a police precinct in your underwear
in subfreezing temperatures and then
released without an apology when they
realize: Oops. You actually are an
American citizen.
Imagine agents with full kit on, no
identifying information, masks, breaking your car window when your 2-yearold is in the backseat. Imagine peacefully protesting and having rubber bullets shot at you.
Imagine masked men detaining a 5year-old who is coming home from preschool. Imagine being pepper-sprayed
as clergy while you are praying out
loud. Imagine tear gas filling your car
on your way home from a basketball
game with your children in the backseat and doing CPR on a 6-month-old
who stopped breathing.
Imagine being the family watching
on video as your loved one is beaten
and shot repeatedly and killed because
they were exercising their Second
Amendment right and being present in
their First Amendment right with freedom of speech.
And then imagine being grabbed off
the street and taken to a detention facility without your family or a lawyer
knowing where you are.
Every one of these things has happened in Minneapolis in the past 30
days. If you have a problem with any of

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.055

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

those things happening to you, you
should have a problem with those
things happening in Minneapolis.
It doesn’t matter if you are a Democrat or Republican. This is not about
political party.
In my State, we have seen political
protests over the last 5 years for all
kinds of political persuasions. And I
want people to imagine that if they
will do this in Minneapolis, there is no
stopping them—or some future administration—from doing this to you for
what you care about.
Now, I think it is lucky that we grew
up in this country, and we are taught
over and over about the values of freedom of speech, freedom of peaceful protest. I think that it is important that
young people are taught these things
and that they come to live in a place
very deep in all Americans that I
know.
And because of that, I think Americans have kind of an internal redline
for authoritarian behavior; there are
just some things that look and smell
and feel wrong, given our history and
given our values.
I think what is most abhorrent about
what is going on in Minneapolis is that
it runs against the fundamental freedoms of who we are as Americans.
Now, the President, who ran, in many
ways, on the issue of immigration, has
managed to piss off everybody—left,
right, and center. Whether you are Joe
Rogan or Zach Bryan or everyone inbetween, the tide has turned, and the
President knows it. That is why he is
slinking Bovino and other people out of
town. That is why he is changing his
tune.
But what he says publicly is still fundamentally different from what is
going on today in Minneapolis. You
still have 3,000 agents doing the same
list of things that I am talking about.
It has not changed. So until the actions change, words don’t matter.
Now, Michiganders have been clear
with me that there need to be consequences for this kind of anti-American behavior, and that starts with
leadership. We have a cast of characters who are in charge of policy related to immigration.
Let’s start with Secretary Kristi
Noem. She should resign. If she doesn’t
resign, the President should do what he
has done in the past and fire her. And
if she doesn’t get fired, she should be
impeached, because while she is not the
only one who is the brains behind these
operations, she was the one who got
the big job. She was the one who sat in
front of many of us for Senate confirmation. And she has done nothing to
defend the values that she claimed
when she held her hand up and swore to
protect them.
Now, I will tell you, back a year ago,
I was one of those people who voted for
Kristi Noem. I voted yes on her nomination. I come from the State of Michigan. We have major border crossings,
some of the biggest border crossings in
America, and we are about to open one

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:03 Jan 29, 2026

S333

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

of the largest new border bridges in the
world, the Gordie Howe Bridge to Canada. We need her. We needed her to
staff that new bridge, to pay attention
when we had issues with CBP or Border
Patrol, when we needed more resources. She sat in my office. I invited
her in. And she told me how she was a
former Governor. She had received
Federal support through FEMA. She
knew what it was like, and she was
going to uphold those same things that
she depended on as a Governor, when it
came to being the Secretary of Homeland Security.
So I don’t regret that I tried to have
a relationship with her. I tried to say:
Hey, as someone from a border State,
we have got to make this work. I have
got to have a relationship with this
person.
But she has proved, over and over
again, up until this weekend, that she
does not deserve the title of Cabinet
Secretary. This week, when Alex Pretti
was killed on the ground, shot 10 times,
she didn’t say: We need an independent
investigation.
She didn’t say: We need to cool down
and relax.
She didn’t say: We need to put the
DHS officers on administrative leave
and have some sort of accountability.
She said: He was a domestic terrorist. A nurse who worked at the ICU
for the Veterans’ Administration was a
domestic terrorist.
If you are a Cabinet-level Secretary
and you jump to that, you don’t understand our system. And, certainly, the
one time she has come in front of our
committee—one time since she was
confirmed—she didn’t seem to understand basic concepts, like habeas corpus.
Now, she is not the only one who is
the mastermind of the President’s border and immigration policy. If you
want to understand the through line
between Trump’s first administration,
where he literally put children in cages
and purposely separated them from
their parents as an immigration policy,
and what you are seeing in Minneapolis
today, that through line is Stephen
Miller and his dark vision of America.
I do not understand this person. I do
not understand how he could be educated in this country and then spew
these dark visions of who we are as a
people. You know, I think the thing
that he said right after Alex Pretti was
killed was that not only was he a domestic terrorist, but he was an assassin.
These people don’t understand who
we are, and they certainly don’t understand that the American public does
not
tolerate
this
kind
of
authoritarianism.
So what do we need to do? We need
accountability. We need the people who
are the masterminds of these policies
to leave their jobs. Either, again, Stephen Miller and Kristi Noem resign—
that would be the respectful thing—are
fired by the President—they are boat
anchors around your neck—or impeach
them, in the case of Kristi Noem.

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

But, certainly, for what this body
needs to do this week, it seems abundantly clear that we need to separate
out the budgets for a bunch of other
Departments and Agencies from the
Department of Homeland Security. We
cannot trust this administration to
handle the deployment of Federal
forces in our streets without making
some fundamental reforms of the Department of Homeland Security.
And I am glad to see that, like dominoes, my Republican colleagues are
now saying: Yes, we should separate
this out. Yes, I don’t want to defend
DHS and ICE and have the government
shut down because I will just salute the
President.
They understand, and I give them
credit. I will take any millimeters of
bravery that I can get from the other
side of the aisle to say: This is not
America.
And you better believe that my colleagues would be losing their ever-loving minds if a Democratic President
were doing this in some Republican-run
city—losing their minds.
So we need accountability for the
people who are behind this. We also
need fundamental reforms of ICE. We
can’t leave the administration to do it
themselves.
So you separate the bill out, and
then we can have a real conversation.
And all we are asking for—it is not the
moon—is that Federal agents who show
up in these cities cannot play by different rules than police who live and
work in our communities.
You need to wear a body camera. You
should not be masked, unless it is for
your health. You need to have insignia
that shows you are actually real law
enforcement. You need to have a judicial warrant to come into someone’s
house, not a warrant signed by some
person at the Department of Homeland
Security, who may or may not just
have political dependencies on Kristi
Noem and the President.
We are asking for the same things
that the Michigan State Police or the
Nevada police have to do on every single day. We want our Federal agents to
abide by those same laws and rules because they fundamentally lost the
trust of the American people. They
don’t have it.
So we don’t trust that the President
is just going to learn his lesson, slink
out of Minneapolis, and not do this to
another city. So we need prevention.
We need reform. We need to separate
out the DHS budget from the others so
we can get to work and not shut down
the government because the President
won’t admit fault in Minneapolis.
And we need to fundamentally remember who we are as Americans. We
need to remember those values that literally we learned in the first grade. We
have fundamental freedoms that make
us different than almost every other
country of the world, and we need to
defend them vigorously.
And, in fact, those people who are
standing up and exercising those rights

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.056

S28JAPT1

S334

are doing the most patriotic thing they
can do right now. Standing up and calling out authoritarianism when we see
it is the most patriotic thing that we
can do as Americans.
I urge my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle to join us in calling a
spade a spade when you see it.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Kansas.
ANNIVERSARY OF FLIGHT 5342

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, this is a
solemn occasion for me and for many
people I know, and I rise this evening
to recognize and honor the 67 lives we
lost, 1 year ago tomorrow, on January
29, 2025.
On that night, Flight 5342 took off
from Wichita, KS, and flew toward our
Nation’s Capital with 64 passengers on
board. In Washington, DC, a Black
Hawk helicopter with three Army soldiers would soon be in the air as well.
Flight 5342 was just minutes away from
a safe landing at Reagan National Airport when the plane and the Army helicopter collided over the Potomac
River.
Shortly after 9 p.m., I received a call
with the news that a flight from
home—from Kansas—was involved in
an accident in our Nation’s Capital. I
made my way to Reagan National Airport that night. The banks of the Potomac River were illuminated with lights
from emergency responders who were
searching the icy waters of a crash
site.
At the airport, I was joined by local
leaders and the newly sworn-in Secretary of Transportation, Sean Duffy.
Our conversation that night was one of
many that would then span the course
of the following year, trying to understand how an accident like this could
occur and how to prevent it from ever
happening again.
At the airport, we learned the tragic
news that there were no survivors. Of
those who perished, seven were Kansans.
Kiah Duggins, a civil rights attorney
and a Wichita native, was set to begin
teaching at Howard University School
of Law.
Lindsey Fields, a professor at Butler
Community College and the presidentelect of the National Association of Biology Teachers, was traveling to our
Nation’s Capital to advocate for the
issues that mattered to her.
Bob and Lori Schrock, a prominent
and very well-liked couple of farmers
from Kiowa, KS, were on their way to
visit their daughter in college in Pennsylvania.
Grace Maxwell, an engineering student from Wichita, was returning to
college after attending her grandfather’s funeral at home in Kansas.
Dustin Miller, an IT professional who
grew up in El Dorado and was a lifelong
Chiefs fan, told his mom he was going
to try to make it back in time to
watch his team play in the Super Bowl.
PJ Diaz of Wichita was described by
his loved ones as a world traveler who

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:03 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

had been to 49 States. He especially
loved cruises and had an extra-long
cruise planned for later that year.
Sadly, 28 members of the U.S. Figure
Skating community also lost their
lives—young athletes traveling back
from the National Development Camp
in Wichita, with their coaches and family members.
Maxim Naumov, a 24-year-old U.S.
figure skater, lost both of his parents
in the accident. In the wake of this
tragedy, Maxim used his love of skating to overcome this immense loss and
now heads to the 2026 Olympic Games,
just weeks away, to achieve his lifelong
dream that he shared with his parents.
We will all be cheering him on.
A year later, the memory of this
night—the deadliest aviation incident
that America had witnessed in nearly
25 years—is as painful as it was when
we first heard the news. The victims
were husbands and wives, fathers and
mothers, sons and daughters, friends
and coworkers.
As we mourn the victims, we also remember the heroism, solidarity, and
love displayed that night. Hundreds of
first responders worked tirelessly
through the night and into the coming
days. Strangers offered comfort, and
people checked in on their neighbors.
Since January 29, the families of the
victims have tried to find meaning and
purpose after the death of their loved
ones and have worked to eliminate the
likelihood of an accident like this ever
happening again.
A family, in particular, that I would
like to mention, Tim and Sheri Lilley,
lost their son Sam. He was the copilot
for Flight 5342, the plane.
Following the tragic accident, the
Lilley family has used its voice to become an advocate for safer skies, in
honor of their son Sam.
I am grateful for the advocacy of the
families who are gathered here tonight
in the Nation’s Capital to remember
their family members, to mourn the
losses, to comfort each other. I am
grateful for the families of the victims
over the last year as they work to advocate for changes at the FAA—Federal
Aviation
Administration—and
congressional legislation like the
ROTOR Act.
Thanks to their support, the Senate
advanced this critical legislation last
year. This was an important step, but
our progress has been stalled in the
House.
The National Transportation Safety
Board’s hearing just yesterday further
confirmed that this legislation could
have made a difference on January 29 a
year ago. We cannot afford to waste
any more time. I urgently insist the
House of Representatives quickly pass
this legislation or amend it and pass it
so we can find consensus.
I want to commend NTSB Chair Jennifer Homendy and her team on their
thorough investigation of the crash.
Their report will guide Congress in the
coming weeks in our efforts to ensure
safety in the skies.

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

In addition to passing and implementing the ROTOR Act, Congress will
soon hold a hearing—after the NTSB
releases its final report in about 2
weeks—to review the findings and recommendations. We need to determine
what, if any, congressional action is
necessary to implement these recommendations and make certain the
FAA and Army are making the recommended changes, provide funding for
further modernization of our aviation
system, advance new technologies at
the FAA, and train and support air
traffic controllers. We cannot—we
should not—miss the moment to act
and ensure lasting change.
I cannot imagine the pain each of the
families of the victims has experienced
every day since January 29. This week,
their loss must be felt especially hard
as they face the anniversary of the
crash.
Tonight, I want to remember those
who perished—67 lives that ended way
too soon. We resolve to honor their legacy, work to make our skies safer, and
remember those we loved who lost
their lives.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the names of the victims of
Flight 5342 be printed in the RECORD.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
HONORING THE VICTIMS OF FLIGHT 5342
Isabel Cristina Martinez Aldana, Franco
Aparicio, Luciano Aparicio, Sarah Lee Best,
Brielle Beyer, Justyna Beyer, Jonathan
Boyd, Jonathan Campos, James Clagett,
Lars Raeder Clausen, Christopher Collins,
Casey Crafton, Pete Diaz, Kiah Duggins, Andrew Eaves, Danasia Elder, Brian Ellis, Ian
Epstein, Lindsey Fields, Jinna Han, Jin Hee
Han, Cory Haynos, Roger Haynos, Stephanie
Haynos, Alex Huffman, Asra Hussain, Steven
Johnson, Julia Kay, Sean Kay, Elizabeth
Anne Keys, Alexandr Kirsanov, Christine
Lane, Spencer Lane, Samuel Lilley, Alydia
Livingston, Donna Livingston, Everly Livingston, Peter Livingston, Rebecca Lobach,
Pergentino Malabed, Grace Maxwell, Charles
McDaniel, Dustin Miller, Vadim Naumov,
Melissa Nicandri, Ryan O’Hara, Anthony
Parente, Vikesh Patel, Jesse Pitcher, Robert
Prewitt, Bob Schrock, Lori Schrock, Wendy
Jo Shaffer, Evgenia Shishkova, Michael Stovall, Olesya Taylor, Olivia Eve Ter, Inna
Volyanskaya, Angela Yang, Lilly Li, Edward
Zhou, Kaiyan Mao, Yu Zhou.
f

MORNING BUSINESS
Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Senate be
in a period of morning business, with
Senators permitted to speak therein
for up to 10 minutes each.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

TRIBUTE TO RANA ALTENBURG
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, if you
were to follow I–94W for just an hour
and a half north of the city of Chicago,
you would find yourself rolling into the
city of Milwaukee. Every day, tens of
thousands of drivers make this commute, and every day, they are greeted

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.058

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

by two colors: blue and gold—more specifically ‘‘denim’’ and ‘‘wheat,’’ the
two colors used to paint every highway
circling Milwaukee. Why these colors?
Well, for one, because they are the colors of Milwaukee’s own Marquette University. And for two, because of the
hard work of a woman named Rana Altenburg.
With more than 30 years serving as
Marquette University associate vice
president for public affairs, Rana Altenburg’s legacy reaches far beyond
choosing those two colors while she
chaired the Marquette Interchange
Color Committee. Her impact on the
city of Milwaukee, the State of Wisconsin, and Washington, DC, was profound. While Rana retired at the end of
2025, her legacy will be felt for years to
come.
In fact, it is difficult to walk more
than a few blocks in Milwaukee, or
even Wisconsin, without encountering
Rana’s handiwork. Crossing Wisconsin
Avenue on Marquette’s campus? Rana
worked alongside city officials to install the medians bisecting the busy
street. Enjoying a ‘‘blue moon’’
popsicle from Pete’s Pops on a summer
day in Milwaukee? The local business
was the inaugural winner of Rev-Up
MKE, a small business pitch competition put on by the nonprofit that Rana
helped found in 2015. Going to a dental
check up in Eau Claire, WI? Your teeth
are probably being cleaned by someone
from Marquette’s esteemed dental
school, which Rana championed.
A few blocks down from Marquette’s
campus sits Milwaukee’s ‘‘Near West
Side,’’ a group of seven neighborhoods
that, in the 2010s, were in dire need of
reinvestment. Rana brought together
five anchor institutions in Milwaukee—Marquette, Advocate Aurora
Health,
Harley-Davidson,
Molson
Coors, and Potawatomi Ventures—to
establish a nonprofit dedicated to revitalizing the city’s Near West Side as a
business and residential corridor. Ten
years later, Near West Side Partners—
NWSP—with Rana at the helm as the
nonprofit’s board president, is thriving.
Thanks to the hard work of NWSP,
more than 50 new small businesses
have opened in the area, crime has decreased by double-digits, home ownership rates are up, and the opening of
the mixed-use space, Concordia 27, has
given Milwaukeeans a new community
hub.
Beyond Wisconsin, Rana is one of the
strongest advocates for Marquette’s
Les Aspin Center for Government in
Washington, DC. The program, which
brings students out to the Nation’s
Capital to study American political
systems and to intern across the city,
has expanded its reach during Rana’s
tenure. She leveraged the university’s
tightly knit alumni network to place
students at internships ranging from
congressional offices to healthcare advocacy. As a direct result of Rana’s
support for the program, Marquette
alumni populate Capitol Hill in extraordinary numbers.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:03 Jan 29, 2026

S335

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Rana is a familiar face to folks on
Capitol Hill, even to those who didn’t
attend the Les Aspin Center. She
worked alongside congressional staff to
bring millions in funding to Marquette
to support the university’s dental
school, the only one in the State of
Wisconsin; to bolster Marquette’s nursing program by securing funding for
the school’s clinical simulation lab;
and to boost the redevelopment of Milwaukee’s Near West Side.
But she lent her talents to many
other worthy causes, including to the
James Wright Foley Foundation, a
nonprofit named for the Marquette
alumnus and journalist who was tragically captured and killed by ISIS
while reporting in Syria. Through her
efforts and the work of my colleague
Senator SHAHEEN, the foundation will
receive a $350,000 earmark this year to
support their work promoting journalists’ safety abroad and to preserve the
James Wright Foley Archives at Marquette.
In recognition of her outstanding
work, the Milwaukee Business Journal
has honored Rana, first as a ‘‘Forty
Under 40’’ awardee and subsequently,
as a ‘‘Woman of Influence’’. But what
the well-deserved profiles in the Milwaukee Business Journal often forget
to mention are the hours she invested
in mentoring Marquette students. Affectionately referring to them as her
‘‘superstar interns,’’ Rana mentored
hundreds of students through the Marquette Office of Public Affairs, carving
out time in her intense schedule to foster her interns’ interest in public policy. She welcomed her students into
the legislative process and even
brought them along to meetings and
events, allowing her interns to take an
active role in advancing the university’s priorities. Years later, those
same ‘‘superstar interns’’ are now serving as legislative aides, communications professionals, and legal counsel
across Capitol Hill, including on my
own staff and on the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
But Rana takes no job more seriously
than her role as a Marquette basketball superfan. A long-time season ticket holder, Rana is a fixture at the
Fiserv Forum in the sea of university
students. If you keep your eye out during the Big East tournament, it is not
uncommon to spot Rana, decked out in
blue and gold, in the crowd during an
away game. And as perhaps the greatest contribution a superfan can make,
Rana worked tirelessly to ensure the
Marquette Golden Eagles could play at
the new Fiserv Forum, keeping Marquette in the very small club of college
teams that play in an NBA arena.
In everything she did, Rana imbued
one of Marquette’s guiding principles,
cura personalis, which translates to
‘‘care for the whole person.’’ Because of
her guidance, Milwaukee has grown
thoughtfully and deliberately, Capitol
Hill has been made more compassionate and decent, and even that dentist in Eau Claire provides more wholesome care.

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

While Rana dedicated the last 30
years to improving both Milwaukee
and Wisconsin, she will always be a
daughter of Northbrook, IL. My staff,
especially the Marquette graduates she
mentored; my son, a Marquette alumnus; and I congratulate Rana on a long
and storied career. We wish Rana, her
husband Jeff, her two daughters Hannah and Sophia, her son-in-law Jack,
and her new granddaughter Nora, all
the best in the years to come.
f

ARMS SALES NOTIFICATION
Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, section
36(b) of the Arms Export Control Act
requires that Congress receive prior notification of certain proposed arms
sales as defined by that statute. Upon
such notification, the Congress has 30
calendar days during which the sale
may be reviewed. The provision stipulates that, in the Senate, the notification of proposed sales shall be sent to
the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee.
In keeping with the committee’s intention to see that relevant information is still available to the full Senate, I ask unanimous consent to have
printed in the RECORD the notifications
that have been received. If the cover
letter references a classified annex,
then such an annex is available to all
Senators in the office of the Foreign
Relations Committee, room SD–423.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. SPEAKER: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
26–03, concerning the Air Force’s proposed
Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Australia for defense articles and
services estimated to cost $3.16 billion.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. JAMES E. RISCH,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relations,
U.S. Senate, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
26–03, concerning the Air Force’s proposed
Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Australia for defense articles and
services estimated to cost $3.16 billion.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.031

S28JAPT1

S336

DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. BRIAN MAST,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs,
House of Representatives, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
26–03, concerning the Air Force’s proposed
Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Australia for defense articles and
services estimated to cost $3.16 billion.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 26–03
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act, as amended
(i) Prospective Purchaser: Government of
Australia.
(ii) Total Estimated Value:
Major Defense Equipment * $2.61 billion.
Other $.55 billion.
Total $3.16 billion.
Funding Source: National Funds.
(iii) Description and Quantity or Quantities of Articles or Services under Consideration for Purchase:
Major Defense Equipment (MDE):
Up to four hundred fifty (450) AIM–260
Joint Advanced Tactical Missiles (JATM).
Up to five (5) AIM–260 JATM Integration
Test Vehicles (ITV).
Up to thirty (30) AIM–260 JATM Guided
Test Vehicles (GTV).
Non-Major Defense Equipment:
The following non-MDE items will also be
included: ammunition containers; shoe jettison assemblies; KGV–135A embedded communications security devices; spare parts,
consumables, and accessories; repair and return support; component parts and spare
equipment; training aids, devices, and spare
parts; weapon system support and test equipment; classified and unclassified software delivery and support; classified and unclassified publications and technical documentation; personnel training and training equipment; transportation support; site surveys;
warranties; U.S. Government and contractor
engineering, technical, and logistics support
services; and other related elements of logistics and program support.
(iv) Military Department: Air Force (AT–
D–YAO).
(v) Prior Related Cases, if any: None.
(vi) Sales Commission, Fee, etc., Paid, Offered, or Agreed to be Paid: None known at
this time.
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology Contained
in the Defense Article or Defense Services
Proposed to be Sold: See Attached Annex.
(viii) Date Report Delivered to Congress:
January 23, 2026.
* As defined in Section 47(6) of the Arms
Export Control Act.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

POLICY JUSTIFICATION

Australia—AIM–260 Joint Advanced Tactical
Missiles
The Government of Australia has requested to buy up to four hundred fifty (450)
AIM–260 Joint Advanced Tactical Missiles
(JATM); up to five (5) AIM–260 JATM Integration Test Vehicles (ITV); and up to thirty
(30) AIM–260 JATM Guided Test Vehicles
(GTV). The following nonMDE items will
also be included: ammunition containers;
shoe jettison assemblies; KGV–135 A embedded communications security devices; spare
parts, consumables, and accessories; repair
and return support; component parts and
spare equipment; training aids, devices, and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

spare parts; weapon system support and test
equipment; classified and unclassified software delivery and support; classified and unclassified publications and technical documentation; personnel training and training
equipment; transportation support; site surveys; warranties; U.S. Government and contractor engineering, technical, and logistics
support services; and other related elements
of logistics and program support. The estimated total cost is $3.16 billion.
This proposed sale will support the foreign
policy and national security objectives of
the United States. Australia is one of our
most important allies in the Western Pacific. The strategic location of this political
and economic power contributes significantly to ensuring peace and economic stability in the Western Pacific. It is vital to
the U.S. national interest to assist our ally
in developing and maintaining a strong and
ready self-defense capability.
The proposed sale will improve Australia’s
capability to meet current and future
threats by ensuring Australia has modern,
capable air-to-air munitions that improve
interoperability between the United States
and the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF).
Australia will have no difficulty absorbing
these articles into its armed forces.
The proposed sale of this equipment and
support will not alter the basic military balance in the region.
The principal contractor will be Lockheed
Martin Missiles and Fire Control, located in
Orlando, FL. At this time, the U.S. Government is not aware of any offset agreement
proposed in connection with this potential
sale. Any offset agreement will be defined in
negotiations between the purchaser and the
contractor.
Implementation of this proposed sale will
not require the assignment of any additional
U.S. Government or contractor representatives to Australia.
There will be no adverse impact on U.S. defense readiness as a result of this proposed
sale.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 26–03
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act
Annex Item No. vii
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology:
1. The AIM–260 Joint Advanced Tactical
Missile (JATM) is a GPS-aided air superiority missile with increased range and effectiveness over existing air-to-air weapons
with Precise Positioning Services provided
by Selective Availability Anti-Spoofing Module or M–Code. Anti-tampering security
measures have been incorporated into the
AIM–260 to prevent exploitation of the software.
2. The AIM–260 Guided Test Vehicle (GTV)
is an instrumented version of the missile
where the warhead is replaced with a telemetry unit to capture missile data parameters
during live-fire flight testing.
3. The AIM–260 Integration Test Vehicle
(ITV) is a modified AIM–260 missile used for
captive test purposes.
4. The KGV–135 A is a high-speed, general
purpose encryptor/decryptor module used for
wideband data encryption.
5. The highest level of classification of defense articles, components, and services included in this potential sale is SECRET.
6. If a technologically advanced adversary
were to obtain knowledge of the specific
hardware and software elements, the information could be used to develop countermeasures that might reduce system effectiveness or be used in the development of a
system with similar or advanced capabilities.
7. A determination has been made that
Australia can provide substantially the same

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

degree of protection for the sensitive technology being released as the U.S. Government. This sale is necessary in furtherance
of the U.S. foreign policy and national security objectives outlined in the Policy Justification.
8. All defense articles and services listed in
this transmittal have been authorized for release and export to the Government of Australia.
f

ARMS SALES NOTIFICATION
Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, section
36(b) of the Arms Export Control Act
requires that Congress receive prior notification of certain proposed arms
sales as defined by that statute. Upon
such notification, the Congress has 30
calendar days during which the sale
may be reviewed. The provision stipulates that, in the Senate, the notification of proposed sales shall be sent to
the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee.
In keeping with the committee’s intention to see that relevant information is still available to the full Senate, I ask unanimous consent to have
printed in the RECORD the notifications
that have been received. If the cover
letter references a classified annex,
then such an annex is available to all
Senators in the office of the Foreign
Relations Committee, room SD–423.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. SPEAKER: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
26–12, concerning the Navy’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Singapore for defense articles and
services estimated to cost $2.316 billion. We
will issue a news release to notify the public
of this proposed sale upon delivery of this
letter to your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. JAMES E. RISCH,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relations,
U.S. Senate, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
26–12, concerning the Navy’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Singapore for defense articles and
services estimated to cost $2.316 billion. We
will issue a news release to notify the public
of this proposed sale upon delivery of this
letter to your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.005

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. BRIAN MAST,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs,
House of Representatives, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
26-12, concerning the Navy’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Singapore the defense articles and
services estimated to cost $2.316 billion. We
will issue a news release to notify the public
of this proposed sale upon delivery of this
letter to your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 26–12
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of offer
Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the Arms
Export Control Act, as amended
(i) Prospective Purchaser: Government of
Singapore.
(ii) Total Estimated Value:
Major Defense Equipment* $1.293 billion.
Other $1.023 billion.
Total $2.316 billion.
Funding Source: National Funds
(iii) Description and Quantity or Quantities of Articles or Services under Consideration for Purchase:
Major Defense Equipment (MDE):
Four (4) P–8A patrol aircraft.
Seven (7) Guardian laser transmitter assemblies for the AN/AAQ–24(V)N system.
Seven (7) system processors for the AN/
AAQ–24(V)N system with Selective Availability Anti-Spoofing Modules.
Eight (8) MK 54 MOD 0 lightweight torpedoes all up rounds.
Non-Major Defense Equipment: The following non-MDE items will also be included:
tactical open mission software; electro-optical and infrared MX–20HD systems; missile
warning sensors for the AN/AAQ–24(V)N; AN/
AQQ–2(V) acoustic systems; AN/APY–10
radar systems (with Global Positioning System); ALQ–213 early warning management
systems; KIV–78 cryptographic appliques; A/
N APX–123 A Identification Friend or Foe
transmitters; AN/ALE–47 countermeasures
dispenser system programmers; AN/PYQ–10
simple key loaders; aircraft spares; spare engines; support equipment; training devices;
engineering support; training; classified and
unclassified publications; classified and unclassified software; mission systems and
other
Government-furnished
equipment;
classified and unclassified torpedo spare
parts for the all up round and exercise torpedo configured MK 54 lightweight torpedoes; torpedo support equipment, including equipment and tools; classified software
for test equipment; torpedo containers; recoverable exercise torpedoes; air launch accessories; torpedo support, including facility
stand-up and test equipment support; classified and unclassified publications; other
technical assistance, including technical
support, technical program management, infrastructure
support,
test
equipment
sustainment, exercise firing assistance, and
contract management; in-country training;
and other related elements of logistics and
program support.
(iv) Military Department: Navy (SN–P–
SAD & SN–P–AEB).
(v) Prior Related Cases, if any: SN–P–GZS.
(vi) Sales Commission, Fee, etc., Paid, Offered, or Agreed to be Paid: None known at
this time.
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology Contained
in the Defense Article or Defense Services
Proposed to be Sold: See Attached Annex.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:24 Jan 29, 2026

S337

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

(viii) Date Report Delivered to Congress:
January 20, 2026.
*As defined in Section 47(6) of the Arms Export Control Act.
POLICY JUSTIFICATION

Singapore—Maritime Patrol and Reconnaissance Aircraft P–8A and MK 54 Lightweight Torpedoes
The Government of Singapore has requested to buy up to four (4) P–8 A patrol aircraft; seven (7) Guardian laser transmitter
assemblies for the AN/AAQ–24(V)N system;
seven (7) system processors for the AN/AAQ–
24(V)N system with Selective Availability
Anti-Spoofing Modules; and eight (8) MK 54
MOD 0 lightweight torpedoes all up rounds.
The following non-Major Defense Equipment
items will also be included: tactical open
mission software; electro-optical and infrared MX–20HD systems; missile warning sensors for the AN/AAQ–24(V)N; AN/AQQ 2(V)
acoustic systems; AN/APY–10 radar systems
(with Global Positioning System); ALQ–213
early warning management systems; KIV–78
cryptographic appliques; A/N APX–123A Identification Friend or Foe transmitters; AN/
ALE–47 countermeasures dispenser system
programmers; AN/PYQ–10 simple key loaders; aircraft spares; spare engines; support
equipment; training devices; engineering
support; training; classified and unclassified
publications; classified and unclassified software;
mission
systems
and
other
Governmentfurnished equipment; classified
and unclassified torpedo spare parts for the
all up round and exercise torpedo configured
MK 54 lightweight torpedoes; torpedo support equipment, including equipment and
tools; classified software for test equipment;
torpedo containers; recoverable exercise torpedoes; air launch accessories; torpedo support, including facility stand-up and test
equipment support; classified and unclassified publications; other technical assistance,
including technical support, technical program management, infrastructure support,
test equipment sustainment, exercise firing
assistance, and contract management; incountry training; and other related elements
of logistics and program support. The estimated total cost is $2.316 billion.
This proposed sale will enhance the foreign
policy and national security objectives of
the United States by improving the security
of a strategic partner that is an important
force for political stability and economic
progress in Asia.
The proposed sale will improve Singapore’s
capability to meet current and future
threats by providing a credible maritime
force capable of deterring adversaries and
participating in U.S allied operations. The
proposed sale will support Singapore’s goal
of improving national and territorial defense
as well as increasing interoperability with
U.S. and allied forces. Singapore will have no
difficulty absorbing this equipment into its
armed forces.
The proposed sale of this equipment and
support will not alter the basic military balance in the region.
The principal contractor will be The Boeing Company, located in Arlington, VA. The
majority of MK 54 lightweight torpedo hardware will be purchased directly from U.S.
Navy stock. There are a significant number
of other companies under contract with the
U.S. Navy that will provide components) systems, and engineering services during the
execution of this effort. At this time, the
U.S. Government is not aware of any offset
agreement proposed in connection with this
potential sale. Any offset agreement will be
defined in negotiations between the purchaser and the contractor.
Implementation of this proposed sale will
require up to fourteen U.S. Government and

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

contractor representatives to travel to
Singapore for a duration of up to two years
to support aircraft fielding and maintenance,
mission systems, training, and logistics and
engineering technical assistance.
There will be no adverse impact on U.S. defense readiness as a result of this proposed
sale.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 26–12
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act
Annex Item No. vii
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology:
1. The P–8A aircraft is a militarized
version of the Boeing 737–800 Next Generation commercial aircraft. The P–8A is replacing the Government of Singapore’s Fokker 50
Maritime Patrol Aircraft and adds longrange antisubmarine warfare (ASW) and
anti-surface warfare capabilities to Singapore’s intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance aircraft.
The AN/AAQ–24 Large Aircraft Infrared
Countermeasures (LAIRCM) system is a directional, active infrared (IR) jammer that
protects the host aircraft from surface
launched IR-guided missiles. The system includes Missile Warning System (MWS),
LAIRCM system processor replacement, and
Guardian laser transmitter assembly with
Selective Availability Anti-Spoofing Module
(SAASM) capability.
The MK 54 MOD 0 torpedo is a conventional torpedo that can be launched from
surface ships, rotary, and fixed wing aircraft.
The MK 54 MOD 0 is an upgrade from the MK
46 torpedo created by combining the guidance section of the MK 50 torpedo with the
warhead and propulsion sections of the MK
46 torpedo.
Non-MDE included within the P–8A configuration for the initial sale of four (4) P–
8As to the Government of Singapore:
Tactical Open Mission Software (TOMS).
Functions include environment planning,
tactical aids, weapons planning aids, and
data correlation. TOMS includes an algorithm for track fusion which automatically
correlates tracks produced by on board and
off board sensors.
Electro-Optical (EO) and IR MX–20HD. The
EO/IR system processes visible EO and IR
spectrum (IR focal plane array and turret
stabilization) to detect and image objects.
AN/AQQ–2(V)1 acoustic system. The acoustic sensor system is integrated within the
mission system as the primary sensor for
ASW missions.
AN/APY–10 radar with Global Positioning
System (GPS). Radar capabilities include
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)/Inverse
Synthetic Aperture Radar (ISAR) resolution,
geolocation, periscope detection mode, track
generation, track while scan, color weather
radar, Identification Friend or Foe (IFF)
interface, and SAR/IS AR imagery resolutions. The radar includes a GPS 524D Precise
Positioning System with SAASM Mode III
hardware.
ALQ–240 Electronic Support Measures.
This system provides real time capability for
the automatic detection, location, measurement, and analysis of radio frequency signals
and modes. Real time results are compared
with a library of known emitters to perform
emitter classification.
Electronic
Warfare
Self
Protection
(EWSP). The P–8A EWSP suite consists of
the ALQ–213 Electronic Warfare Management
System (EWMS), ALE–47 Countermeasures
Dispensing System (CMDS), AN/AAQ–24
LAIRCM and the NexGEN MWS. EWSP includes threat information.
AN/ALQ–213 EWMS. The AN/ALQ–213 system provides the primary interface for control and monitoring of the EWSP suite.

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.023

S28JAPT1

S338

AN/ALE–47 CMDS. The AN/ALE–47 system
dispenses flares that act as decoys to deflect
incoming IR-guided missiles away from the
aircraft. This system acts as a backup for
the AN/AAQ–24 LAIRCM system.
KIV–78 IFF system. The KIV–78 IFF system deployed to identify cooperative, friendly systems.
AN/APX–123A(C) IFF Digital Transponder.
The AN/APX–123A is capable of both Mode 5
and Mode S secure modes and provides own
ship positional information.
Networked
communications
radio.
Networked communications airborne radio
delivers mission-critical capabilities through
multiple waveforms, high-speed ability and
beyond-line-of-sight connectivity for data,
voice, and imagery.
Advanced Digital Antenna Production
(ADAP) system antenna electronics and
ADAP Controlled Reception Pattern Antenna. ADAP contains a multi-element antenna, digital anti-jam processing, and provides protected GPS.
KIV–7M communications security device.
The KIV–7M device provides encryption for
high frequency beyond line-of-sight communications.
2. The highest level of classification of defense articles, components, and services included in this potential sale is SECRET.
3. If a technologically advanced adversary
were to obtain knowledge of the specific
hardware and software elements, the information could be used to develop countermeasures that might reduce system effectiveness or be used in the development of a
system with similar or advanced capabilities.
4. A determination has been made that
Singapore can provide substantially the
same degree of protection for the sensitive
technology being released as the U.S, Government. The proposed sale is necessary in
furtherance of the U.S. foreign policy and
national security objectives outline in the
Policy Justification.
5. All defense articles and services listed in
this transmittal have been authorized for release and export to the Government of
Singapore.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

TRIBUTE TO PATRICIA HARRISON
Mr. MARKEY. Mr. President, I rise
today to honor Patricia Harrison,
president and chief executive officer of
the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, as she concludes her service at
the close of a historic chapter for public media in America.
Throughout her tenure, Ms. Harrison
ensured
that
CPB’s
investments
strengthened service to local communities and delivered lasting public
value. In Massachusetts, those investments supported some of the Nation’s
most trusted and innovative public
media organizations: advancing education, journalism, and civic engagement.
Under her leadership, CPB supported
PBS LearningMedia, expanding online
access to high-quality, free educational
resources for students, educators, and
families across the Commonwealth and
the country. CPB also backed children’s programming produced in Massachusetts that reflects both educational rigor and creativity, including
Work It Out Wombats!, Ruff Ruffman,
and Molly of Denali, helping young
learners build critical thinking skills

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

while seeing themselves reflected on
screen.
Ms. Harrison also championed Massachusetts-based journalism and documentary storytelling that informs our
democracy. CPB’s support enabled nationally recognized programming such
as FRONTLINE, American Experience,
and NOVA, as well as impactful storytelling like ‘‘My Home Is Here: Stories
from Rural America’’ and ‘‘American
Veteran,’’ which elevate voices often
overlooked in national discourse.
Across education, civics, journalism,
and cultural storytelling, Patricia Harrison led CPB with integrity, accountability, and a clear commitment to the
public interest. Her legacy is deeply
felt in Massachusetts and across the
Nation.
f

TRIBUTE TO VADM NANCY HANN
Mr. VAN HOLLEN. Mr. President, I
rise today to honor Vice Admiral
Nancy Hann on the occasion of her retirement. VADM Hann is retiring after
more than 30 years of extraordinary
service with the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, NOAA.
After graduating from the University
of California San Diego in 1996 with a
bachelor’s degree in marine science and
biology, VADM Hann started her career with NOAA as a fisheries observer.
Over time, she expanded her expertise
and was later commissioned as an officer in the NOAA Officer Corps, where
she served in a variety of capacities.
VADM Hann’s versatility and dedication to her profession have made her an
incomparable asset to NOAA and to the
Nation. She later went on to earn a
master’s in space studies and remote
sensing at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University and a master of public administration at the Harvard Kennedy
School.
Most notably, VADM Hann has
served in many operational and top
management assignments including
her positions as NOAA’s Acting Administrator, deputy director of the NOAA
Corps and the Office of Marine and
Aviation Operations, OMAO, commanding officer of the NOAA Aircraft
Operations Center, and NOAA liaison
to the U.S. Pacific Command. Most recently, VADM Hann completed a tour
as the director of the NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps and is currently
the highest-ranking officer in the
NOAA Corps.
VADM Hann is a trailblazer in her
field. She was she one of the first female officers to qualify as an aircraft
commander and the first woman to
achieve the rank of vice admiral in the
NOAA Corps, as well as one of NOAA’s
first uncrewed systems operators. She
has consistently led by example
through her experience, her achievements, and her demonstrated commitment to equitable workspaces. VADM
Hann’s leadership has left an enduring
legacy of professionalism, mentorship,
and innovation that will inspire generations to come.

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

Upon retiring, VADM Hann is closing
out an illustrious, awe-inspiring career, one spent in service to research,
coastal and marine stewardship, and
our Nation. She has dedicated the entirety of her career to principled leadership and environmental conservation, and I thank her for her commitment. I invite my colleagues to join me
in thanking VADM Hann for her lifetime of service and to congratulate her
on her well-deserved retirement.
f

225TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE
TOWN OF STRONG
Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, nestled
among the rugged wilderness of the
western Maine mountains, the town of
Strong, ME, was incorporated on January 31, 1801. This 225th anniversary is a
time to celebrate the spirit of determination and resiliency that still
guides the community today.
Strong’s incorporation was but one
milestone on a long journey of
progress. For thousands of years, the
abundant forests and waters of the region were the hunting grounds of the
Native American Tribes. The very first
house that laid the foundation for a
permanent community was built in
1780 by a Wabanki known as Pierpole.
Drawn by the rich natural resources,
other settlers followed, and at the
dawn of the 19th century, the town was
established by Massachusetts Governor
Caleb Strong.
The rich soil supported prosperous
farms and the fast-moving Sandy River
powered lumber and grain mills. In the
years that followed, Strong became a
rural industrial powerhouse, including
footwear,
furniture,
textiles,
and
Maine’s first cheese factory. By the
mid-20th century, the Forster Manufacturing Company was the world’s largest maker of toothpicks, producing
some 20 million per day.
The townspeople used their prosperity to built what has been called
‘‘the prettiest village in Maine,’’ with
handsome
homes,
churches,
and
schools. Education remains a center of
community life, with the high-performing Strong Elementary School
being named a National Blue Ribbon
School.
From the American Revolution to
our time, Strong has always been a
town of patriots, with a veterans memorial paying tribute to those who defend freedom. Among the most illustrious veterans is Lt. James Porter.
After graduating from West Point in
1869, he served with the 7th Cavalry in
the Reconstruction Era South under
George Armstrong Custer and distinguished himself by his courage during
the mission the eradicate the Ku Klux
Klan. In 1876, he was among the 268
members of the legendary regiment
who fell at the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
In recent years, the townspeople have
worked together to dedicate the Lance
Corporal Scott B. Paul Memorial Park
in honor of the young marine who fell

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.024

S28JAPT1

January 28, 2026

in 1992 during the Gulf War. A section
of the beautiful park, the Sgt. Richard
Parker Memorial Wing, pays tribute to
a local hero who made the ultimate
sacrifice in Operation Iraqi Freedom in
2007.
Every summer, the town celebrates it
history and community spirit with
Pierpole Days, a festival of parades,
food, music, and family fun. The 2026
festival will surely be a memorable
celebration of the people who for more
than two centuries have pulled together, cared for one another, and built
a community. I congratulate the town
of Strong, ME, on this landmark anniversary.
f

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS
RECOGNIZING THE MONTANA NATIONAL GUARD MILITARY AND
FAMILY READINESS GROUP
∑ Mr. DAINES. Mr. President, today I
have the honor to recognize the Montana National Guard Military and
Family Readiness Group as Montanans
of the Month.
For over a century, the Montana National Guard has stood strong in its
commitment to serving both State and
Nation. The Montana National Guard
Military and Family Readiness Program also provides this group of soldiers and airmen with support and specialized programming as they grapple
with the unique challenges and sacrifices they and their families face in
order to serve our State and Nation.
Today, we recognize them for what
they provide to our Montana families:
their steadfast care to family wellness.
Family programs provided by the Montana National Guard helps families become more resilient so they can thrive
by equipping them with the support
and resources they need to succeed.
Recently, the Montana Military and
Family Readiness Programs, MFRP,
received national recognition, finishing
tied for first overall in the Nation for
fiscal year 2025, according to National
Guard Bureau evaluations. Under a rigorous grading system, Montana ranked
second in Personnel and fifth in Program Execution, making Montana the
only State in the Nation to place in the
top five in both categories in the last 2
years.
Josh Jopling, Montana Guard Family
Programs director, shared: ‘‘What inspires us every day is seeing the direct
impact our programs have on families.
Supporting them means strengthening
the entire Montana National Guard.
Our team is honored to serve these
families and help ensure our soldiers
and airmen can focus on the mission,
knowing their loved ones are cared
for.’’
Their efforts big and small make a
tremendous impact on this esteemed
group of servicemen and women, and
their contributions will help Montanan’s everywhere.
It is my distinct honor to recognize
the Montana Military and Family

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

S339

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Readiness Program for its steadfast
dedication and care for the families of
those who sacrifice to protect our great
State and Nation.∑
f

RECOGNIZING SURVIVAL GARDEN
SEEDS
∑ Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, as a member and former chairman of the Senate
Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship, each month I recognize
and celebrate the American entrepreneurial spirit by highlighting the success of a small business in my home
State of Idaho. Today, I am proud to
honor Survival Garden Seeds in Rigby
as the Idaho Small Business of the
Month for January 2026.
Jason Spahr and Daryl Ward started
Survival Garden Seeds in April 2020 as
a way to combat supply chain disruptions and food shortages. The small
family business was inspired by the
Victory Garden movement of World
Wars I and II, which encouraged people
to grow food at home to support their
communities. As the business grew
over the following years, Jason and his
wife Arianne assumed leadership,
transforming it into the Idaho-based
operation it is today. Through Survival
Garden Seeds, the couple and their
team aim to help people become more
self-reliant through gardening.
Starting with just 30 seed varieties in
a small facility, Jason and his family
handled all packaging and shipping for
incoming orders. Thanks to their hard
work and long hours, Survival Garden
Seeds has grown to 23 employees and
now offers over 400 different kinds of
seeds.
In the 5 years since its founding, Survival Garden Seeds has evolved into a
fully domestic manufacturing business,
designing and building its own seedpacking equipment and managing production, packaging, and distribution
under one roof. Their in-house process
has helped secure partnerships with
companies like Walmart and Amazon,
fueling business growth, job creation,
and greater supply chain reliability.
Survival Garden Seeds places a
strong focus on using education to promote gardening techniques for longterm self-reliance. Jason, Arianne, and
the team partner with local food
banks, community gardens, and missions in Africa to teach sustainable
gardening practices. They also regularly offer gardening and homesteading
classes to Idahoans throughout the
Rigby area.
Congratulations to Survival Garden
Seeds and its team on being recognized
as the Idaho Small Business of the
Month for January 2026. Your dedication to excellence makes Idaho proud,
and I look forward to your continued
growth and success.∑
f

PRIVILEGED NOMINATION
REFERRED TO COMMITTEE
On request by Senator CORY A. BOOKER, under the authority of S. Res. 116,

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

112th Congress, the following nomination was referred to Committee on Foreign Relation: Russell Vought, of Virginia, to be a Member of the Board of
Directors of the African Development
Foundation for a term expiring September 22, 2027.
f

EXECUTIVE AND OTHER
COMMUNICATIONS
The following communications were
laid before the Senate, together with
accompanying papers, reports, and documents, and were referred as indicated:
EC–2531. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Approval:
Indiana; Huntington County 2010 Sulfur Dioxide Redesignation and Maintenance Plan’’
(FRL No. 12933–02–R5) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 14,
2026; to the Committee on Environment and
Public Works.
EC–2532. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Approval:
New Hampshire; Updates to Materials Incorporated by Reference’’ (FRL No. 13094–01–R1)
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee
on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2533. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Approval and Promulgation of Delegation of Authority for
Designated Facilities and Pollutants; Ohio;
Delegation of Authority’’ (FRL No. 13131–01–
R5) received in the Office of the President of
the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2534. A communication from the Secretary of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to law, a six-month periodic report on
the national emergency with respect to hostage-taking and the wrongful detention of
United States nationals abroad that was declared in Executive Order 14078 of July 19,
2022; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–2535. A communication from the President of the United States, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report of the continuation of
the national emergency with respect to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) that was
declared in Executive Order 14203 of February 6, 2026; to the Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2536. A communication from the President of the United States, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report of the continuation of
the national emergency with respect to the
widespread humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and the potential for a deepening economic collapse in Afghanistan that was declared in Executive Order 14064 of February
11, 2022; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2537. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 36(c) and 36(d) of the Arms Export
Control Act, the certification of a proposed
license amendment for the manufacture of
significant military equipment abroad and
the export of defense articles, including
technical data, and defense services to the
Republic of Korea in the amount of
$100,000,000 or more (Transmittal No. DDTC
25–105) received in the Office of the President

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.030

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S340

pro tempore; to the Committee on Foreign
Relations.
EC–2538. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 36(c) of the Arms Export Control Act,
the certification of a proposed license for the
export of defense articles, including technical data, and defense services to Iraq in the
amount of $14,000,000 or more (Transmittal
No. DDTC 25–064) received in the Office of the
President pro tempore; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
EC–2539. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 36(c) of the Arms Export Control Act,
the certification of a proposed license
amendment for the export of defense articles, including technical data, and defense
services to the United Kingdom in the
amount of $50,000,000 or more (Transmittal
No. DDTC 25–106) received in the Office of the
President pro tempore; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
EC–2540. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 36(c) of the Arms Export Control Act,
the certification of a proposed license
amendment for the export of defense articles, including technical data, and defense
services to Canada and the United Kingdom
in the amount of $100,000,000 or more (Transmittal No. DDTC 25–109) received in the Office of the President pro tempore; to the
Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–2541. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 36(c) of the Arms Export Control Act,
the certification of a proposed license for the
export of firearms, parts, and components
controlled under Category I of the U.S. Munitions List to Ukraine in the amount of
$1,000,000 or more (Transmittal No. DDTC 25–
121) received in the Office of the President
pro tempore; to the Committee on Foreign
Relations.
EC–2542. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 3(d) of the Arms Export Control Act,
the certification of a proposed transfer of
major defense equipment to the United Kingdom in the amount of approximately
$110,000,000 (Transmittal No. RSAT 25–11179)
received in the Office of the President pro
tempore; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–2543. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
law, a report entitled ‘‘Cuban Compliance
with the Migration Accords’’ received in the
Office of the President pro tempore; to the
Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–2544. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 36(c) of the Arms Export Control Act,
the certification of a proposed license for the
export of firearms, parts, and components
controlled under Category I of the U.S. Munitions List to Norway in the amount of
$1,000,000 or more (Transmittal No. DDTC 25–
120); to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–2545. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
law, a report entitled ‘‘Federal Vacancies
Reform Act, changes that occurred as of November 19, 2025, and additional report on departures of ambassadors’’; to the Committee
on Foreign Relations.
EC–2546. A communication from the Secretary of Defense, transmitting the report of
an officer authorized to wear the insignia of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

the grade of general in accordance with title
10, United States Code, section 777a; to the
Committee on Armed Services.
EC–2547. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; Detroit River, Detroit,
Michigan’’ ((RIN1625–AA00) (Docket No.
USCG–2025–1042)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2548. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; Coast Guard Base San
Juan, San Juan Harbor, Puerto Rico’’
((RIN1625–AA87) (Docket No. USCG–2025–
0366)) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2549. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; Port of Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California’’ ((RIN1625–AA00) (Docket No. USCG–2025–1066)) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2550. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; Patapsco River, Baltimore, Maryland’’ ((RIN1625–AA00) (Docket
No. USCG–2025–1045)) received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2551. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Fixed and Moving Safety Zone; Vicinity of the M/V SAMPOGRACHT; Houston
Ship
Channel
and
Seabrook,
Texas’’
((RIN1625–AA00) (Docket No. USCG–2025–
1052)) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2552. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; Santa Barbara Harbor,
Santa Barbara, California’’ ((RIN1625–AA00)
(Docket No. USCG–2025–0997)) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2553. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; Fireworks Display,
Lower Mississippi River, Natchez, Mississippi’’ ((RIN1625–AA00) (Docket No. USCG–
2025–1062)) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2554. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,
Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; Sandusky Bay, Sandusky Ohio’’ ((RIN1625–AA00) (Docket No.
USCG–2025–1039)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2555. A communication from the Administrative Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard,

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Safety Zone; La Quinta Channel,
Ingleside, Texas’’ ((RIN1625–AA00) (Docket
No. USCG–2025–1123)) received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2556. A communication from the Attorney Advisor, Department of Transportation,
transmitting, pursuant to law, a report relative to discontinuation of service in an acting role for a position covered by the Federal
Vacancies Reform Act of 1998 for the position
of Inspector General, Department of Transportation, received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2557. A communication from the Attorney Advisor, Department of Transportation,
transmitting, pursuant to law, a report relative to a nomination for a position covered
by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998
for the position of Chief Financial Officer,
Department of Transportation, received in
the Office of the President of the Senate on
January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2558. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters; Amendment 39–23184’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–0910)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2559. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters; Amendment 39–23190’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–1736)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2560. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters; Amendment 39–23202’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–1363)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2561. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters; Amendment 39–23199’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–1735)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2562. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters Deutschland GmbH; Amendment 39–23099’’ ((RIN2120–
AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–0214)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2563. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.008

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Establishment of Class E Airspace; Zuni, New Mexico’’
((RIN2120–AA66) (Docket No. FAA–2025–0632))
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2564. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Modification and Revocation of Class E Airspace; Hawaiian
Islands,
Hawaii;
Correction’’
((RIN2120–AA66) (Docket No. FAA–2025–1187))
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2565. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters Deutschland GmbH (AHD) Helicopters’’ ((RIN2120–
AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–5385)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2566. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel, Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to
law, a report relative to discontinuation of
service in an acting role for a position covered by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of
1998 for the position of Administrator, Department of Homeland Security, received in
the Office of the President of the Senate on
January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2567. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Gulfstream Aerospace LP
(Type Certificate Previously Held by Israel
Aircraft Industries, Ltd.) Airplanes; Amendment 39–23207’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–2260)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2568. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; MHI RJ Aviation ULC (Type
Certificate Previously Held by Bombardier,
Inc.)’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No. FAA–
2025–2261)) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2569. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; The Boeing Company Airplanes; Amendment 39–23212’’ ((RIN2120–
AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–0481)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2570. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Modification and Revocation of Class E Airspace; Hawaiian
Islands,
Hawaii;
Correction’’
((RIN2120–AA66) (Docket No. FAA–2025–1187))
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2571. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Fed-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

S341

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

eral Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Standard
Instrument Approach Procedures, and Takeoff Minimums and Obstacle Departure Procedures;
Miscellaneous
Amendments’’
((RIN2120–AA65) (Docket No. 31638)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2572. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Standard
Instrument Approach Procedures, and Takeoff Minimums and Obstacle Departure; Miscellaneous Amendments’’ ((RIN2120–AA65)
(Docket No. 31639)) received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2573. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Aerospace & Defense Oxygen
Systems SaS (Part of Safran Aerosystems)
(Formerly Known as Air Liquide); Amendment 39–23210’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–5041)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2574. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus SaS Airplanes;
Amendment
39–23192’’
((RIN2120–AA64)
(Docket No. FAA–2025–0758)) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2575. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus SAS Airplanes;
Amendment
39–23185’’
((RIN2120–AA64)
(Docket No. FAA–2025–0754)) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2576. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; ATR–GIE Avons de Transport Regional Airplanes; Amendment 39–
23187’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No. FAA–
2025–2262)) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2577. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Helicopteres Guimbal Helicopters; Amendment 39–23205’’ ((RIN2120–
AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–1102)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2578. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; ATR–GIE Avions de Transport Regional Airplanes; Amendment 39–
23206’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No. FAA–

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

2025–2259)) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2579. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; The Boeing Company Airplanes; Amendment 39–23189’’ ((RIN2120–
AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–0749)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2580. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; The Boeing Company Airplanes; Amendment 39–23188’’ ((RIN2120–
AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–0338)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2581. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; The Boeing Company Airplanes; Amendment 39–23186’’ ((RIN2120–
AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–0474)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2582. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters; Amendment 39–23196’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–1350)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2583. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; CFM International, S.A. Engines; Amendment 39–23175’’ ((RIN2120–AA64)
(Docket No. FAA–2025–3434)) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2584. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Bombardier, Inc., Amendment 39–23208’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–1728)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2585. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Bell Textron Canada Limited Helicopters; Amendment 39–23209’’
((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–1727))
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2586. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Establishment of Class E
Airspace; Manila Airport, Manila, Utah’’

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.010

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S342

((RIN2120–AA66) (Docket No. FAA–2025–2433))
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2587. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters; Amendment 39–23200’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–0916)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 7, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2588. A communication from the Manager, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Transportation, transmitting,
pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled
‘‘FY2026 Airport Terminal Program Notice of
Funding Opportunity’’ (Docket No. FAA–
ARP–IIJA–G–26–001) received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
EC–2589. A communication from the Chief
of Staff, Media Bureau, Federal Communications Commission, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Amendment of the Commission’s Rules to Advance
the Low Power Television, TV Translator
and Class A Television Service’’ (FCC 25–84)
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2590. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; ATR–GIE Avions de Transport Regional Airplanes; Amendment 39–
23218’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No. FAA–
2025–2270)) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2591. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; ATR–GIE Avions de Transport Regional Airplanes; Amendment 39–
23222’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No. FAA–
2025–2269)) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2592. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus SAS Airplanes;
Amendment
39–23223’’
((RIN2120–AA64)
(Docket No. FAA–2025–5395)) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2593. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus SAS Airplanes;
Amendment
39–23217’’
((RIN2120–AA64)
(Docket No. FAA–2025–1721)) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2594. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; General Electric Company
Engines; Amendment 39–23215’’ ((RIN2120–

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–1364)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2595. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters Deutschland GmbH Helicopters; Amendment 39–
23219’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No. FAA–
2025–2274)) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2596. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters; Amendment 39–23214’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–0612)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 14, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2597. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus Helicopters; Amendment 39–23216’’ ((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No.
FAA–2025–2273)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 14, 2026;
to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation.
EC–2598. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Establishment of United States Area Navigation
(RNAV) Routes Q–190 and T–497, and Amendment of Domestic Very High Frequency
Omnidirectional Range (VOR) Federal Airways V–1, V–70, and V–194; Eastern United
States’’ ((RIN2120–AA66) (Docket No. FAA–
2025–0668)) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2599. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Standard
Instrument Approach Procedures, and Takeoff Minimums and Obstacle Departure Procedures; Miscellaneous Amendments; Amendment No. 4197’’ ((RIN2120–AA65) (Docket No.
31640)) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2600. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Standard
Instrument Approach Procedures, and Takeoff Minimums and Obstacle Departure Procedures; Miscellaneous Amendments; Amendment No. 4198’’ ((RIN2120–AA65) (Docket No.
31641)) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
EC–2601. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Leonardo S.p.A. Helicopters;
Amendment
39–23221’’
((RIN2120–AA64)
(Docket No. FAA–2025–5392)) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on Jan-

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

uary 14, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2602. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Airbus SAS Airplanes;
Amendment
39–23220’’
((RIN2120–AA64)
(Docket No. FAA–2025–5390)) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2603. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Amendment of Colored Federal Airway Green 8, Jet
Route J–115, United States Area Navigation
(RNAV) Route T–227 and Establishment of
RNAV Route Q–188 in Alaska’’ ((RIN2120–
AA66) (Docket No. FAA–2025–0372)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2604. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; Diamond Aircraft Industries
GmbH Airplanes; Amendment 39–23204’’
((RIN2120–AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–2263))
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2605. A communication from the Manager of Legal Litigation and Support, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Airworthiness Directives; DAHER AEROSPACE (Type
Certificate Previously Held by SOCATA) Airplanes; Amendment 39–23224’’ ((RIN2120–
AA64) (Docket No. FAA–2025–2265)) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
EC–2606. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Fossil
Energy and Carbon Management, Department of Energy, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Rescission
of Policy Statement on Export Commencement Deadlines in Authorizations To Export
Natural Gas to Non-Free Trade Agreement
Countries’’ (10 CFR Part 590) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources.
EC–2607. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Management, Department of Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Rescinding Obsolete Financial Assistance Rules’’ (RIN1991–AC20) received in
the Office of the President of the Senate on
January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2608. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Minority Economic Impact, Department of Energy,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Rescinding Regulations for
Loans for Minority Business Enterprises
Seeking DOE Contracts and Assistance’’
(RIN1903–AA23) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 14, 2026;
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2609. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Minority Economic Impact, Department of Energy,

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.012

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Rescinding Regulations Related to Nondiscrimination on the Basis of
Sex in Education Programs or Activities Receiving
Federal
Financial
Assistance’’
(RIN1903–AA22) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 14, 2026;
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2610. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Minority Economic Impact, Department of Energy,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Rescinding Regulations Related to Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs or Activities (General Provisions)’’ (RIN1903–AA20) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Energy and
Natural Resources.
EC–2611. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Civil
Rights and EEO, Department of Energy,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Rescinding Regulations Related to Nondiscrimination on the Basis of
Sex in Education Programs or Activities Receiving
Federal
Financial
Assistance’’
(RIN1903–AA22) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 14, 2026;
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2612. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Hearing and Appeals, Department of Energy,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Revisions to the Office of
Hearings and Appeals Procedural Regulations for the DOE Contractor Employee Protection Program’’ (RIN1910–AA56) received in
the Office of the President of the Senate on
January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2613. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Hearing and Appeals, Department of Energy,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Revisions to the Office of
Hearings and Appeals Procedural Regulation’’ (RIN1910–AA57) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 14,
2026; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2614. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Department of Energy, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Energy
Conservation Standards for Manufactured
Housing’’ (RIN1904–AF73) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Energy and
Natural Resources.
EC–2615. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Department
of Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law,
the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Application for
Presidential Permit Authorizing the Construction, Connection, Operation, and Maintenance of Facilities for Transmission of
Electric Energy at International Boundaries’’ (RIN1901–AB68) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 14,
2026; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2616. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of the
General Counsel, Department of Energy,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Rescinding Obsolete Trans-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

S343

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

fer of Proceedings Regulations’’ (RIN1990–
AA53) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2617. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Office of the
General Counsel, Department of Energy,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Revision of National Environmental Policy Act Implementing Procedures’’ (RIN1990–AA52) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 14,
2026; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2618. A communication from the Chief
Regulatory Officer, Citizenship and Immigration Services, Department of Homeland
Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Improving Continuity for Religious Organizations and their
Employees’’ (RIN1615–AD02) received during
adjournment of the Senate in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 21,
2026; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
EC–2619. A communication from the Solicitor General, Office of Solicitor General, Department of Justice, transmitting, pursuant
to law, a report relative to Race-Based Classifications in the Ronald E. McNair
Postbaccalaureate Achievement Program received in the Office of the President pro tempore; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
EC–2620. A communication from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of
Health and Human Services, transmitting,
pursuant to law, a report entitled ‘‘Providing
Accountable Care Organizations the Ability
to Expand the Use of Telehealth Report to
Congress’’; to the Committee on Finance.
EC–2621. A communication from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of
Health and Human Services, transmitting,
pursuant to law, a report entitled ‘‘The Administration, Cost, and Impact of the Quality Improvement Organization Program for
Medicare Beneficiaries for Fiscal Year 2024’’;
to the Committee on Finance.
EC–2622. A communication from the Deputy Assistant Secretary, Employment and
Training Administration, Department of
Labor, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Wagner-Peyser Act
Staffing, Delay of Merit Staffing Compliance
Date’’ (RIN1205–AC23) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 27,
2026; to the Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions.
EC–2623. A communication from the Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the
Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
2025 Annual Report to Congress; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2624. A communication from the President and Chair, Export-Import Bank of the
United States, transmitting, pursuant to
law, a report relative to transactions involving exports to Ethiopia; to the Committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2625. A communication from the Associate Director, Court Services and Offender
Supervision Agency, transmitting, pursuant
to law, a report relative to a vacancy and
change in previously submitted reported information for a position covered by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998 for the position of Director, Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency, received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 27, 2026; to the Committee on Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2626. A communication from the Acting
Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health and Human Services, transmitting, pursuant to law, the Department’s

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

Semiannual Report of the Inspector General
for the period from April 1, 2025 through September 30, 2025; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2627. A communication from the Deputy Chief Financial Officer, Department of
the Interior, transmitting, pursuant to law,
the Department’s Agency Financial Report
for fiscal year 2025; to the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2628. A communication from the
Branch Chief, Customs and Border Protection, Department of Homeland Security,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Enhanced Air Cargo Advance
Screening (ACAS); Corrections’’ (RIN1651–
AB61) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 27, 2026; to the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2629. A communication from the Chairwoman of the National Transportation Safety Board, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
Board’s Performance and Accountability report for fiscal year 2025; to the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2630. A communication from the Chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report
on D.C. Act 26–240, ‘‘Streatery Program Endorsements and Protest Process Amendment
Act of 2025’’; to the Committee on Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2631. A communication from the Congressional and Public Affairs Specialist, Bureau of Industry and Security, Department
of Commerce, transmitting, pursuant to law,
the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Revision to License Review Policy for Advanced Computing Commodities’’ (RIN0694–AK43) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 27, 2026; to the Committee
on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
f

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES
The following reports of committees
were submitted:
By Mr. CASSIDY, from the Committee on
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
with an amendment in the nature of a substitute and an amendment to the title:
S. 272. A bill to improve the safety of infant formula through testing of infant formula for microorganisms and toxic elements, and for other purposes.
By Mr. CASSIDY, from the Committee on
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
with an amendment in the nature of a substitute:
S. 921. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Health and Human Services to issue guidance on whether hospital emergency departments should implement fentanyl testing as
a routine procedure for patients experiencing
an overdose, and for other purposes.
S. 1157. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Health and Human Services to conduct a review to evaluate the status of research on
lung cancer in women and underserved populations, and for other purposes.
By Mr. GRASSLEY, from the Committee
on the Judiciary, with an amendment in the
nature of a substitute:
S. 2132. A bill to amend title 18, United
States Code, to prevent and mitigate the potential for conflicts of interest following
government service, and for other purposes.
By Mr. CASSIDY, from the Committee on
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
with an amendment in the nature of a substitute:
S. 2169. A bill to require the development
of a comprehensive rural hospital cybersecurity workforce development strategy, and for
other purposes.

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.014

S28JAPT1

S344

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND
JOINT RESOLUTIONS
The following bills and joint resolutions were introduced, read the first
and second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated:
By Mr. COTTON:
S. 3708. A bill to amend the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands to make that Act
applicable to hardrock minerals, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources.
By Mr. PETERS (for himself and Mr.
LANKFORD):
S. 3709. A bill to improve the effectiveness
and performance of certain Federal financial
assistance programs, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs.
By Mr. JOHNSON (for himself and Mr.
SCOTT of South Carolina):
S. 3710. A bill to amend the SOAR Act; to
the Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs.
By Ms. SMITH (for herself, Mr.
MERKLEY, Ms. WARREN, Mr. HEINRICH,
Mr. VAN HOLLEN, and Mr. PADILLA):
S. 3711. A bill to establish the Climate Financial Risk Committee and Climate Financial Risk Advisory Committee on the Financial Stability Oversight Council; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Mrs. HYDE–SMITH (for herself and
Ms. CORTEZ MASTO):
S. 3712. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Health and Human Services to conduct, and
submit to Congress a report describing the
results of, a study on the use of home cardiorespiratory monitors for infants, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Health,
Education, Labor, and Pensions.
By Mr. BARRASSO (for himself, Mr.
MARSHALL, Mrs. BLACKBURN, Mr. CASSIDY, Mr. LEE, Mr. SCOTT of Florida,
Mrs. MOODY, Mr. HOEVEN, Mr. CORNYN, Mr. COTTON, Mrs. CAPITO, Mr.
KENNEDY, Mr. RISCH, Ms. LUMMIS, Mr.
BOOZMAN, Mr. HAGERTY, Mr. CRAPO,
Mr. TUBERVILLE, Mr. CRUZ, Mr. JOHNSON, Mr. SHEEHY, Mr. WICKER, Mr.
HAWLEY, and Mr. PAUL):
S. 3713. A bill to require the advice and
consent of the Senate for entry or reentry
into any international climate agreement,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
By Ms. HASSAN (for herself and Mr.
SCOTT of South Carolina):
S. 3714. A bill to amend title V of the Social Security Act to extend funding for the
family-to-family health information centers;
to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. KELLY (for himself and Mr.
GALLEGO):
S. 3715. A bill to establish the Chiricahua
National Park in the State of Arizona as a
unit of the National Park System, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources.
By Ms. BALDWIN:
S. 3716. A bill to set forth limitations on
exclusive approval or licensure of drugs designated for rare diseases or conditions; to
the Committee on Health, Education, Labor,
and Pensions.
By Mr. WELCH (for himself, Mr. BENNET, Mr. BOOKER, Mr. FETTERMAN,
Mrs. GILLIBRAND, Mr. HEINRICH, Mr.
KING, Mr. MERKLEY, Mr. MURPHY, Mr.
SANDERS, Mr. SCHIFF, Ms. SMITH, and
Mr. PADILLA):
S. 3717. A bill to amend the Farm Security
and Rural Investment Act of 2002 to expand
the national organic certification cost-share
program into a comprehensive organic pro-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

gram, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.
By Mr. KELLY (for himself and Mr.
HUSTED):
S. 3718. A bill to amend the Agriculture
and Consumer Protection Act of 1973 to establish a pilot program to award grants to
facilitate home delivery of commodities
under the commodity supplemental food program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.
By Mr. TILLIS (for himself and Mr.
BLUMENTHAL):
S. 3719. A bill to authorize the Secretary of
the Interior to provide funding for the National Law Enforcement Museum, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources.
By Mr. SCHIFF:
S. 3720. A bill to amend the National Trails
System Act to direct the Secretary of the Interior to conduct a study on the feasibility
of designating the Bay Area Ridge as a national scenic trail, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
f

SUBMISSION OF CONCURRENT AND
SENATE RESOLUTIONS
The following concurrent resolutions
and Senate resolutions were read, and
referred (or acted upon), as indicated:
By Mr. BOOKER (for himself, Mrs.
BRITT, Mr. HICKENLOOPER, Mrs. CAPITO, Mr. SCHIFF, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, and
Mr. WYDEN):
S. Res. 590. A resolution designating January 23, 2026, as ‘‘Maternal Health Awareness
Day’’; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. SCHMITT (for himself, Ms.
ROSEN, Mrs. MOODY, Ms. DUCKWORTH,
and Ms. CORTEZ MASTO):
S. Res. 591. A resolution recognizing the
30th anniversary of the first flight of the F/
A–18 E1 Super Hornet from Lambert Field in
St. Louis, Missouri, and the 30 years of service of the F/A–18E/F Super Hornet to the
United States Navy and to allies of the
United States; considered and agreed to.
f

ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS
S. 6

At the request of Mr. LANKFORD, the
name of the Senator from Kentucky
(Mr. PAUL) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 6, a bill to amend title 18, United
States Code, to prohibit a health care
practitioner from failing to exercise
the proper degree of care in the case of
a child who survives an abortion or attempted abortion.
S. 106

At the request of Mr. CRAMER, the
name of the Senator from Delaware
(Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 106, a bill to amend
title XVIII of the Social Security Act
to provide Medicare coverage for all
physicians’ services furnished by doctors of chiropractic within the scope of
their license, and for other purposes.
S. 128

At the request of Mr. LEE, the names
of the Senator from Nebraska (Mr.
RICKETTS), the Senator from Kansas
(Mr. MORAN), the Senator from Utah
(Mr. CURTIS), the Senator from West
Virginia (Mrs. CAPITO) and the Senator

PO 00000

Frm 00044

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

from Arkansas (Mr. BOOZMAN) were
added as cosponsors of S. 128, a bill to
amend the National Voter Registration
Act of 1993 to require proof of United
States citizenship to register an individual to vote in elections for Federal
office, and for other purposes.
S. 167

At the request of Mr. TILLIS, the
name of the Senator from Indiana (Mr.
BANKS) was added as a cosponsor of S.
167, a bill to amend title 18, United
States Code, to punish criminal offenses targeting law enforcement officers, and for other purposes.
S. 405

At the request of Mr. TUBERVILLE,
the names of the Senator from West
Virginia (Mrs. CAPITO) and the Senator
from Montana (Mr. DAINES) were added
as cosponsors of S. 405, a bill to modify
eligibility requirements for amateur
sports governing organizations.
S. 410

At the request of Mr. MORAN, the
names of the Senator from North Carolina (Mr. TILLIS) and the Senator from
Washington (Mrs. MURRAY) were added
as cosponsors of S. 410, a bill to amend
titles 10 and 38, United States Code, to
improve benefits and services for surviving spouses, and for other purposes.
S. 522

At the request of Mr. HAGERTY, the
name of the Senator from Arizona (Mr.
GALLEGO) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 522, a bill to amend the Federal
Credit Union Act to modify the frequency of board of directors meetings,
and for other purposes.
S. 752

At the request of Mr. GRASSLEY, the
names of the Senator from New Mexico
(Mr.
LUJÁN),
the
Senator
from
Vermont (Mr. WELCH) and the Senator
from New Mexico (Mr. HEINRICH) were
added as cosponsors of S. 752, a bill to
amend title XIX of the Social Security
Act to streamline enrollment under the
Medicaid program of certain providers
across State lines.
S. 864

At the request of Mr. KAINE, the
name of the Senator from Connecticut
(Mr. BLUMENTHAL) was added as a cosponsor of S. 864, a bill to amend title
XXVII of the Public Health Service Act
to apply financial assistance towards
the
cost-sharing
requirements
of
health insurance plans, and for other
purposes.
S. 944

At the request of Mr. VAN HOLLEN,
the name of the Senator from Delaware
(Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 944, a bill to amend
title 23, United States Code, with respect to the highway safety improvement program, and for other purposes.
S. 952

At the request of Mr. CASSIDY, the
name of the Senator from South Carolina (Mr. SCOTT) was added as a cosponsor of S. 952, a bill to amend the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United
States to provide a uniform 8-digit subheading number for all whiskies.

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.017

S28JAPT1

January 28, 2026
S. 957

S. 1756

S. 2302

At the request of Mr. LUJÁN, the
name of the Senator from Oregon (Mr.
MERKLEY) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 957, a bill to amend the Public
Health Service Act to eliminate consideration of the income of organ recipients in providing reimbursement of
expenses to donating individuals, and
for other purposes.

At the request of Mr. LANKFORD, the
name of the Senator from Pennsylvania (Mr. MCCORMICK) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 1756, a bill to amend the
Public Health Service Act to prohibit
discrimination against health care entities that do not participate in abortion, and to strengthen implementation and enforcement of Federal conscience laws.

At the request of Mr. BOOKER, the
name of the Senator from Delaware
(Mr. COONS) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2302, a bill to amend the Public
Health Service Act to establish certain
duties for pharmacies to ensure provision of Food and Drug Administrationapproved contraception and medication
related to contraception, and for other
purposes.

S. 986

At the request of Mr. KAINE, the
name of the Senator from Michigan
(Ms. SLOTKIN) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 986, a bill to address and take action to prevent bullying and harassment of students.
S. 1169

At the request of Mr. RISCH, the
name of the Senator from Texas (Mr.
CORNYN) was added as a cosponsor of S.
1169, a bill to prohibit State excise
taxes on firearms and ammunition
manufacturers and dealers.
S. 1245

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the name of the Senator from New Jersey (Mr. BOOKER) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1245, a bill to amend title
38, United States Code, to expand
health care and benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs for military sexual trauma, and for other purposes.
S. 1562

At the request of Mr. BENNET, the
names of the Senator from North Carolina (Mr. TILLIS), the Senator from Illinois (Ms. DUCKWORTH), the Senator
from Maryland (Ms. ALSOBROOKS) and
the Senator from Virginia (Mr. WARNER) were added as cosponsors of S.
1562, a bill to reauthorize the Prematurity Research Expansion and Education for Mothers who deliver Infants
Early Act.
S. 1572

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the name of the Senator from New
Hampshire (Mrs. SHAHEEN) was added
as a cosponsor of S. 1572, a bill to
amend title 18, United States Code, to
improve the Federal carjacking statute.
S. 1716

At the request of Mr. CRAMER, the
name of the Senator from New York
(Mrs. GILLIBRAND) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1716, a bill to amend title
XXVII of the Public Health Service Act
to improve health care coverage under
vision plans, and for other purposes.
S. 1725

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S345

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

At the request of Mr. GRASSLEY, the
name of the Senator from Georgia (Mr.
OSSOFF) was added as a cosponsor of S.
1725, a bill to amend the Animal Health
Protection Act with respect to the importation of live dogs, and for other
purposes.
S. 1748

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the name of the Senator from Wyoming
(Mr. BARRASSO) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1748, a bill to protect the safety of children on the internet.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

S. 2621

S. 1881

At the request of Mr. MARKEY, the
name of the Senator from Colorado
(Mr. HICKENLOOPER) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1881, a bill to amend the
Occupational Safety and Health Act of
1970 to expand coverage under such Act
to public employees.
S. 1918

At the request of Mr. BOOZMAN, the
name of the Senator from Maine (Mr.
KING) was added as a cosponsor of S.
1918, a bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow a refundable
tax credit against income tax for the
purchase of qualified access technology
for the blind.
S. 2061

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the names of the Senator from Illinois
(Ms. DUCKWORTH) and the Senator from
Nevada (Ms. ROSEN) were added as cosponsors of S. 2061, a bill to require the
Interagency Working Group on Toxic
Exposure to conduct research on the
diagnosis and treatment of health conditions of descendants of individuals
exposed to toxic substances while serving as members of the Armed Forces,
and for other purposes.
S. 2211

At the request of Ms. COLLINS, the
name of the Senator from Maryland
(Ms. ALSOBROOKS) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2211, a bill to reauthorize
the Special Diabetes Program for Type
1 Diabetes and the Special Diabetes
Program for Indians.
S. 2230

At the request of Ms. CORTEZ MASTO,
the name of the Senator from Michigan
(Ms. SLOTKIN) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2230, a bill to amend the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 to reinstate the
rules for wagering losses.

At the request of Mrs. CAPITO, the
names of the Senator from Delaware
(Mr. COONS), the Senator from Maryland (Ms. ALSOBROOKS) and the Senator
from New Mexico (Mr. HEINRICH) were
added as cosponsors of S. 2621, a bill to
amend the Public Health Service Act
to reauthorize support for State-based
maternal mortality review committees, to direct the Secretary of Health
and Human Services to disseminate
best practices on maternal mortality
prevention to hospitals, State-based
professional societies, and perinatal
quality collaboratives, and for other
purposes.
S. 2667

At the request of Mr. BOOKER, the
name of the Senator from Georgia (Mr.
OSSOFF) was added as a cosponsor of S.
2667, a bill to prevent violence in the
West Bank and authorize the imposition of sanctions with respect to any
foreign person endangering United
States national security and undermining prospects for a two-state solution by committing illegal violent
acts.
S. 2771

At the request of Mr. LUJÁN, the
names of the Senator from North Carolina (Mr. TILLIS) and the Senator from
Arizona (Mr. KELLY) were added as cosponsors of S. 2771, a bill to amend the
Indian Self-Determination Act and the
Indian Health Care Improvement Act
to provide advance appropriations authority for certain accounts of the Bureau of Indian Affairs and Bureau of Indian Education of the Department of
the Interior and the Indian Health
Service of the Department of Health
and Human Services, and for other purposes.
S. 2840

S. 2265

At the request of Mr. HAGERTY, the
name of the Senator from California
(Mr. SCHIFF) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2840, a bill to amend the Investment Company Act of 1940 to postpone
the date of payment or satisfaction
upon redemption of certain securities
in the case of the financial exploitation
of specified adults, and for other purposes.

At the request of Mr. PADILLA, the
names of the Senator from New Mexico
(Mr. LUJÁN) and the Senator from Connecticut (Mr. BLUMENTHAL) were added
as cosponsors of S. 2265, a bill to require the Secretary of the Treasury to
mint coins in commemoration of the
2028 Olympic and Paralympic Games in
Los Angeles, California, and the 2034
Olympics and Paralympic Winter
Games in Salt Lake City, Utah.

At the request of Ms. HASSAN, the
name of the Senator from Maine (Ms.
COLLINS) was added as a cosponsor of S.
2947, a bill to establish a Federal Clearinghouse on Safety and Best Practices
for Nonprofit Organizations, Faithbased Organizations, and Houses of
Worship within the Department of
Homeland Security, and for other purposes.

S. 2252

At the request of Mrs. SHAHEEN, the
name of the Senator from New Jersey
(Mr. BOOKER) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2252, a bill to require United
States foreign assistance commodities
to be made available for their intended
purposes before they expire.

PO 00000

Frm 00045

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

S. 2947

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.019

S28JAPT1

S346
S. 2993

S. 3448

At the request of Mr. COTTON, the
name of the Senator from Texas (Mr.
CRUZ) was added as a cosponsor of S.
2993, a bill to establish appropriate
rules for prosecutors and Federal
judges to carry a concealed firearm.

At the request of Mr. MURPHY, the
name of the Senator from Wisconsin
(Ms. BALDWIN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3448, a bill to prohibit and prevent seclusion, mechanical restraint,
chemical restraint, and dangerous restraints that restrict breathing, and to
prevent and reduce the use of physical
restraint in schools, and for other purposes.

S. 3267

At the request of Ms. COLLINS, the
name of the Senator from Kansas (Mr.
MORAN) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3267, a bill to amend title XVIII of the
Social Security Act to provide for
Medicare coverage of blood-based dementia screening tests.
S. 3301

At the request of Mr. KELLY, the
name of the Senator from Montana
(Mr. SHEEHY) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3301, a bill to prohibit purchases
of certain semiconductor manufacturing equipment from foreign entities
of concern or subsidiaries of foreign entities of concern, and for other purposes.
S. 3341

At the request of Mr. HICKENLOOPER,
the name of the Senator from Ohio
(Mr. HUSTED) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3341, a bill to amend the Small
Business Investment Act of 1958 to exclude from the limit on leverage certain amounts invested in smaller enterprises located in rural or low-income areas and small businesses in
critical technology areas, and for other
purposes.
S. 3345

At the request of Mr. CRAPO, the
name of the Senator from New Mexico
(Mr. HEINRICH) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3345, a bill to amend titles
XVIII and XIX of the Social Security
Act to ensure accurate payments to
pharmacies under Medicaid and prevent the use of abusive spread pricing
in Medicaid, and to assure pharmacy
access and choice for Medicare beneficiaries and modernize and ensure
PBM accountability under Medicare.

S. 3470

At the request of Mr. PADILLA, the
name of the Senator from New Jersey
(Mr. KIM) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 3470, a bill to amend the Revised
Statutes of the United States to hold
certain public employers liable in civil
actions for deprivation of rights, and
for other purposes.
S. 3503

At the request of Mr. HEINRICH, the
names of the Senator from North Carolina (Mr. TILLIS) and the Senator from
Delaware (Mr. COONS) were added as cosponsors of S. 3503, a bill to reauthorize
and improve the wildlife crossings program, and for other purposes.
S. 3528

At the request of Mr. SCHIFF, the
name of the Senator from New Mexico
(Mr. HEINRICH) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3528, a bill to amend the Food,
Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade
Act of 1990 to direct the Secretary of
Agriculture to establish research centers of excellence for alternative protein innovation, and for other purposes.
S. 3626

At the request of Mrs. SHAHEEN, the
names of the Senator from New Hampshire (Ms. HASSAN) and the Senator
from Tennessee (Mrs. BLACKBURN) were
added as cosponsors of S. 3626, a bill to
amend title 5, United States Code, to
improve recruitment and retention of
Federal correctional officers, and for
other purposes.

S. 3426

At the request of Mr. MARKEY, the
name of the Senator from Michigan
(Ms. SLOTKIN) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3426, a bill to establish in the Department of State a Special Envoy for
the Human Rights of LGBTQI+ People,
and for other purposes.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S. 3442

At the request of Mr. MURPHY, the
names of the Senator from South Dakota (Mr. ROUNDS) and the Senator
from New York (Mrs. GILLIBRAND) were
added as cosponsors of S. 3442, a bill to
amend title II of the Social Security
Act to eliminate the waiting periods
for disability insurance benefits and
Medicare coverage for individuals with
metastatic breast cancer, and for other
purposes.

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

nished under provisions of law administered by the Secretary, and for other
purposes.
S. 3674

At the request of Mr. SCHMITT, the
names of the Senator from Utah (Mr.
LEE) and the Senator from Tennessee
(Mr. HAGERTY) were added as cosponsors of S. 3674, a bill to expand and
clarify
the
grounds
for
civil
denaturalization proceedings for individuals who have defrauded a governmental program, joined a terrorist organization, or committed certain
criminal offenses.
S. 3683

At the request of Mr. KELLY, the
names of the Senator from Delaware
(Mr. COONS) and the Senator from
Maine (Mr. KING) were added as cosponsors of S. 3683, a bill to establish clear
standards, training requirements, and
reporting relating to immigration enforcement personnel.
S.J. RES. 95

At the request of Mr. WYDEN, the
name of the Senator from Maryland
(Ms. ALSOBROOKS) was added as a cosponsor of S.J. Res. 95, a joint resolution providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5,
United States Code, of the rule submitted by the Internal Revenue Service
relating to ‘‘Interim Guidance Simplifying Application of the Corporate Alternative Minimum Tax to Partnerships’’.
S.J. RES. 103

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the names of the Senator from Colorado (Mr. BENNET) and the Senator
from New York (Mrs. GILLIBRAND) were
added as cosponsors of S.J. Res. 103, a
joint resolution providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of
title 5, United States Code, of the rule
submitted by the Department of Veterans Affairs relating to ‘‘Reproductive
Health Services’’.

S. 3631

S. CON. RES. 6

At the request of Ms. CORTEZ MASTO,
the name of the Senator from Wisconsin (Ms. BALDWIN) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 3631, a bill to allocate
funds for the local law enforcement
grant programs, and for other purposes.

At the request of Mr. CRAPO, the
name of the Senator from New Hampshire (Ms. HASSAN) was added as a cosponsor of S. Con. Res. 6, a concurrent
resolution expressing the sense of Congress that tax-exempt fraternal benefit
societies have historically provided
and continue to provide critical benefits to the people and communities of
the United States.

S. 3360

At the request of Ms. ROSEN, the
names of the Senator from Arizona
(Mr. GALLEGO) and the Senator from
Texas (Mr. CORNYN) were added as cosponsors of S. 3360, a bill to require a
report on internet freedom in Iran.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

S. 3650

At the request of Mrs. MOODY, the
name of the Senator from Missouri
(Mr. HAWLEY) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3650, a bill to amend title 18,
United States Code, to prohibit taking
minors across State lines in circumvention of laws requiring the involvement of parents in abortion decisions.
S. 3653

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the name of the Senator from Arkansas
(Mr. COTTON) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3653, a bill to require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to carry out
efforts to inform veterans of their
rights with regards to the receipt of
health care, benefits, and services fur-

PO 00000

Frm 00046

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

S. RES. 61

At the request of Mr. MARKEY, the
names of the Senator from New Jersey
(Mr. BOOKER) and the Senator from Arizona (Mr. GALLEGO) were added as cosponsors of S. Res. 61, a resolution expressing support for the continued
value of arms control agreements and
negotiated constraints on Russian and
Chinese strategic nuclear forces.
S. RES. 525

At the request of Mr. WYDEN, the
names of the Senator from Massachusetts (Mr. MARKEY), the Senator from
California (Mr. SCHIFF) and the Senator from Kansas (Mr. MARSHALL) were

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.021

S28JAPT1

January 28, 2026

added as cosponsors of S. Res. 525, a
resolution condemning the Government of Iran’s state-sponsored persecution of the Baha’i minority and its continued violation of the International
Covenants on Human Rights.
S. RES. 587

At the request of Mr. SCOTT of South
Carolina, the name of the Senator from
Montana (Mr. SHEEHY) was added as a
cosponsor of S. Res. 587, a resolution
designating the week of January 25
through January 31, 2026, as ‘‘National
School Choice Week’’.
f

STATEMENTS ON INTRODUCED
BILLS AND JOINT RESOLUTIONS
By Mr. BARRASSO (for himself,
Mr. MARSHALL, Mrs. BLACKBURN, Mr. CASSIDY, Mr. LEE,
Mr. SCOTT of Florida, Mrs.
MOODY, Mr. HOEVEN, Mr. CORNYN, Mr. COTTON, Mrs. CAPITO,
Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. RISCH, Ms.
LUMMIS, Mr. BOOZMAN, Mr.
HAGERTY,
Mr.
CRAPO,
Mr.
TUBERVILLE, Mr. CRUZ, Mr.
JOHNSON, Mr. SHEEHY, Mr.
WICKER, Mr. HAWLEY, and Mr.
PAUL):
S. 3713. A bill to require the advice
and consent of the Senate for entry or
reentry into any international climate
agreement, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Foreign Relations.
S. 3713
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘No Climate
Treaties Act of 2026’’.
SEC. 2. REQUIREMENT FOR SENATE ADVICE AND
CONSENT FOR ENTRY OR REENTRY
INTO
INTERNATIONAL
CLIMATE
AGREEMENTS.

Any agreement providing for the entry or
reentry of the United States into an international climate agreement or an agreement
mandating legally binding reductions in domestic greenhouse gas emissions, including
the decision of the 21st Conference of Parties
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, adopted in Paris December 12, 2015 (commonly known as the
‘‘Paris Agreement’’), shall be considered a
treaty and submitted to the Senate for its
advice and consent under clause 2 of section
2 of article II of the Constitution of the
United States.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 3. RESTRICTION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR
INTERNATIONAL CLIMATE AGREEMENTS.

No Federal funds may be obligated or expended to implement, enforce, or otherwise
comply with any international climate
agreement or agreement mandating legally
binding reductions in domestic greenhouse
gas emissions unless the agreement has received the advice and consent of the Senate
under clause 2 of section 2 of article II of the
Constitution of the United States.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

S347

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

SUBMITTED RESOLUTIONS
SENATE RESOLUTION 590—DESIGNATING JANUARY 23, 2026, AS
‘‘MATERNAL
HEALTH
AWARENESS DAY’’
Mr. BOOKER (for himself, Mrs.
BRITT, Mr. HICKENLOOPER, Mrs. CAPITO,
Mr. SCHIFF, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, and Mr.
WYDEN) submitted the following resolution; which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary:
S. RES. 590
Whereas each year in the United States, on
average, more than 600 women die as a result
of complications related to pregnancy and
childbirth;
Whereas the pregnancy-related mortality
ratio, defined as the number of pregnancy-related deaths per 100,000 live births, more
than doubled in the United States between
1987 and 2024;
Whereas, according to the United Nations
Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group, the United States is one of 4 countries in the world with a significant percentage increase in the maternal mortality from
2000 to 2023;
Whereas, of the pregnancy-related deaths
that occurred in the United States in 2021—
(1) approximately 19.5 percent occurred
during pregnancy;
(2) approximately 9.1 percent occurred the
day of delivery;
(3) approximately 14.1 percent occurred 1 to
6 days postpartum;
(4) approximately 29.2 percent occurred 7 to
42 days postpartum; and
(5) approximately 28.1 percent occurred between 43 days and 1 year postpartum;
Whereas 87 percent of pregnancy-related
deaths in the United States in 2021 are considered preventable;
Whereas, from 2016 to 2021, the rate of severe maternal morbidity (‘‘SMM’’), which includes unexpected outcomes of labor and delivery that can result in significant shortand long-term health consequences, increased by 40 percent;
Whereas approximately 20 percent of mothers who give birth in the United States report experiencing mistreatment;
Whereas postpartum depression affects a
significant percentage of new mothers who
give birth, with estimates ranging from 10 to
20 percent of mothers who give birth experiencing depressive symptoms during the first
year after childbirth, but many postpartum
depression cases go undiagnosed and untreated, often due to a lack of screening;
Whereas various social and systemic factors can influence maternal health outcomes
and contribute to disparities in care;
Whereas significant disparities in maternal
health outcomes exist in the United States,
including that—
(1) the 2024 pregnancy-related mortality
ratio for Black women is more than 3 times
higher than for White women;
(2) the 2024 pregnancy-related mortality
ratio for American Indian and Alaska Native
women is more than 4 times as high as for
White women;
(3) in 2021, based on hospital records for impatient deliveries, the rate of SMM for Black
women was 91 percent higher than the rate
for White non-Hispanic women;
(4) the rate of severe maternal morbidity
for Black and Asian-Pacific Islander women
is approximately twice as high as the rate
for White women;
(5) women who live in rural areas have a
greater rate of severe maternal morbidity
and mortality compared to women who live
in urban areas;

PO 00000

Frm 00047

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(6) 59 percent of rural counties are considered a maternity care desert;
(7) rural counties with more Black residents and lower median incomes are less
likely to have access to hospital obstetric
services;
(8) the average travel time to reach a
birthing hospital in maternity care deserts is
2.6 times longer than in full access counties;
and
(9) American Indian and Alaska Native individuals have a preterm birth rate of 12.5
percent, whereas White individuals have a
preterm birth rate of 9.5 percent;
Whereas 48 States and the District of Columbia have adopted the option to extend
coverage for postpartum care under Medicaid
to 12 months;
Whereas 46 States and 6 United States territories and Freely Associated States receive
funding from the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention via the Enhancing Reviews
and Surveillance to Eliminate Maternal
Mortality program to support maternal mortality review committees to identify, review,
and characterize pregnancy-related deaths
and to identify prevention opportunities;
Whereas State and local maternal mortality review committees are positioned to
comprehensively assess maternal deaths and
identify opportunities for prevention;
Whereas 49 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico are participating in the
Alliance for Innovation on Maternal Health,
which promotes consistent and safe maternity care to reduce maternal morbidity and
mortality;
Whereas
community-based
maternal
health care models, including midwifery
childbirth services, doula support services,
community and perinatal health worker
services, and group prenatal care, in collaboration with culturally competent physician
care, show great promise in improving maternal health outcomes and reducing disparities in maternal health outcomes;
Whereas increasing the maternal health
care workforce and expanding telehealth
services can help reduce the disparities in
maternal health outcomes;
Whereas many organizations have implemented initiatives to educate patients and
providers about—
(1) all causes of, contributing factors to,
and disparities in maternal mortality;
(2) the prevention of pregnancy-related
deaths; and
(3) the importance of listening to and empowering all people to report pregnancy-related medical issues; and
Whereas several States, communities, and
organizations recognize January 23 as ‘‘Maternal Health Awareness Day’’ to raise
awareness about maternal health and promote maternal safety: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) designates January 23, 2026, as ‘‘Maternal Health Awareness Day’’;
(2) supports the goals and ideals of Maternal Health Awareness Day, including—
(A) raising public awareness about maternal mortality, maternal morbidity, and disparities in maternal health outcomes; and
(B) encouraging the Federal Government,
States, territories, Tribes, local communities, public health organizations, physicians, health care providers, and others to
take action to reduce adverse maternal
health outcomes and improve maternal safety;
(3) promotes initiatives—
(A) to address and eliminate disparities in
maternal health outcomes; and
(B) to ensure respectful and equitable maternity care practices;
(4) honors those who have passed away as a
result of pregnancy-related causes; and

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.022

S28JAPT1

S348

(5) supports and recognizes the need for
meaningful investments in efforts to improve maternal health, eliminate disparities
in maternal health outcomes, and promote
respectful and equitable maternity care
practices.
f

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SENATE RESOLUTION 591—RECOGNIZING THE 30TH ANNIVERSARY
OF THE FIRST FLIGHT OF THE F/
A–18 E1 SUPER HORNET FROM
LAMBERT FIELD IN ST. LOUIS,
MISSOURI, AND THE 30 YEARS
OF SERVICE OF THE F/A–18E/F
SUPER HORNET TO THE UNITED
STATES NAVY AND TO ALLIES
OF THE UNITED STATES
Mr. SCHMITT (for himself, Ms.
ROSEN, Mrs. MOODY, Ms. DUCKWORTH,
and Ms. CORTEZ MASTO) submitted the
following resolution; which was considered and agreed to:
S. RES. 591
Whereas, on November 29, 1995, the F/A–18
E1 Super Hornet made its first flight, departing from Lambert Field in St. Louis, Missouri, flown by McDonnell Douglas pilot, retired Lieutenant Colonel Fred Madenwald;
Whereas the F/A–18 E1, as the inaugural
Super Hornet produced, serves as a United
States Navy carrier-based, supersonic fighter
jet, manufactured in St. Louis, Missouri;
Whereas the F/A–18 E1 was later returned
to the Boeing facility in St. Louis for use in
training under a program involving aircraft
sales to Kuwait;
Whereas the F/A–18E is configured as a single-seat aircraft and the F/A–18F is designed
for a 2-person crew;
Whereas the F/A–18E and F/A–18F are twinengine, carrier-capable, multi-role fighter
aircrafts, both derived from the McDonnell
Douglas F/A–18 Hornet platform;
Whereas the F/A–18E/F Super Hornet is
about 20 percent larger, 7,000 pounds heavier
empty weight, and 15,000 pounds heavier
maximum weight than the original McDonnell Douglas F/A–18 Hornet;
Whereas, on February 21, 1997, at Naval Air
Station Patuxent River in Maryland, the F/
A–18 E1 flew with an aeroservoelasticitystore configuration, comprised of 3 480-gallon
fuel tanks, 2 MK–84 bombs, 2 AGM–88 highspeed anti-radiation missiles, and 2 AIM-9
sidewinder missiles, making this flight the
heaviest test flight to that date in the test
program;
Whereas the F/A–18E/F Super Hornet officially entered the fleet service of the United
States Navy in 1999, with Strike Fighter
Squadron 122 based at Naval Air Station
Lemoore in California, and achieved initial
operating capability in 2001;
Whereas, on November 6, 2002, F/A–18E
models participated in a strike on hostile
targets in the ‘‘no-fly’’ zone in Iraq, as a part
of Operation Southern Watch;
Whereas, on June 18, 2017, a United States
Navy F/A–18E shot down a Syrian Air Force
Sukoi Su–22 fighter-bomber that had bombed
a position held by Coalition partnered forces;
Whereas such shooting was the first aerial
kill of a crewed aircraft by a fighter aircraft
of the United States since 1999, the first aerial kill by the United States Navy since the
1991 Persian Gulf War, the first kill by a
Super Hornet, and the third kill by an F/A–
18;
Whereas the United States Navy Flight
Demonstration Squadron, the Blue Angels,
which operates out of Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida, transitioned to the F/A–18E
Super Hornet airframe in 2021, on the 75th
anniversary of the squadron’s operation;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

Whereas the F/A–18F Super Hornet gained
recognition as the primary fighter aircraft
featured in the film ‘‘Top Gun: Maverick’’;
Whereas, in December 2023, the F/A–18 E1
arrived unassembled at the National Museum of Transportation, on loan from the
National Naval Aviation Museum on behalf
of the Naval History and Heritage Command;
Whereas, in July 2024, the reassembly and
installation of the F/A–18 E1 were completed,
with a dedication ceremony held on August
3, 2024;
Whereas the Naval Air Station Lemoore, in
California, is the West Coast home for the F/
A–18E/F Super Hornet, and the Naval Air
Station Oceana, in Virginia, is the East
Coast home for the F/A–18E/F Super Hornet;
Whereas the F/A–18F Super Hornet operates in Nevada in support of training on the
Fallon Range Training Complex at Naval Air
Station Fallon, Nevada;
Whereas the TOPGUN school is located at
Naval Air Station Fallon, Nevada, where the
Navy’s most elite pilots train on the F/A–
18E/F aircraft;
Whereas the Royal Australian Air Force F/
A–18F Super Hornet achieved final operational capability in December 2012 and are
based at Number 1 Squadron at Royal Australian Air Force Base Amberley, Australia;
Whereas, on July 10, 2023, a Mobile Aircraft
Arresting System received a Kuwait Air
Force F/A–18 Super Hornet at Ali Al Salem
Air Base in Kuwait;
Whereas Super Hornets embarked on USS
Gerald Ford, USS Dwight D. Eisenhower, USS
Abraham Lincoln, USS Theodore Roosevelt,
and USS Harry S. Truman were involved in
defending Israel and ensuring the free flow of
goods through the Red Sea as part of Operation Prosperity Guardian from December
2023 to May 2025;
Whereas, on February 3, 2024, 2 United
States destroyers and F/A–18E/F Super Hornets flying from USS Dwight D. Eisenhower
joined a multi-national strike on 13 locations
in Yemen;
Whereas, on February 1, 2025, the Armed
Forces of the United States carried out an
airstrike in Somalia from the USS Harry S.
Truman Carrier Strike Group, which was the
largest airstrike launched from a single aircraft carrier in the history of naval aviation;
and
Whereas the strike dropped approximately
124,000 pounds of munitions on the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria-Somalia targets:
Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) recognizes the achievements and contributions of the F/A–18E/F Super Hornet to
the national security of the United States;
(2) recognizes the dedication, service, and
sacrifice of the United States Navy pilots
and weapons system officers who have operated the F/A–18E/F Super Hornet;
(3) recognizes the dedication, service, and
sacrifice of the United States Navy F/A–18E/
F Super Hornet maintenance teams who provide expert and agile support to the aircraft;
(4) recognizes the role that the F/A–18E/F
Super Hornet has had in maintaining naval
supremacy and ensuring freedom of the seas;
and
(5) respectfully directs the Secretary of the
Senate to transmit an enrolled copy of this
resolution to the National Museum of Transportation in St. Louis, Missouri.
f

SA 4240. Mr. KENNEDY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4241. Mr. SCHMITT submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4242. Mr. CRUZ (for himself and Ms.
CANTWELL) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the bill H.R.
7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the
table.
SA 4243. Ms. ROSEN submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by her to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4244. Mr. SCHIFF (for himself, Mr.
KAINE, and Mr. BENNET) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4245. Ms. CORTEZ MASTO (for herself,
Mr. LUJÁN, Mr. COONS, Mr. HEINRICH, Ms.
ROSEN, and Mr. BENNET) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by her
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4246. Mr. LEE submitted an amendment
intended to be proposed by him to the bill
H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on
the table.
SA 4247. Mrs. MOODY submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by her to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4248. Ms. CORTEZ MASTO (for herself
and Mr. CRUZ) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by her to the bill H.R.
7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the
table.
SA 4249. Mr. CRUZ submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4250. Mr. CRUZ submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4251. Ms. CORTEZ MASTO submitted
an amendment intended to be proposed by
her to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4252. Ms. DUCKWORTH (for herself, Mr.
VAN HOLLEN, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, and Mrs.
GILLIBRAND) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by her to the bill H.R.
7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the
table.
f

TEXT OF AMENDMENTS
SA 4239. Mr. KENNEDY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:

AMENDMENTS SUBMITTED AND
PROPOSED

At the end of section 5019 of division E, add
the following:
(c) OUT-OF-CYCLE REVIEW OF ELIGIBILITY OF
SOUTH AFRICA.—As soon as practicable after
the date of the enactment of this Act, the
President shall review the eligibility of
South Africa for designation as a beneficiary
sub-Saharan African country for purposes of
section 112 of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (19 U.S.C. 3721) and section 506A
of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2466a).

SA 4239. Mr. KENNEDY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; which was ordered to lie on the table.

SA 4240. Mr. KENNEDY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,

PO 00000

Frm 00048

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.026

S28JAPT1

January 28, 2026

2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
After section 5019 of division E, insert the
following:

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 5019A. REVIEW OF BILATERAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES
AND SOUTH AFRICA.
(a) FULL REVIEW OF THE BILATERAL RELATIONSHIP.—The President, in consultation

with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of
Defense, the United States Ambassador to
South Africa, and the heads of other departments and agencies that play a substantial
role in United States relations with South
Africa, shall conduct a comprehensive review
of the bilateral relationship between the
United States and South Africa.
(b) REPORT AND CERTIFICATION.—Not later
than 120 days after the date of the enactment
of this Act, the President shall submit to the
appropriate congressional committees a report that includes the following:
(1) The findings of the review required by
subsection (a).
(2) A certification, in consultation with the
Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, explicitly stating whether South Africa has engaged in activities that undermine
the national security or foreign policy interests of the United States, together with an
unclassified report, including a classified
annex as necessary, providing a justification
for the determination. The President shall
publish the certification in unclassified
form.
(c) REPORT ON SANCTIONABLE PERSONS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 120 days
after the date of the enactment of this Act,
the President, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of the
Treasury, shall submit to the appropriate
congressional committees a classified report
on senior South African government officials
and leaders of the African National Congress.
(2) ELEMENTS.—The report required under
paragraph (1) shall include the following elements:
(A) A list of senior South African government officials and leaders of the African National Congress the President determines
have engaged in corruption or human rights
abuses that would be sufficient, based on
credible evidence, to meet the criteria for
the imposition of sanctions pursuant to the
authorities
provided
by
the
Global
Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability
Act (22 U.S.C. 10101 et seq.).
(B) With respect to each person included on
such list—
(i) a detailed explanation describing the
conduct forming the basis of the person’s inclusion on the list; and
(ii)(I) the expected timeline for sanctions
described in subparagraph (A) to be imposed
with respect to such person; or
(II) if the President does not intend to impose sanctions with respect to such person, a
detailed justification describing the rationale and legal authorities underlying such
negative determination.
(d) TERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY OF SOUTH
AFRICA FOR CERTAIN TRADE PREFERENCES
PROGRAMS.—If the President determines and
certifies under subsection (b)(2) that South
Africa has engaged in activities that undermine the national security or foreign policy
interests of the United States, the President
shall terminate the eligibility of South Africa for designation as an eligible sub-Saharan
African country under section 104 of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (19 U.S.C.
3703) or a beneficiary sub-Saharan African
country under section 506A of the Trade Act
of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2466a).
(e) APPROPRIATE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES DEFINED.—In this section, the term
‘‘appropriate
congressional
committees’’
means—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:24 Jan 29, 2026

S349

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

(1) the Committee on Foreign Relations of
the Senate; and
(2) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the
House of Representatives.

SA 4241. Mr. SCHMITT submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
In title I of division F, under ‘‘RELATED
PROGRAMS’’, strike the heading ‘‘NATIONAL
ENDOWMENT FOR DEMOCRACY’’ and everything
that follows under such heading.

SA 4242. Mr. CRUZ (for himself and
Ms. CANTWELL) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, making further
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes; which was ordered
to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
DIVISION ll—ROTOR ACT
SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.

This division may be cited as the ‘‘Rotorcraft Operations Transparency and Oversight
Reform Act’’ or the ‘‘ROTOR ACT’’.
SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS.

In this division:
(1) ADMINISTRATOR.—The term ‘‘Administrator’’ means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration.
(2) ADS–B IN.—The term ‘‘ADS–B In’’
means onboard avionics equipment that receives and processes Automatic Dependent
Surveillance-Broadcast transmissions that
are broadcast in accordance with sections
91.225 and 91.227 of title 14, Code of Federal
Regulations (or any successor regulations),
and other aviation advisory information
from ground stations, that provides the aircraft with awareness to the location of other
aircraft and traffic advisories.
(3) ADS–B OUT.—The term ‘‘ADS–B Out’’—
(A) has the meaning given such term in
section 91.227 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations; and
(B) broadcasts information from the aircraft in accordance with sections 91.225 and
91.227 of such title 14 (or any successor regulations).
(4) AFFECTED AIRCRAFT.—The term ‘‘affected aircraft’’ means any aircraft that is
required to operate in accordance with section 91.225 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulation.
(5) APPROPRIATE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS.—The term ‘‘appropriate committees
of Congress’’ means the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the
Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of
Representatives.
(6) CABINET MEMBER.—The term ‘‘Cabinet
Member’’ means an individual who is the
head (including an acting head) of the Department of Agriculture, the Department of
Commerce, the Department of Defense, the
Department of Education, the Department of
Energy, the Department of Health and
Human Services, the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Housing
and Urban Development, the Department of
the Interior, the Department of Justice, the
Department of Labor, the Department of
State, the Department of Transportation,
the Department of the Treasury, or the Department of Veterans Affairs, or any other
individual who occupies a position designated by the President as a Cabinet-level
position.

PO 00000

Frm 00049

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(7) FAA.—The term ‘‘FAA’’ means the Federal Aviation Administration.
(8) NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION; NCR.—The
terms ‘‘National Capital Region’’ and ‘‘NCR’’
mean the geographic area located within the
boundaries of—
(A) the District of Columbia;
(B) Montgomery and Prince Georges Counties in the State of Maryland;
(C) Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, and
Prince William Counties and the City of Alexandria in the Commonwealth of Virginia;
and
(D) all cities and other units of government within the geographic areas described
in subparagraphs (A) through (C).
(9) POWERED-LIFT.—The term ‘‘poweredlift’’—
(A) has the meaning given such term in
section 1.1 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation); and
(B) includes vertical-lift flight mode and
wing-borne flight mode, as such terms are
defined in section 194.103 of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation).
(10) ROTORCRAFT.—The term ‘‘rotorcraft’’
has the meaning given such term in section
1.1 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations
(or any successor regulation).
(11) TRANSPORT AIRPLANE.—The term
‘‘transport airplane’’ has the meaning given
such term in section 44741(i) of title 49,
United States Code.
(12) UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEM.—The
term ‘‘unmanned aircraft system’’ has the
meaning given such term in section 44801 of
title 49, United States Code.
SEC. 103. REVISION TO EXCEPTION FOR ADS–B
OUT TRANSMISSION.

(a) ADS–B OUT REFORMS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—
(A) SENSITIVE GOVERNMENT MISSION.—Beginning on the date of enactment of this section, in applying section 91.225(f)(1) of title
14, Code of Federal Regulations, the term
‘‘sensitive government mission’’ shall be narrowly construed and shall not include routine flights, non-classified flights, proficiency flights, or flights of Federal officials
below the rank of Cabinet Member or the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
(B) NOTIFICATION.—For the purposes of interpreting section 91.225(f)(1) of title 14, Code
of Federal Regulations, the operating agency
shall—
(i) when operating a sensitive government
mission during which the aircraft will not be
transmitting ADS–B Out, notify Air Traffic
Control; and
(ii) notify the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation and the Committee on the Armed Services of the Senate
and the Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure and the Committee on the
Armed Services of the House of Representatives on a monthly basis regarding each sensitive government mission within Class B
airspace operated during such month.
(2) RULEMAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 1 year
after the date of enactment of this section,
the Administrator shall—
(i) issue or revise regulations to update
section 91.225(f) of title 14, Code of Federal
Regulations, to comply with the requirements of this section; and
(ii) revise any memorandum of agreement
between the FAA and any other Federal,
State, local, or Tribal agency to conform
with the revised regulations described in
clause (i), including any agreement pursuant
to section 1046 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2019 (49 U.S.C. 40101 note).

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.030

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S350

(B) REPORT.—If the Administrator fails to
issue or revise regulations pursuant to subparagraph (A) or revise any memorandum of
agreement between the FAA and any other
agency pursuant to such subparagraph, the
Administrator shall, within 30 days, submit
to the appropriate committees of Congress a
report on the status of such regulations, including the reasons that the Administrator
has failed to issue or revise such regulations
within the period required under such subparagraph.
(b) GAO REVIEW AND REPORT.—Not later
than the date that is 2 years after the date
of enactment of this section, the Comptroller
General of the United States shall—
(1) review the utilization of exceptions
under section 91.225(f) of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), to
determine—
(A) whether the Department of Defense and
other relevant Federal agencies or other applicable operators have utilized such exceptions in accordance with relevant laws and
regulations; and
(B) the extent of such utilization;
(2) compare the utilization of exceptions
specified in such section 91.225(f) before and
after the issuance of revised regulations
under subsection (a); and
(3) submit to the Administrator and the
appropriate committees of Congress a report
on the findings of the review conducted
under paragraph (1) and the comparison conducted under paragraph (2).
(c) FAA REVIEW OF NON-COMPLIANT OPERATORS.—Upon submission of the report under
subsection (b)(3), the Administrator shall—
(1) determine whether any Federal agency
or other applicable operator that has been
found to have not utilized the exceptions
under section 91.225(f) of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), in
accordance with relevant laws and regulations shall be permitted to continue to utilize such exceptions; and
(2) not later than 30 days after the date on
which the Comptroller General submits the
report under subsection (b)(3), brief the appropriate committees of Congress on such
determination.
(d) REPORTS.—
(1) TO THE ADMINISTRATOR.—Not later than
90 days after the date of enactment of this
section, and on a quarterly basis thereafter,
each Federal, State, local, and Tribal agency
that performs sensitive government missions
as described in section 91.225(f)(1) of title 14,
Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), shall submit to the Administrator a report that includes—
(A) an attestation that such operations are
regularly transmitting ADS–B Out and are
conducted with proper consideration to aviation safety;
(B) a list of operations delineated by flight
in which the ADS–B Out equipment is not in
transmit mode because the aircraft was performing a sensitive government mission, including the airport, airspace location, date,
time, duration, and mission type of each
such operation; and
(C) with respect to any classified operation, a classified annex.
(2) TO CONGRESS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 180 days
after the date of enactment of this section,
and biannually thereafter, the Administrator
shall submit to the appropriate committees
of Congress a report on the frequency and
nature of the ADS–B Out exceptions granted
to Federal, State, local, and Tribal agencies
under section 91.225(f)(1) of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regu-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

lation), as revised under subsection (a). Such
report—
(i) shall include—
(I) aggregated data on the operations in
which ADS–B Out equipment is not in transmit mode by each agency described in paragraph (1); and
(II) a determination from the Administrator as to whether each operation described in paragraph (1)(B) jeopardizes aviation safety; and
(ii) may include a classified annex.
(B) SPECIAL NOTIFICATION.—If an agency described in paragraph (1) operates a flight
using an exception granted under section
91.225(f)(1) of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), 5 or more times in
a calendar month, or fails to provide to the
Administrator the attestation required
under paragraph (1)(A), the Administrator
shall notify the appropriate committees of
Congress of such use within 14 days of being
notified of such use. For the purposes of this
subparagraph, a flight shall be interpreted as
the period beginning when an aircraft moves
under its own power for the purpose of flight
and ending when the aircraft lands.
(e) ANNUAL INSPECTOR GENERAL AUDITS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Beginning on the date
that is 3 years after the date of enactment of
this section, the Inspector General of the Department of Transportation (in this section
referred to as the ‘‘Inspector General’’) shall
conduct an annual audit of FAA oversight of
all operations that utilize an exception
under section 91.225(f) of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), including Federal agency operations.
(2) CONSIDERATIONS.—In conducting an
audit under paragraph (1), the Inspector General shall assess the efficacy of FAA oversight related to the following:
(A) Ensuring exceptions under such section
91.225(f)(1) (or any successor regulation) are
strictly utilized by operators in accordance
with relevant laws and regulations.
(B) Ensuring exceptions under such section
91.225(f)(1) (or any successor regulation) are
not routinely used by operators.
(C) Identifying and engaging with any operator not in compliance with relevant laws
and regulations relating to exceptions under
such section 91.225(f)(1) (or any successor regulation).
(D) Any other factor determined appropriate by the Inspector General.
(3) BRIEFINGS TO CONGRESS.—The Inspector
General shall brief the appropriate committees of Congress on an annual basis after the
completion of each annual audit.
SEC. 104. ADS–B IN REQUIREMENTS.
(a) REQUIREMENT FOR ADS–B IN OPERATION.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 2 years

after the date of enactment of this section,
the Administrator shall issue a final rule in
accordance with section 553 of title 5, United
States Code, to require any person operating
an aircraft (other than an unmanned aircraft, as defined in section 44801 of title 49,
United States Code) required to be equipped
with ADS–B Out in accordance with section
91.225 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations
(or any successor regulation), to be equipped
with and operating with ADS–B In equipment that provides the aircraft with awareness to the location of other aircraft and
traffic advisories, unless otherwise authorized by air traffic control.
(2) COMPLIANCE DEADLINES.—In issuing a
final rule under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall—
(A) include an effective date of not later
than 60 days after the date on which such
final rule is published in the Federal Register; and

PO 00000

Frm 00050

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(B) require aircraft described in paragraph
(1) to be equipped with ADS-B In not later
than December 31, 2031.
(3) FINAL REGULATION REQUIREMENTS.—In
issuing a final rule under paragraph (1), the
Administrator shall, at a minimum, do the
following:
(A) PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.—The Administrator shall establish appropriate performance requirements for ADS–B In equipment
to provide integrated safety-enhancing capabilities for a pilot or other flight crew, including by increasing situational awareness
to the location of other aircraft and providing traffic advisories with alerting sufficient to provide traffic advisory indications
while airborne and on the airport surface,
such as visual and aural advisories.
(B) ALTERNATIVE EQUIPMENT OR TECHNOLOGY.—With respect to aircraft with a
maximum certificated takeoff weight of less
than 12,500 pounds when operating under part
91 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations,
and qualifying military aircraft as specified
by the Administrator in consultation with
the Secretary of Defense, the Administrator
shall establish performance requirements for
alternative equipment or technology that
the Administrator determines acceptable in
satisfying the ADS–B In requirement. The
performance requirements shall, at a minimum—
(i) provide similar or improved situational
awareness to the location of other airborne
traffic, as well as traffic advisory information; and
(ii) leverage the use of portable ADS–B In
receivers or equipment that allow display on
an existing or future electronic flight bag or
panel mounted display, provided that the installation or use of such equipment does not
adversely affect other required avionics or
the airworthiness of the aircraft.
(C) REQUIRED BRIEFING.—The Administrator shall brief the appropriate committees of Congress, the Committee on Armed
Services of the Senate, and the Committee
on Armed Services of the House of Representatives, on at least a monthly basis, regarding the alternative equipment or technology for qualifying military aircraft prior
to determining that such equipment or technology is acceptable to satisfy the ADS–B In
requirement.
(D) GUIDANCE.—The Administrator shall
issue relevant guidance for aircraft operators
and other appropriate stakeholders regarding the types of equipment that satisfy the
performance requirements described in this
paragraph.
(4) OTHER REQUIREMENTS.—In issuing a
final rule under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall include—
(A) requirements for ADS–B In equipment
and the use of such equipment;
(B) technical assistance to facilitating
ADS–B In equipage across the entire fleet of
affected aircraft, including, as appropriate,
guidance under part 26 of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations, to provide support for
affected transport airplane operators in complying with the requirements of this section;
(C) any other associated guidance necessary to assist operators and other stakeholders in identifying equipment that satisfies the ADS–B In performance standards described in paragraph (3) prior to the compliance deadline described in paragraph (2)(B);
(D) a determination of alternative equipment or technology described in subsection
(e); and
(E) a presumption, absent clear and compelling evidence to the contrary, that ADS–
B In equipment is cost beneficial and improves aviation safety.
(5) CONGRESSIONAL BRIEFINGS.—Not later
than 180 days after the date of enactment of
this section, and every 90 days thereafter,

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.031

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

the Administrator shall brief the appropriate
committees of Congress, as well as publish a
publicly available report, on the status of—
(A) the ADS–B In rulemaking required
under paragraph (1); and
(B) after the compliance deadline described
in paragraph (2)(A), the implementation and
oversight of such ADS–B In requirement.
(b) NEGOTIATED RULEMAKING COMMITTEE.—
(1) COMMITTEE.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 60 days
after the date of enactment of this section,
the Administrator may establish a negotiated rulemaking committee (in this section referred to as the ‘‘committee’’) pursuant to section 565 of title 5, United States
Code, to negotiate proposed regulations to
implement the requirements described in
subsection (a).
(B) MEMBERSHIP.—If the Administrator
elects to establish a committee under this
subsection, the committee shall be composed
of—
(i) representatives of—
(I) the FAA;
(II) air carriers;
(III) avionics manufacturers;
(IV) aircraft manufacturers; and
(V) general aviation organizations;
(ii) the exclusive bargaining representative
of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified
under section 7511 of title 5, United States
Code;
(iii) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots;
(iv) aviation safety experts outside of the
FAA; and
(v) any other representatives determined
appropriate by the Administrator.
(C) REQUIRED CONSULTATION.—In establishing a committee under this subsection,
the Administrator—
(i) shall consult with the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Homeland Security; and
(ii) may consult with other Federal agencies as appropriate.
(2) REQUIREMENTS.—If the Administrator
elects to establish a committee under this
subsection, the Administrator shall do the
following:
(A) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall
direct the committee to make recommendations relating to—
(i) ADS–B In equipment and its use;
(ii) ADS–B In equipment performance
standards pursuant to subsection (a)(3);
(iii) the consideration of effective approaches to facilitating ADS–B In equipage
across the entire fleet of affected aircraft,
including requirements under part 26 of title
14, Code of Federal Regulations, to provide
support for affected transport category airplane operators in complying with the requirements of this section; and
(iv) with respect to aircraft with a maximum certificated takeoff weight of less
than 12,500 pounds when operating under part
91 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, a
recommendation for low cost alternative
equipment or technology in accordance with
subsection (e).
(B) LACK OF COMMITTEE CONSENSUS.—In the
event the committee does not reach a consensus regarding a recommendation for low
cost alternative equipment or technology
under subparagraph (A)(iv), the Administrator shall, after the submission of the committee under paragraph (3), consider prescribing a low cost alternative that includes
the criteria described in subsection (e).
(3) SUBMISSION TO THE ADMINISTRATOR.—If
the Administrator elects to establish a committee under this subsection, not later than

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

S351

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

1 year after the date of enactment of this
section, the committee shall submit to the
Administrator—
(A) a consensus proposal of regulations to
implement the requirement described in subsection (a)(1); or
(B) in the event the committee does not
reach a consensus, a report identifying any
points of agreement and disagreement with
respect to such proposed regulations.
(4) PROPOSED RULE.—If the Administrator
elects to establish a committee under this
subsection, not later than 180 days after receiving the submission of the committee
under paragraph (3), the Administrator shall
issue a proposed rule, in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code, that
either—
(A) to the maximum extent possible consistent with the legal obligations of the
FAA, uses the consensus proposal of the
committee under paragraph (3)(A) as the
basis for the proposed rule for notice and
comment, including with respect to any
standards or requirements described in subsection (a)(3); or
(B) in the event the committee does not
reach a consensus, considers the points of
agreement and disagreement submitted by
the committee under paragraph (3)(B).
(c) CONSULTATION REQUIRED WITHOUT NEGOTIATED RULEMAKING COMMITTEE.—If the Administrator does not establish a committee
under subsection (b), prior to issuing a final
rule, the Administrator shall consult with
appropriate stakeholders in conducting the
rulemaking required under subsection (a)(1),
including at a minimum the representatives
described in subsection (b)(1)(B).
(d) PHASED-IN RETROFIT.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—In issuing a final rule
under subsection (a)(1), the Administrator
shall—
(A) establish a process by which the operator of an affected aircraft, in service as of
the date on which the final rule under subsection (a)(1) is published in the Federal Register in accordance with subsection (a)(2)(A),
may apply to the Administrator to request
additional time, not to exceed a period of 1
year after the deadline described in subsection (a)(2)(B), to finalize equipage of its
fleet and make ADS–B In operational, provided that—
(i) an aircraft operator, owner, or their
agent submits an application deemed acceptable to the Administrator for additional
time for compliance, including a justification for such request and an attestation of
actions to date demonstrating progress toward achieving compliance;
(ii) the Administrator, in consultation
with the Secretary of Transportation, determines additional time is required to mitigate a significant disruption to air transportation; and
(iii) the Administrator determines the aircraft operator or owner does not have any
uncorrected violations of subchapters F and
G of chapter I of title 14, Code of Federal
Regulations; and
(B) notify the appropriate committees of
Congress not later than 14 days after making
a determination under clause (ii) or (iii) of
subparagraph (A).
(2) SPECIAL RULE FOR AGENTS.—With the exception of an agent representing an owner or
operator of transport airplanes, for the purposes of this subsection, an agent may represent more than 1 aircraft operator or
owner of the same type, model, or manufacturer and may submit 1 or more applications
under paragraph (1)(A)(i), each of which may
contain multiple aircraft operators or owners.
(e) LOW COST ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF
COMPLIANCE.—In issuing a final rule under
subsection (a)(1), the Administrator shall de-

PO 00000

Frm 00051

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

termine low cost equipment or technologies
that provide similar or improved situational
awareness to the location of other airborne
traffic, as well as traffic advisory information, that satisfy the ADS–B In equipage requirement for aircraft with a maximum certificated takeoff weight of less than 12,500
pounds when operated under part 91 of title
14, Code of Federal Regulations. In making
such a determination, the Administrator
shall consider the use of—
(1) portable ADS–B In receivers; and
(2) equipment that allows display on an existing or future electronic flight bag or panel
mounted display, provided the installation
or use does not adversely affect other required avionics or the airworthiness of the
aircraft.
(f) PROACTIVE EQUIPAGE.—With respect to
any aircraft for which ADS–B In equipment
is available and complies with the requirements of the final rule issued under subsection (a)(1), the operator of any such aircraft shall take all appropriate actions necessary to equip such aircraft with ADS–B In
prior to the compliance deadline described in
subsection (a)(2).
(g) SEPARATION STANDARDS; RELEVANT CONTROLLER TRAINING.—
(1) RULEMAKING.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 18 months
after the effective date of the final rule described in subsection (a), the Administrator
shall issue a notice of proposed rulemaking
to establish separation standards, as appropriate, that leverage ADS–B Out or ADS–B
In equipment, and all other available technological capabilities in the air traffic control
system, to achieve safety and efficiency benefits throughout the national airspace system, including on an airport surface and
within Class E airspace (as defined in section
71.71 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations,
or any successor regulation).
(B) CONSULTATION.—In conducting the rulemaking under this subsection, the Administrator shall consult with appropriate stakeholders, including, at a minimum—
(i) representatives of—
(I) air carriers;
(II) original equipment manufacturers; and
(III) general aviation organizations;
(ii) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots;
(iii) the exclusive bargaining representative of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified under section 7111 of title 5, United
States Code;
(iv) aviation safety experts from outside
the FAA; and
(v) any other stakeholder deemed appropriate by the Administrator.
(2) REQUIRED UPDATES TO FAA ORDERS.—Not
later than 18 months after the issuance of
the notice of proposed rulemaking under
paragraph (1)(A), the Administrator shall
complete revisions, as appropriate, to FAA
Order 7110.65 and other relevant FAA Orders,
to increase safety and efficiency benefits in
the national airspace system.
(3) RELEVANT CONTROLLER TRAINING.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 1 year
after the compliance deadline described in
subsection (a)(2), the Administrator shall revise initial and recurrent air traffic controller training, as appropriate, in accordance with FAA Orders 3000.22 and 3120.4 and
revise associated orders and directives, as
appropriate, to ensure such controllers are
trained to apply any new separation standards and procedures.
(B) REQUIREMENTS.—In revising training
under subparagraph (A), the Administrator
shall—

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.031

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S352

(i) consider human factors impacts, appropriate phraseology adjustments, and surface
movement applications; and
(ii) consult with the exclusive bargaining
representative of air traffic controllers of
the FAA certified under section 7111 of title
5, United States Code.
(h) ACAS–X ACTION PLAN.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 180 days
after the date of enactment of this section,
the Administrator shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress an action
plan for advancing the deployment of the
Airborne Collision Avoidance System-X (in
this section referred to as ‘‘ACAS-X’’), or
any variant or successor technology, in the
national airspace system. The Administrator
shall publish the action plan in a publicly
available format not later than 10 days after
submitting such action plan to Congress.
(2) CONTENTS.—In developing the action
plan under paragraph (1), the Administrator
shall include—
(A) a strategic roadmap for the deployment
of ACAS-X technology, including steps required for widespread adoption among aircraft operators (including rotorcraft operators);
(B) actions and funding necessary to complete any applicable research, development,
testing, evaluation, and standards development needed to support the certification of
such technology;
(C) plans for engagement with appropriate
stakeholders, including—
(i) aircraft operators, including those in
the Department of Defense;
(ii) aviation safety experts outside the
FAA;
(iii) avionics manufacturers;
(iv) aircraft manufacturers;
(v) general aviation organizations;
(vi) the exclusive bargaining representative of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified under section 7511 of title 5, United
States Code;
(vii) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots; and
(viii) any other stakeholders determined
appropriate by the Administrator;
(D) engagement with foreign civil aviation
authorities to harmonize international
standards for certification of such technology;
(E) ACAS-X interoperability considerations for aircraft operators (including
rotorcraft operators) equipped with ADS–B
Out and ADS–B In equipment;
(F) an assessment of safety benefits for aircraft operators equipping with such technology, including civil and military operators; and
(G) any recommendations for administrative or legislative action, as determined appropriate by the Administrator, to advance
such technology deployment.
(3) IMPLEMENTATION.—The Administrator
may take actions, as appropriate, to implement the action plan developed under paragraph (1).
(4) BRIEFING.—Not later than 30 days after
the date on which the Administrator submits
the action plan under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall brief the appropriate committees of Congress on the contents of such
action plan and any prospective actions to
implement such plan.
(i) ARAC TASKING.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall
task the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory
Committee (in this section referred to as the
‘‘ARAC’’) with reviewing and assessing the
need for aircraft operating in Class D air-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

space to be equipped with ADS–B Out and
ADS–B In equipment.
(2) REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS.—Not
later than 1 year after initiating the review
and assessment under this section, the ARAC
shall submit to the Administrator—
(A) a report on the findings of the review
and assessment under paragraph (1); and
(B) any recommendations for legislative or
regulatory action the ARAC determines appropriate.
(3) BRIEFING.—Not later than 30 days after
the date on which the ARAC submits the report under paragraph (2), the Administrator
shall brief the appropriate committees of
Congress on—
(A) the findings and recommendations included in such report; and
(B) any plan to implement such recommendations, including a justification for
any recommendations the Administrator determines should not be implemented.
SEC. 105. REPEAL OF MANNED ROTARY WING
AIRCRAFT SAFETY PROVISIONS.

Section 373(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2026 is repealed, and Chapter 157 of title 10, United
States Code, shall be applied as if the amendments made by such section had not been enacted.
SEC. 106. INSPECTOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY
AUDIT.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 60 days

after the date of enactment of this section,
the Inspector General of the Army shall initiate an audit to evaluate the Army’s coordination with the FAA, pilot training, and
qualification standards, and the Army’s use
of ADS–B Out and whether it adheres to
Army policy, regulation, and law.
(b) ASSESSMENT.—In conducting the audit
required by subsection (a), the Inspector
General of the Army shall assess practices
and recommendations for the Army, including—
(1) whether Army policy and United States
law was adhered to, and the Army’s coordination with the FAA, during National Capital Region (‘‘NCR’’) operations of pilot
training and qualifications standards in the
NCR;
(2) the Army’s policy on ADS–B Out equipage, usage, and activation;
(3) maintenance protocols for UH-60 Black
Hawk helicopters operated by the 12th Army
Aviation Brigade including, but not limited
to, the calibration of any system that transmits altitude and position information outside the aircraft and the calibration of systems that send altitude and position information to the pilots inside the aircraft, and
the frequency with which such maintenance
protocols occur;
(4) compliance with the September 29, 2021,
Letter of Agreement executed between the
Pentagon Heliport Air Traffic Control Tower
and the Ronald Reagan Washington National
Airport Air Traffic Control Tower regarding
flight operations in the NCR; and
(5) the Army’s review of loss of separation
incidents involving its rotorcraft in the NCR
along with possible mitigations to prevent
future mishaps.
(c) PUBLIC DISCLOSURE.—Not later than 14
days after the audit required by subsection
(a) is concluded, the Secretary of the Army
shall—
(1) transmit a report on the results of the
audit, without redactions, to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
and the Committee on Armed Services of the
Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure and the Committee
on Armed Services of the House of Representatives; and
(2) publicly release the report without
redactions, except to the extent required for
national security reasons.

PO 00000

Frm 00052

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(d) INTERIM REPORTING.—Not later than 180
days after initiating the audit required by
subsection (a), and every 180 days thereafter
until such audit is concluded, the Inspector
General of the Army shall brief the committees of Congress described in subsection
(c)(1) regarding the progress of such audit.
SEC. 107. SAFETY REVIEWS OF AIRSPACE.
(a) FAA-DOD COORDINATION.—Not

later
than 30 days after the date of enactment of
this section, the Administrator shall establish or designate an office within the FAA as
the ‘‘Office of FAA-DOD Coordination’’ (in
this section referred to as the ‘‘Office’’),
which shall—
(1) coordinate airspace usage of military
aircraft and rotorcraft with relevant FAA
lines of business, including the Air Traffic
Organization;
(2) coordinate with the Office of Audit and
Evaluation of the FAA to ensure employee
complaints and whistleblower protections
are considered;
(3) consider opportunities to improve management and consolidation of aviation safety
information system databases to enhance
civil and military aviation incident reporting; and
(4) carry out the safety review required by
subsection (b).
(b) SAFETY REVIEWS.—
(1) REVIEW OF RONALD REAGAN WASHINGTON
NATIONAL AIRPORT.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 30 days
after the date on which the Office is established or designated, the Administrator shall
initiate a safety review of all military, law
enforcement, and civilian rotary wing, powered lift, fixed wing, and unmanned aircraft
system flight operations and flight routes in
the Washington D.C. Metropolitan Area Special Flight Rules Area, including but not
limited to flight operations conducted by the
Department of Defense, emergency response
providers, and air medical transport operators, to evaluate any associated safety risk
to commercial transport airplane operations
at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport.
(B) CONSULTATION.—In conducting a safety
review under subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall consult with—
(i) the Secretary of Defense;
(ii) Federal, State, and local agencies;
(iii) law enforcement agencies;
(iv) emergency response providers, including air medical transport operators;
(v) air carriers;
(vi) aviation labor organizations, including, at a minimum—
(I) the exclusive bargaining representative
of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified
under section 7511 of title 5, United States
Code; and
(II) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots; and
(vii) other stakeholders determined appropriate by the Administrator.
(2) OTHER AIRPORT REVIEWS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall
conduct safety reviews of all military, law
enforcement and civilian rotary wing, powered lift, fixed wing, and unmanned aircraft
system flight operations and flight routes at
other Class B airports (as listed in section 1
of Appendix D to part 91 of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation)) and within the lateral boundary of
Class B airspace, at commercial service Class
C airports (as listed in FAA Order JO 7400.11J
(or any successor order)) and within the lateral boundary of Class C airspace in the national airspace system, and at Class D airports that provide passenger service under

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.031

S28JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 28, 2026

part 121 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, determined to meet the risk criteria
set forth in subparagraph (C), including
flight operations conducted by the Department of Defense, emergency response providers, and air medical transport operators,
to evaluate any associated safety risk to
commercial transport airplane operations.
(B) CONSULTATION.—In conducting a safety
review under subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall consult with—
(i) the Secretary of Defense;
(ii) Federal, State, local, and Tribal agencies;
(iii) law enforcement agencies;
(iv) emergency response providers;
(v) air carriers;
(vi) aviation labor organizations, including, at a minimum—
(I) the exclusive bargaining representative
of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified
under section 7511 of title 5, United States
Code; and
(II) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots; and
(vii) other stakeholders determined appropriate by the Administrator.
(C) PRIORITIZATION AND RISK CRITERIA.—In
prioritizing the safety reviews of Class B,
Class C, and Class D airports described in
subparagraph (A) and conducting the safety
reviews pursuant to subparagraph (A), the
Administrator shall, at a minimum, consider
the following risk criteria:
(i) The type of airspace the airport is located in and the type of tower at the airport.
(ii) Whether the airport has radar on the
field.
(iii) The total number of air traffic operations at the airport per calendar year, as reported in the Operations Network (OPSNET)
data of the FAA, and the rate of growth
measured over a 20-year period prior to the
initiation of a safety review under this section.
(iv) The Traffic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) resolution advisory rates at the
airport compared to the number of arrivals
at the airport.
(v) The presence of parallel runways.
(vi) The presence of visual flights (in this
subparagraph referred to as ‘‘VFR’’) corridors in proximity to the airport.
(vii) The presence of a helicopter corridor
in proximity to the airport or nearby helicopter operations.
(viii) The presence of dense VFR operations at the airport.
(ix) The presence of complex VFR procedures at the airport or in the adjacent airspace.
(D) DEADLINE OF INITIATION OF REVIEWS.—
The Administrator shall initiate the reviews
under this paragraph by the following deadlines:
(i) CLASS B AIRPORTS.—With respect to
Class B airports, not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of this section.
(ii) CLASS C AIRPORTS.—With respect to
Class C airports, not later than 90 days after
the initiation date of the Class B airport reviews.
(iii) CLASS D AIRPORTS.—With respect to
Class D airports, not later than 90 days after
the initiation date of the Class C airport reviews.
(3) REQUIREMENTS.—In conducting the safety reviews required by paragraphs (1) and (2),
the Office shall do the following:
(A) Analyze air traffic and airspace management.
(B) Evaluate the level of coordination the
Administrator exercises with the Secretary
of Defense and the heads of any other Fed-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

S353

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

eral agencies, and emergency response providers as appropriate, to inform the designation and approval of airspace use and flight
routes for non-transport airplane operations.
(C) Assess any risks posed to transport airplanes from military aircraft and rotorcraft,
civil rotorcraft, powered lift aircraft, and unmanned aircraft systems operating in Class
B, Class C, or Class D airspace in proximity
to Class B, Class C, or Class D airports.
(D) Review relevant incidents submitted to
the Administrator through Air Traffic Mandatory Occurrence reports (as documented
via FAA Form 7210-13), Aviation Safety Reporting System reports, and Aviation Safety
Action Program reports, and relevant reports submitted to the Administrator of the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration through the Aviation Safety Reporting
System, to identify any safety trends regarding the operation of military aircraft and
rotorcraft, civil rotorcraft, powered lift aircraft, and unmanned aircraft systems in
Class B, Class C, or Class D airspace near
Class B, Class C, or Class D airports.
(4) DEADLINES FOR COMPLETION OF SAFETY
REVIEWS.—
(A) RONALD REAGAN WASHINGTON NATIONAL
AIRPORT.—The Administrator shall complete
the safety review required by paragraph (1)
not later than 120 days after the date on
which such review is initiated.
(B) OTHER AIRPORTS.—The Administrator
shall complete a safety review required by
paragraph (2) not later than 180 days after
such review is initiated.
(5) REPORTS.—
(A) REVIEW OF RONALD REAGAN WASHINGTON
NATIONAL AIRPORT.—Not later than 60 days
after completing the safety review required
by paragraph (1), the Administrator shall
submit to the appropriate committees of
Congress a report detailing the analyses and
results of such review, together with relevant findings and recommendations, including any corrective action plans to address
any risks identified, and recommendations
for legislative or administrative action determined appropriate by the Administrator.
(B) OTHER AIRPORT REVIEWS.—Not later
than 6 months after the date of enactment of
this section, and every 6 months thereafter,
the Administrator shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report detailing the analyses and results of the safety
reviews completed pursuant to paragraph (2)
since the preceding report under this subparagraph (or, in the case of the first such
report, since such date of enactment), together with relevant findings and recommendations, including any corrective action plans to address any risks identified,
and recommendations for legislative or administrative actions determined appropriate
by the Administrator.
(6) DESIGNATION.—The Administrator shall
designate a person within the Senior Executive Service of the FAA to be directly responsible for the completion of the requirements of this subsection.
(7) STAFFING.—The Administrator shall ensure adequate staffing to conduct the safety
reviews within the deadlines specified in this
section.
SEC. 108. FAA-DOD SAFETY INFORMATION SHARING.
(a) MOU WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
ARMY.—Not later than 60 days after the date

of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall enter into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Secretary of the Army
to permit, as appropriate, the sharing of information from the Army’s Safety Management Information System with the FAA, as
well as the sharing of information from the
FAA’s Aviation Safety Information Analysis
and Sharing System, Operational Analysis
Reporting System, Safety Trend Analytics

PO 00000

Frm 00053

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

Dashboard, Aviation Risk Identification and
Assessment Program, Comprehensive Electronic Data Analysis and Reporting Tool,
and Falcon tool with the Army, to facilitate
communications and analysis of any applicable impacts to the safety and efficiency of
civil aviation operations and to mitigate
risk in the national airspace system.
(b) OTHER DOD MOUS.—Not later than 90
days after the date of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall enter into a
Memorandum of Understanding with the following military departments to permit, as
appropriate, the sharing of information from
applicable aviation safety information systems to facilitate communications and analysis of any applicable impacts to the safety
and efficiency of civil aviation operations
and to mitigate risk in the national airspace
system:
(1) The Department of the Navy.
(2) The Department of the Air Force.
(3) The Coast Guard.
NOTIFICATION.—Not
(c)
CONGRESSIONAL
later than 7 days after the date on which the
Administrator enters into any Memorandum
of Understanding under subsection (a) or (b),
the Administrator shall notify the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the Committee on Armed Services
of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of
Representatives.
SEC. 109. TREATMENT OF MEMORANDUM OF
AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND FEDERAL
AVIATION ADMINISTRATION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of sub-

section (b) of section 1046 of the John S.
McCain National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115–232; 49
U.S.C. 40101 note), the Memorandum of
Agreement Between the Department of Defense and the FAA entered into on May 10,
2024, is deemed to be notice jointly submitted to the appropriate congressional
committees for purposes of such subsection
and subsection (a) of such section shall cease
to be effective as of such date.
(b) UPDATE AND EFFECT OF MEMORANDUM OF
AGREEMENT.—
(1) UPDATE.—The Secretary of Transportation and the Secretary of Defense shall update the memorandum of understanding described in subsection (a) consistent with regulations issued by the Administrator of the
Federal Aviation Administration pursuant
to section 103(a)(2).
(2) EFFECT OF MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT.—The memorandum of agreement described in subsection (a) shall remain in
force subject to—
(A) any modifications made jointly by the
Secretary of Transportation and the Secretary of Defense;
(B) termination by either such Secretary;
or
(C) modification or termination by law.

SA 4243. Ms. ROSEN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
her to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in division B, insert the following:
SEC. ll. None of the funds made available
under this Act to the Department of Health
and Human Services may be used to implement or promote changes to the childhood
and adolescent immunization schedule that
are not consistent with the recommendations for child and adolescent immunizations
made by the American Academy of Pediatrics. The salary of the Secretary of Health

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.031

S28JAPT1

S354

and Human Services shall be reduced to $1
annually until the changes to the childhood
and adolescent immunization schedule that
were announced by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention in January 2026 are
reversed and the official recommendations
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for child and adolescent immunizations match the recommendations by such
agency for such immunizations that were in
effect in 2024, with any additional changes to
the childhood and adolescent immunization
schedule occurring only in consultation
with, and with the agreement of, the American Academy of Pediatrics.

SA 4244. Mr. SCHIFF (for himself,
Mr. KAINE, and Mr. BENNET) submitted
an amendment intended to be proposed
by him to the bill H.R. 7148, making
further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. ll. PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS TO
SUPPORT CERTAIN ACTIVITIES IN
VENEZUELA.

None of the amounts appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act may be
used for United States military personnel or
private security personnel to seize, control
access to, operate, or provide security at facilities within Venezuela involved in the extraction, processing, or transportation of oil
or other petroleum products.

SA 4245. Ms. CORTEZ MASTO (for
herself, Mr. LUJÁN, Mr. COONS, Mr.
HEINRICH, and Ms. ROSEN) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
her to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. ll. FUNDING FOR COPS HIRING PROGRAM
AND BYRNE JAG PROGRAM.
(a) COPS HIRING PROGRAM.—Section 100052

of the Act titled ‘‘An Act to provide for reconciliation pursuant to title II of H. Con.
Res. 14’’ (Public Law 119–21) is amended—
(1) in the section heading, by striking ‘‘U.S.
IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT’’ and
inserting ‘‘COPS HIRING PROGRAM’’;
(2) by striking ‘‘In addition to’’ and inserting ‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—In addition to’’;
(3) in subsection (a), as so designated—
(A) by striking ‘‘Secretary of Homeland
Security for U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement’’ and inserting ‘‘Attorney General’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘September 30, 2029’’ and
all that follows through ‘‘removal proceedings’’ and inserting the following: ‘‘September 30, 2030, for grants made pursuant to
paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1701(b) of the
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act
of 1968 (34 U.S.C. 10381(b)).
‘‘(b) WAIVER.—For grants made from funds
made available under this section, the requirements of section 1701(g) of the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968
(34 U.S.C. 10381(g)) shall be waived for the
following jurisdictions:
‘‘(1) A county, municipality, town, township, village, parish, borough, or other unit
of general government below the State level
that employs fewer than 175 law enforcement
officers.
‘‘(2) A Tribal government that employs
fewer than 175 law enforcement officers.’’.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

(b) BYRNE JAG PROGRAM.—Section 90003 of
the Act titled ‘‘An Act to provide for reconciliation pursuant to title II of H. Con.
Res. 14’’ (Public Law 119–21) is amended to
read as follows:
‘‘SEC. 90003. EDWARD BYRNE MEMORIAL JUSTICE
ASSISTANCE GRANT PROGRAM.

‘‘In addition to any amounts otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated to the Attorney General for the Department of Justice for fiscal year 2025, out of any money in
the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to
remain available until September 30, 2029,
$45,000,000,000, for the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant Program.’’.

SA 4246. Mr. LEE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
In title I of division F, under ‘‘RELATED
PROGRAMS’’, strike the heading ‘‘NATIONAL
ENDOWMENT FOR DEMOCRACY’’ and everything
that follows under such heading.

SA 4247. Mrs. MOODY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
her to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in the matter preceding division A, insert the following:
SEC. ll. PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR
CERTAIN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS
OR ENTITIES.

None of the funds made available under
any division of this Act or an amendment
made by any division of this Act may be used
for any health care provider or entity that is
not in compliance with Executive Order 14187
(90 Fed. Reg. 8771; relating to protecting children from chemical and surgical mutilation)
or any regulations promulgated pursuant to
such Executive order.

SA 4248. Ms. CORTEZ MASTO (for
herself and Mr. CRUZ) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
her to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
REINSTATEMENT OF RULES FOR WAGERING
LOSSES

SEC. ll. (a) IN GENERAL.—Section 165(d)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is
amended to read as follows:
‘‘(d) WAGERING LOSSES.—Losses from wagering transactions shall be allowed only to
the extent of the gains from such transactions. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term ‘losses from wagering transactions’ includes any deduction otherwise allowable under this chapter incurred in carrying on any wagering transaction.’’.
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments
made by this section shall apply to taxable
years beginning after December 31, 2025.

SA 4249. Mr. CRUZ submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:

PO 00000

Frm 00054

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. ll. PROHIBITIONS ON FEDERAL RESERVE
AND FEDERAL RESERVE BANK ACTIVITIES.
(a) SHORT TITLE.—This section may be

cited as the ‘‘Anti-CBDC Surveillance State
Act’’.
(b) PROHIBITION ON FEDERAL RESERVE
BANKS RELATING TO CERTAIN PRODUCTS OR
SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS AND PROHIBITION
ON DIRECTLY ISSUING A CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY.—Section 16 of the Federal
Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 411 et seq.) is amended
by adding at the end the following:
‘‘A Federal reserve bank may not—
‘‘(1) offer products or services directly to
an individual;
‘‘(2) maintain an account on behalf of an
individual; or
‘‘(3) issue a central bank digital currency,
as defined in section 10(11)(D), or any digital
asset that is substantially similar under any
other name or label.’’.
(c) PROHIBITION ON FEDERAL RESERVE
BANKS INDIRECTLY ISSUING A CENTRAL BANK
DIGITAL CURRENCY.—Section 16 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 411 et seq.), as
amended by section 2, is further amended by
adding at the end the following:
‘‘A Federal reserve bank may not offer a
central bank digital currency, as defined in
section 10(11)(D), or any digital asset that is
substantially similar under any other name
or label, indirectly to an individual through
a financial institution or other intermediary.’’.
(d) PROHIBITION WITH RESPECT TO CENTRAL
BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY.—Section 10 of the
Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) is
amended by inserting before paragraph (12)
the following:
‘‘(11) PROHIBITION WITH RESPECT TO CENTRAL
BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—The Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System may not test,
study, develop, create, or implement a central bank digital currency, or any digital
asset that is substantially similar under any
other name or label.
‘‘(B) MONETARY POLICY.—The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and
the Federal Open Market Committee may
not use a central bank digital currency to
implement monetary policy, or any digital
asset that is substantially similar under any
other name or label.
‘‘(C) EXCEPTION.—Subparagraph (A) and the
eighteenth and nineteenth undesignated
paragraphs of section 16 may not be construed to prohibit any dollar-denominated
currency that is open, permissionless, and
private, and fully preserves the privacy protections of United States coins and physical
currency.
‘‘(D) CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY DEFINED.—In this paragraph, the term ‘central
bank digital currency’ means a form of digital money or monetary value that is—
‘‘(i) denominated in the national unit of
account;
‘‘(ii) a direct liability of the Federal Reserve System; and
‘‘(iii) widely available to the general public.’’.
(e) SENSE OF CONGRESS.—It is the sense of
Congress that the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve does not have the authority
to issue a central bank digital currency, or
any digital asset that is substantially similar under any other name or label, and will
not have such authority unless Congress
grants such authority pursuant to section 8
of article I of the Constitution of the United
States.

SA 4250. Mr. CRUZ submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.033

S28JAPT1

January 28, 2026

him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
Beginning on page 318, strike line 6 and all
that follows through page 319, line 5.

SA 4251. Ms. CORTEZ MASTO submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by her to the bill H.R. 7148,
making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes;
which was ordered to lie on the table;
as follows:
On page 413, line 11, strike ‘‘$927,212,591’’
and insert ‘‘$1,132,124,591’’.
On page 415, strike lines 14 through 24.
On page 416, line 1, strike ‘‘(4)’’ and insert
‘‘(3)’’.
On page 416, line 11, strike ‘‘(5)’’ and insert
‘‘(4)’’.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SA 4252. Ms. DUCKWORTH (for herself, Mr. VAN HOLLEN, Ms. ALSOBROOKS,
and Mrs. GILLIBRAND) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
her to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in division H, insert the following:
SEC. ll. (a) Not later than 14 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the Department of Homeland Security shall conduct an investigation
into all use of force incidents that have occurred in relation to any civil immigration
or interior enforcement operation since January 20, 2025.
(b) The Inspector General of the Department of Homeland Security shall conduct a
timely, independent investigation of any
subsequent use of force incidents that occur
in relation to such operations.
(c) The Inspector General of the Department of Homeland Security shall coordinate
with Inspectors General of other agencies,
including the Inspector General of the Department of Justice as necessary, to—
(1) assess whether Federal employees complied with applicable laws, regulations, and
departmental policies in the course of civil
immigration or interior enforcement operations;
(2) evaluate the adequacy of training, supervision, and command oversight provided
to Federal employees in relation to civil immigration and interior enforcement operations; and
(3) recommend corrective actions, including but not limited to policy reforms, disciplinary measures, and referrals to the appropriate law enforcement authorities for
criminal prosecution.
(d) The Inspector General of the Department of Homeland Security shall coordinate
with State and local law enforcement agencies on the investigations described in subsections (a) and (b), including by sharing information and evidence that may be relevant
to concurrent State and local law enforcement investigations into use of force by a
Federal employee.
(e) The Inspector General of the Department of Homeland Security shall publish on
a publicly available website the results of
each independent investigation, addressing
compliance with Federal law, regulations,
and agency policies and, in cases where an
investigation resulted in referral for crimi-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

S355

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

nal prosecution or a civil penalty and adverse action, a justification for each referral.
(f) If the Inspector General of the Department of Homeland Security fails to initiate
the investigations described in subsection (a)
by the date required, the Inspector General
shall provide to Congress a daily in-person
briefing, which shall be open to all Members
of Congress and all congressional staff, on
the status of such investigations until the
date on which such investigations are initiated. The Inspector General may not use any
annual or other type of leave during a period
in which such briefings are required under
this subsection, and, notwithstanding any
other provision of law or regulation, none of
the funds made available by this or any
other Act may be used for travel by the Inspector General during such period. If the Inspector General fails to initiate such investigations by the date that is 30 days after the
date of enactment of this Act, the Inspector
General shall be placed in a temporary status without duties and pay until the date on
which such investigations are initiated.
f

AUTHORITY FOR COMMITTEES TO
MEET
Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, I
have 11 requests for committees to
meet during today’s session of the Senate. They have the approval of the Majority and Minority Leaders.
Pursuant to Rule XXVI, paragraph
5(a), of the Standing Rules of the Senate, the following committees are authorized to meet during today’s session
of the Senate:
COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND
TRANSPORTATION

The
Committee
on
Commerce,
Science, and Transportation is authorized to meet during the session of the
Senate on Wednesday, January 28, 2026,
at 10 a.m., to conduct a subcommittee
hearing.
COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND
TRANSPORTATION

The
Committee
on
Commerce,
Science, and Transportation is authorized to meet during the session of the
Senate on Wednesday, January 28, 2026,
at 2:30 p.m., to conduct a subcommittee
hearing.
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC
WORKS

The Committee on Environment and
Public Works is authorized to meet
during the session of the Senate on
Wednesday, January 28, 2026, at 10 a.m.,
to conduct a hearing.
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS

The Committee on Foreign Relations
is authorized to meet during the session of the Senate on Wednesday, January 28, 2026, at 10 a.m., to conduct a
hearing.
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR,
AND PENSIONS

The Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions is authorized to meet during the session of the
Senate on Wednesday, January 28, 2026,
at 10 a.m., to conduct a hearing.
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS

The Committee on Indian Affairs is
authorized to meet during the session
of the Senate on Wednesday, January
28, 2026, at 2:30 p.m., to conduct a hearing.

PO 00000

Frm 00055

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

The Committee on the Judiciary is
authorized to meet during the session
of the Senate on Wednesday, January
28, 2026, at 10:15 a.m., to conduct a
hearing.
COMMITTEE ON VETERANS’ AFFAIRS

The Committee on Veterans’ Affairs
is authorized to meet during the session of the Senate on Wednesday, January 28, 2026, at 3:30 p.m., to conduct a
hearing.
SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE

The Select Committee on Intelligence is authorized to meet during
the session of the Senate on Wednesday, January 28, 2026, at 3 p.m., to conduct a closed briefing.
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY

The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
of the Committee on Armed Services is
authorized to meet during the session
of the Senate on Wednesday, January
28, 2026, at 2:30 p.m., to conduct a hearing.
PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS

The Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental
Affairs is authorized to meet during
the session of the Senate on Wednesday, January 28, 2026, at 2 p.m., to conduct a hearing.
f

RECOGNIZING THE 30TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FIRST FLIGHT OF
THE F/A–18 E1 SUPER HORNET
FROM LAMBERT FIELD IN ST.
LOUIS, MISSOURI, AND THE 30
YEARS OF SERVICE OF THE F/A–
18E/F SUPER HORNET TO THE
UNITED STATES NAVY AND TO
ALLIES OF THE UNITED STATES
Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Senate
proceed to the consideration of S. Res.
591, which is at the desk.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the resolution by
title.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
A resolution (S. Res. 591) recognizing the
30th anniversary of the first flight of the F/
A–18 E1 Super Hornet from Lambert Field in
St. Louis, Missouri, and the 30 years of service of the F/A–18E/F Super Hornet to the
United States Navy and to allies of the
United States.

There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the resolution.
Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the resolution
be agreed to, the preamble be agreed
to, and the motions to reconsider be
considered made and laid upon the
table with no intervening action or debate.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The resolution (S. Res. 591) was
agreed to.
The preamble was agreed to.
(The resolution, with its preamble, is
printed in today’s RECORD under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)

E:\CR\FM\A28JA6.033

S28JAPT1

S356
ORDERS FOR THURSDAY,
JANUARY 29, 2026

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that when the Senate completes its business today, it
stand adjourned until 10:30 a.m., Thursday, January 29; that following the
prayer and pledge, the Journal of proceedings be approved to date, the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:30 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

morning hour be deemed expired, the
time for the two leaders be reserved for
their use later in the day, morning
business be closed, and the Senate resume the motion to proceed to Calendar No. 302, H.R. 7148.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

PO 00000

Frm 00056

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

ADJOURNMENT UNTIL 10:30 A.M.
TOMORROW
Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, if there
is no further business to come before
the Senate, I ask that it stand adjourned under the previous order.
There being no objection, the Senate,
at 7:19 p.m., adjourned until Thursday,
January 29, 2026, at 10:30 a.m.

E:\CR\FM\G28JA6.061

S28JAPT1

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

E79

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS
SENATE COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4,
agreed to by the Senate of February 4,
1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized schedule of all
meetings and hearings of Senate committees, subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference.
This title requires all such committees
to notify the Office of the Senate Daily
Digest—designated by the Rules Committee—of the time, place and purpose
of the meetings, when scheduled and
any cancellations or changes in the
meetings as they occur.
As an additional procedure along
with the computerization of this information, the Office of the Senate Daily
Digest will prepare this information for
printing in the Extensions of Remarks
section of the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD
on Monday and Wednesday of each
week.
Meetings scheduled for Thursday,
January 29, 2026 may be found in the
Daily Digest of today’s RECORD.
MEETINGS SCHEDULED

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

FEBRUARY 3
9:30 a.m.
Committee on Armed Services
To hold hearings to examine strategic
competition in an unconstrained, postNew START Treaty environment.
SD–G50
10 a.m.
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation
Business meeting to consider S. 71, to require Amtrak to install baby changing
tables in bathrooms on passenger rail
cars, S. 1898, to establish a demonstration program for the active remediation of orbital debris and to require
the development of uniform orbital debris standard practices in order to support a safe and sustainable orbital environment, S. 2585, to modernize and
improve the Broadband Funding Map
in order to promote the most efficient
use of Federal funds for broadband deployment, S. 3199, to establish a multistakeholder
advisory
committee
tasked with providing detailed recommendations to address challenges to
transmitting geolocation information
with calls to the 988 Suicide and Crisis
Lifeline, S. 3266, to support the athletic
programs of the United States Merchant Marine Academy, S. 3468, to establish a national programmable cloud
laboratories network to enhance research efficiency, innovation, and collaboration, S. 3639, to expedite proc-

essing of satellite and space licenses, S.
3700, to establish an expert review
panel to make recommendations for a
comprehensive
agency-wide
safety
management system at the FAA, and
the nominations of Daniel Edwards, of
North Carolina, to be an Assistant Secretary, and Ryan McCormack, of Virginia, to be Under Secretary for Policy,
both of the Department of Transportation, Steven Haines, of Virginia, to
be an Assistant Secretary of Commerce, Robert Harvey, of Florida, to be
a Federal Maritime Commissioner, and
John DeLeeuw, of Texas, to be a Member of the National Transportation
Safety Board.
SR–253
Committee on Health, Education, Labor,
and Pensions
To hold hearings to examine modernizing
the National Institutes of Health, focusing on faster discoveries and more
cures.
SD–430
10:15 a.m.
Committee on the Judiciary
To hold hearings to examine hidden facts
regarding Nazis and Swiss banks.
SH–216
2:30 p.m.
Committee on Foreign Relations
Subcommittee on Near East, South Asia,
Central Asia, and Counterterrorism
To hold hearings to examine countering
terrorism in North Africa, focusing on
opportunities and challenges.
SD–419
Committee on the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Competition
Policy, and Consumer Rights
To hold hearings to examine the competitive impact of the proposed NetflixWarner Brothers transaction.
SD–226
Commission on Security and Cooperation
in Europe
To hold hearings to examine securing
Syria’s transformation by diminishing
Russia’s influence.
360–CHOB
FEBRUARY 4
10 a.m.
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation
To hold hearings to examine the future
of self-driving cars.
SR–253
Committee on Environment and Public
Works
To hold hearings to examine identifying
and addressing cybersecurity challenges to protect America’s water infrastructure.
SD–562
Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs
Business meeting to consider S.J. Res.
102, disapproving the action of the Dis-

trict of Columbia Council in approving
the D.C. Income and Franchise Tax
Conformity and Revision Temporary
Amendment Act of 2025, and H.J. Res.
142, disapproving the action of the District of Columbia Council in approving
the D.C. Income and Franchise Tax
Conformity and Revision Temporary
Amendment Act of 2025.
TBA
10:15 a.m.
Committee on the Judiciary
To hold hearings to examine certain
pending nominations.
SH–216
2:30 p.m.
Committee on Foreign Relations
Subcommittee on Europe and Regional Security Cooperation
To hold hearings to examine European
energy security.
SD–419
Committee on Indian Affairs
To hold hearings to examine S. 2098, to
provide for the conveyance of certain
property to the Southcentral Foundation located in Anchorage, Alaska, S.
1055, to amend the Indian Health Care
Improvement Act to modify the notification requirement for emergency contract health services for certain beneficiaries, and S. 699, to amend the Indian Health Care Improvement Act to
address liability for payment of
charges or costs associated with the
provision of purchased/referred care
services.
SD–628
Committee on the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Federal Courts, Oversight, Agency Action, and Federal
Rights
To hold hearings to examine fighting
fraud in Minnesota and beyond.
SD–226
4 p.m.
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs
To hold hearings to examine veteran
health and healing through adaptive
sports.
SD–G50
FEBRUARY 10
10:15 a.m.
Committee on the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology,
and the Law
To hold hearings to examine Arctic Frost
accountability, focusing on oversight
of telecommunications carriers.
SH–216
FEBRUARY 11
3 p.m.
Committee on Armed Services
Subcommittee on Personnel
To hold hearings to examine the Senior
Enlisted Leaders on servicemember and
family quality of life.
SR–222

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:43 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\M28JA8.000

E28JAPT1

Wednesday, January 28, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Chamber Action
Routine Proceedings, pages S301–S356
Measures Introduced: Thirteen bills and two resolutions were introduced, as follows: S. 3708–3720,
Page S344
and S. Res. 590–591.
Measures Reported:
S. 272, to improve the safety of infant formula
through testing of infant formula for microorganisms
and toxic elements, with an amendment in the nature of a substitute.
S. 921, to direct the Secretary of Health and
Human Services to issue guidance on whether hospital emergency departments should implement
fentanyl testing as a routine procedure for patients
experiencing an overdose, with an amendment in the
nature of a substitute.
S. 1157, to direct the Secretary of Health and
Human Services to conduct a review to evaluate the
status of research on lung cancer in women and underserved populations, with an amendment in the
nature of a substitute.
S. 2132, to amend title 18, United States Code,
to prevent and mitigate the potential for conflicts of
interest following government service, with an
amendment in the nature of a substitute.
S. 2169, to require the development of a comprehensive rural hospital cybersecurity workforce development strategy, with an amendment in the naPage S343
ture of a substitute.
Measures Passed:
F/A–18 E1 Super Hornet 30th Anniversary:
Senate agreed to S. Res. 591, recognizing the 30th
anniversary of the first flight of the F/A–18 E1
Super Hornet from Lambert Field in St. Louis, Missouri, and the 30 years of service of the F/A–18E/
F Super Hornet to the United States Navy and to
allies of the United States.
Page S355
Measures Considered:
Consolidated Appropriations Act—Agreement:
Senate continued consideration of the motion to proceed to consideration of H.R. 7148, making further
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026.
Pages S301–34

A unanimous-consent agreement was reached providing for further consideration of the motion to
proceed to consideration of the bill at approximately
10:30 a.m., on Thursday, January 29, 2026.
Page S356

Nominations Referred:
Page S339
Executive Communications:
Pages S339–43
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages S344–47
Statements on Introduced Bills/Resolutions:
Pages S347–48

Additional Statements:
Page S339
Amendments Submitted:
Pages S348–55
Adjournment: Senate convened at 11 a.m. and adjourned at 7:19 p.m., until 10:30 a.m. on Thursday,
January 29, 2026. (For Senate’s program, see the remarks of the Acting Majority Leader in today’s
Record on page S356.)

Committee Meetings
(Committees not listed did not meet)

DOD’s CYBER FORCE GENERATION
Committee on Armed Services: Subcommittee on Cybersecurity concluded a hearing to examine the Department’s cyber force generation plan and the associated
implementation plan, after receiving testimony from
Katherine Sutton, Assistant Secretary for Cyber Policy, Lieutenant General William J. Hartman, USA,
Acting Commander, United States Cyber Command/
performing the duties of Director, National Security
Agency/Acting Chief, Central Security Service, and
Brigadier General R. Ryan Messer, USAF, Deputy
Director for Global Operations, J3, Joint Staff, all of
the Department of Defense.
FIRSTNET’S ROLE IN PUBLIC SAFETY
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation: Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Media concluded a hearing to examine the front lines of
connectivity, focusing on FirstNet’s role in public
safety, after receiving testimony from Michael A.
Adkinson, Jr., Walton County Sheriff, DeFuniak
D123

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:03 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D28JA6.REC

D28JAPT1

D124

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Springs, Florida, on behalf of First Responder Network Authority Board; Scott Agnew, AT&T
FirstNet and Public Sector Mobility, Dallas, Texas;
Cory Davis, Verizon Frontline, New York, New
York; and Mel Maier, Association of Public-Safety
Communications Officials International, Daytona
Beach, Florida.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation: Subcommittee on Consumer Protection, Technology, and
Data Privacy concluded a hearing to examine the
live entertainment industry, after receiving testimony from Robert J. Richie, Nashville, Tennessee;
Daniel M. Wall, Live Nation Entertainment, Inc.,
San Francisco, California; Brian Berry, Ticket Policy
Forum, Washington, D.C.; and David Weingarden,
Z2 Entertainment, Boulder, on behalf of Colorado
Independent Venue Association.
FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW AND
PERMITTING PROCESS
Committee on Environment and Public Works: Committee concluded a hearing to examine improving
the Federal environmental review and permitting
process, part 2, after receiving testimony from
Brendan Bechtel, Bechtel, Reston, Virginia, on behalf of Business Roundtable’s Smart Regulation
Committee; Brent Booker, Laborers’ International
Union of North America, Dustin Meyer, American
Petroleum Institute, and Abigail Ross Hopper, Solar
Energy Industries Association, Washington, D.C.;
and David Terry, National Association of State Energy Officials.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VENEZUELA
Committee on Foreign Relations: Committee concluded
a hearing to examine U.S. policy towards Venezuela,
after receiving testimony from Marco Rubio, Secretary of State.
PALISADES FIRE
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs: Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
concluded a hearing to examine one year after disaster, focusing on the Palisades fire, after receiving
testimony from Patrick Butler, Redondo Beach Fire
Department Fire Chief and Harbor Master, Redondo
Beach, California; Rick Crawford, Los Angeles Fire
Department, Washington, D.C.; and Spencer Hawkins, International Association of Emergency Managers, Macon, Georgia.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:03 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

January 28, 2026

EDUCATIONAL CHOICE IN AMERICA
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions:
Committee concluded a hearing to examine educational choice in America, after receiving testimony
from Cris Gulacy-Worrel, Oakmont Education, Powell, Ohio; John F. Kirtley, Step Up For Students,
Tampa, Florida; and Marisol Garcia, Arizona Education Association, Phoenix, Arizona.
NATIVE CHILDREN’S COMMISSION
IMPLEMENTATION ACT
Committee on Indian Affairs: Committee concluded a
hearing to examine Title II of the draft of the Native Children’s Commission Implementation Act, focusing on justice and safety for native children, after
receiving testimony from Mark Patterson, Hawaii
Correctional System Oversight Commission Chair,
Honolulu; Lonna J. Street, Spirit Lake Nation, Fort
Totten, North Dakota; Joan Johnson, Fort Belknap
Indian Community, Harlem, Montana; Anita
Fineday, Native Children’s Commission, Brainerd,
Minnesota; and Lori Jump, StrongHearts Native
Helpline, Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan.
FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE
ACT
Committee on the Judiciary: Committee concluded a
hearing to examine the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and executive accountability, after receiving testimony from Stewart Baker, Stewart Baker
Consulting PLLC, and Elizabeth Goitein, New York
University School of Law Brennan Center for Justice,
both of Washington, D.C.; and Adam I. Klein, University of Texas Robert Strauss Center for International Security and Law, Austin.
VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs: Committee concluded a
hearing to examine a 21st century VA health care
system, focusing on efforts to restructure the Veterans Health Administration, after receiving testimony from Douglas A. Collins, Secretary, John
Bartrum, Under Secretary for Health, Mark
Engelbaum, Assistant Secretary for Human Resources and Administration, and Gregory Goins,
Acting Chief Operating Officer, Veterans Health
Administration, all of the Department of Veterans
Affairs.
INTELLIGENCE
Select Committee on Intelligence: Committee met in
closed session to receive a briefing on certain intelligence matters from officials of the intelligence
community.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D28JA6.REC

D28JAPT1

January 28, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

D125

House of Representatives
Chamber Action
The House was not in session today. The House
will meet in Pro Forma session at 10:30 a.m. on Friday, January 30, 2026.

Committee Meetings
No hearings were held.

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR THURSDAY,
JANUARY 29, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry: business
meeting to consider an original bill entitled, ‘‘Digital
Commodity Intermediaries Act’’, 10:30 a.m., SR–328A.
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation: Subcommittee on Coast Guard, Maritime, and Fisheries, to
hold hearings to examine assessing Coast Guard force
laydown on the heels of historic investment, 10 a.m.,
SR–253.
Committee on Foreign Relations: business meeting to consider H.R. 260, to require a strategy to oppose financial
or material support by foreign countries and nongovernmental organizations to the Taliban, S. 2904, to impose
sanctions with respect to the shadow fleet of the Russian
Federation, S. 2722, to promote the energy security of
Taiwan, S. 3496, to establish and implement a multi-year
Legal Gold and Mining Partnership Strategy to reduce
the negative environmental and social impacts of illicit
gold mining in the Western Hemisphere, S. 3018, to
permit visiting dignitaries and service members from Tai-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:03 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

wan to display the flag of the Republic of China, S.
2222, to enhance the security, resilience, and protection
of undersea communication cables vital to Taiwan’s national security, economic stability, and defense, particularly in countering gray zone tactics employed by the
People’s Republic of China, S. 3249, to enhance United
States Government strategic coordination of the security,
installation, maintenance, and repair of international
subsea fiber-optic cables, S. 2252, to require United
States foreign assistance commodities to be made available
for their intended purposes before they expire, S. 3360,
to require a report on internet freedom in Iran, S. 1216,
to support Taiwan’s international space, S. 1369, to support the execution of bilateral agreements concerning illicit transnational maritime activity and to authorize the
President to impose sanctions with respect to illegal, unreported, or unregulated fishing and the sale, supply, purchase, or transfer of endangered species, S. 2236, to establish a comprehensive United States Government initiative
to build the capacity of young leaders and entrepreneurs
in Africa, and the nominations of Frank Weiland, of the
District of Columbia, to be an Assistant Secretary (International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs), Jennifer
Wicks McNamara, of Virginia, to be Ambassador to the
Socialist Republic of Vietnam, Eric Meyer, of California,
to be Ambassador to the Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka, Gregory LoGerfo, of Massachusetts, to be Coordinator for Counterterrorism, with the rank and status
of Ambassador at Large, all of the Department of State,
9:30 a.m., S–116, Capitol.
Select Committee on Intelligence: to hold hearings to examine the nomination of Lieutenant General Joshua M.
Rudd, USA, to be Director of the National Security
Agency, 10 a.m., SD–106.
Special Committee on Aging: to hold hearings to examine
truth in drug labeling, 9:30 a.m., SD–608.

House
No hearings are scheduled.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D28JA6.REC

D28JAPT1

D126

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

10:30 a.m., Thursday, January 29

10:30 a.m., Friday, January 30

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Thursday: Senate will continue consideration of the motion to proceed to consideration of H.R.
7148, Consolidated Appropriations Act, and vote on the
motion to invoke cloture thereon at approximately 11:30
a.m.
Additional roll call votes are possible during Thursday’s session of the Senate.

Program for Friday: House will meet in Pro Forma session at 10:30 a.m.

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

January 28, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:03 Jan 29, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D28JA6.REC

D28JAPT1

