UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 21, 2026

No. 14

Senate
The Senate was not in session today. Its next meeting will be held on Thursday, January 22, 2026, at 11:00 a.m.

House of Representatives
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 21, 2026
The House met at 10 a.m. and was
called to order by the Speaker pro tempore (Mr. NEWHOUSE).
f

DESIGNATION OF SPEAKER PRO
TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Speaker:
WASHINGTON, DC,
January 21, 2026.
I hereby appoint the Honorable DAN
NEWHOUSE to act as Speaker pro tempore on
this day.
MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
f

MORNING-HOUR DEBATE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of January 6, 2026, the Chair will now recognize
Members from lists submitted by the
majority and minority leaders for
morning-hour debate.
The Chair will alternate recognition
between the parties, with time equally
allocated between the parties and each
Member other than the majority and
minority leaders and the minority
whip limited to 5 minutes, but in no
event shall debate continue beyond
11:50 a.m.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

RECOGNIZING BRUCE DART
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize

Bruce Dart, who closed his photography studio after more than 40 years.
Bruce is a native of Mansfield, Pennsylvania, earned a bachelor of arts degree from Mansfield State College, and
later served in the Navy.
During his time in the Navy, Bruce
was trained as a journalist and took
courses focused on broadcast journalism and photography, sparking his
interest in the industry.
Following his tenure in the Navy,
Bruce worked for a newspaper in Connecticut and later returned to Pennsylvania and worked for the Williamsport
Sun-Gazette as a photographer. In 1973,
Bruce accepted a position as assistant
director of public relations at Mansfield State University and left after 6
years to fully pursue a career as a freelance photographer.
Bruce studied for more than 10 years
at the Triangle Institute of Professional Photography in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, and attended New York
State’s photography workshop, crediting this to his extensive experience.
Bruce is a member of various photography associations and has won multiple awards over his 40-year career. In
1986, Bruce earned the Certified Professional Photographer competency and
has held this achievement for more
than 30 years, a testament to Bruce’s
expertise and technical proficiency
within the industry.
Bruce served on the board of directors of the Northeast Pennsylvania
Professional Photographers Association, and he is the only photographer
to be awarded the organization’s Photographer of the Year Award five

times. Additionally, some of Bruce’s
photographs have been published by
the Associated Press.
Aside from photography, Bruce has
been an active member of the community. He was president of the Greater
Mansfield Area Chamber of Commerce
and served on the Mansfield Borough
Council for over 20 years. Bruce is also
an active member of the Austin Cox
American Legion Post and VFW Post
6757.
Bruce has been pivotal in capturing
key moments throughout the Mansfield area but also moments in people’s
lives.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Bruce for his
service to the community, capturing
important moments throughout the
years. Bruce has been a great leader in
the photography community, but also
a great mentor to many aspiring photographers. I wish Bruce all the best.
f

RECOGNIZING WAYNE BARTH
(Mr. CARTER of Georgia was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Wayne
Barth, a physical trainer at Union General Hospital, who has been named one
of the 2025 Hospital Hero Award recipients by the Georgia Hospital Association. This prestigious award recognizes
the amazing hospital workers in our
State for their longtime service in
healthcare.
Mr. Barth serves as director of rehabilitation services, where his team is
committed to delivering quality care

b
This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
H1125

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.000

H21JAPT1

H1126

to their patients and clients in
Blairsville and Union County, Georgia.
Mr. Barth has provided extensive
care for disorders that affect speech,
function, movement, and swallowing.
His specialization lies in restoring mobility in patients, reducing pain, rehabilitating injuries, and increasing
movement and overall health. Mr.
Barth’s allegiance to his patients highlights the importance of leaders stepping up and caring for patients across
Georgia.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Mr. Barth for
all his hard work and for being a trusted and compassionate professional in
his field.
HONORING NURSE BARBARA HARN

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Barbara
Harn, a breast health nurse at
Northside Hospital Cherokee, who has
won the 2025 James Shepherd Lifetime
Achievement Award.
This award honors a hospital employee who has dedicated a lifetime of
service to the healthcare field and has
made a significant impact in enhancing
operations in patient care at their hospital.
Ms. Harn is a longtime Northside
Hospital faculty member, compassionately caring for patients for more
than three decades. She personifies this
commitment through her outstanding
and unwavering dedication to her patients, colleagues, and hospital.
Additionally, Ms. Harn is a loving
mother, grandmother, and friend to all
those around her.
This achievement speaks not only for
Ms. Harn’s fantastic skills as a professional, but also for her grateful and
compassionate attitude.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Ms. Harn for
her professionalism, dedication, and
commitment to her field.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

HONORING NURSE HEATHER DANIELS

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Nurse
Heather Daniels, a perinatal services
nurse at Liberty Regional Medical Center in Hinesville, Georgia, who has
been named a 2025 Hospital Hero Recipient by the Georgia Hospital Association.
This award recognizes the time, talent, and expertise of hospital employees in their respective fields. Ms. Daniel exemplifies this by being dependable, unfailing, and caring in all she
does.
In addition to faithfully serving patients, Ms. Daniel has served as director of perinatal services and secretary
for the Georgia Perinatal Association,
and she worked diligently in reducing
morbidity and mortality in pregnant
mothers and infants.
Ms. Daniels’ passion and dedication
for her profession are truly inspirational. This recognition speaks not
only to her skill, but also to her compassion and commitment to healing
and serving others.
RECOGNIZING SEVEN DISTINGUISHED GEORGIA
GOLF COURSES

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize seven

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Georgia golf courses as being named
Golfweek’s top 200 resort golf courses
in America.
Among these, three were ranked in
the top 100: Seaside Golf Course on Sea
Island Resort ranked No. 24, The Keep
at McLemore Resort came in at No. 25,
and Great Waters at Reynolds Lake
Oconee tied for No. 73. Additional
courses at Reynolds Lake Oconee,
McLemore, and St. Simons Island also
earned national recognition.
Georgia is home to hundreds of golf
courses, but our resort golf courses
stand among the very best in the Nation.
These rankings are based on expert
evaluations of course design, conditioning, and overall quality, highlighting Georgia as a premier golf destination. This distinction showcases
both Georgia’s natural beauty and
wonder in our State’s renowned golf
courses.
f

FUNDING CRISIS PREGNANCY
CENTERS
(Ms. DEXTER of Oregon was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. DEXTER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in strong opposition to the proposal Republicans voted on to take
money from families in need and divert
it to anti-abortion crisis pregnancy
centers.
As a medical doctor, I want to be
crystal clear. Crisis pregnancy centers
are not medical facilities. They do not
even have to employ licensed medical
professionals.
Women who seek help at these centers routinely report being misled,
pressured, or given false information
during one of the most vulnerable periods in their lives.
Democrats
offered
commonsense
amendments that would have required
facilities receiving these Federal funds
to provide medically accurate information. That should not be too much to
ask. Republicans rejected those amendments.
The American people deserve to
know exactly what that means: Republicans are knowingly funding centers
that do not have to uphold basic medical standards, and they are doing it at
the expense of families who are already
struggling.
Let us not ignore the cruelty of the
timing. The day before the anniversary
of Roe v. Wade, which Trump gutted,
Republicans are making it even harder
for women to get honest information to
make decisions about their own bodies.
f

HONORING SHERIFF CLINT McRAE
AND WALKER COUNTY SHERIFF’S OFFICE
(Mr. LUTTRELL of Texas was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. LUTTRELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor Sheriff Clint McRae and
the outstanding men and women of the
Walker County Sheriff’s Office.

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

For over 20 years, Sheriff McRae has
led with distinction and unwavering
commitment to the people of Walker
County. His hands-on leadership and
devotion to community policing set the
standard for excellence.
The Walker County Sheriff’s Office
fulfills its mission each day. From volunteer programs engaging citizens in
public safety to responsive patrol operations, these deputies exemplify what
it means to serve with honor.
Mr. Speaker, I am grateful for their
tireless dedication and proud to represent them in Congress.
RECOGNIZING SHERIFF BYRON LYONS AND POLK
COUNTY SHERIFF’S OFFICE

Mr. LUTTRELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Sheriff Byron Lyons
and the brave men and women of the
Polk County Sheriff’s Office for their
exceptional service to our community.
Under Sheriff Lyons’ leadership, the
patrol division of 1 captain, 1 lieutenant, 4 sergeants, 4 corporals, and 15
deputies keeps 1,100 square miles and
1,500 miles of roads safe day in and day
out.
Beyond their patrol duties, these law
enforcement officials engage our community through innovative programs
that build trust and strengthen the
bond between law enforcement and the
families they protect.
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to represent
these outstanding officers who serve
with integrity, professionalism, and
unwavering dedication to Polk County.
RECOGNIZING SHERIFF SAM HOUSTON AND SAN
JACINTO COUNTY SHERIFF’S OFFICE

Mr. LUTTRELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor Sheriff Sam Houston
and the dedicated deputies of the San
Jacinto Sheriff’s Office.
Serving over 27,000 residents across
628 square miles, these law enforcement officers protect our county and
keep our families safe every single day.
Sheriff Houston leads with commitment to community and engagement in
public safety training programs that
make our communities stronger and
safer. Beyond enforcement, they build
trust with our families and serve with
honor.
Mr. Speaker, I am grateful for their
dedication to the people of San Jacinto
County.
f

2025 FINAL PRIORITY RESULTS
SURVEY
(Mrs. SYKES of Ohio was recognized
to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mrs. SYKES. Mr. Speaker, when I am
back home in the district, I make it
clear that although my name is on the
ballot and I am the elected Member of
Congress, when I go to Congress, we all
go to Congress.
Instead of assuming that I knew what
mattered the most to people in my district, we sent out a survey to ask people in Ohio’s 13th what mattered most
to them. Thankfully, more than 2,000
people took the time to respond.
What they told us was pretty
straightforward. They wanted me to

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.002

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

protect Social Security, Medicaid, and
Medicare. They wanted me to lower
costs and make life much more affordable. They wanted me to eliminate
government corruption. That is what I
plan to do.
The number one issue by far was protecting Social Security, Medicare, and
Medicaid. People didn’t talk about
these programs in abstract terms. They
talked about their lives, how Social Security is how they pay their bills;
Medicare is how they get healthcare
without going broke; and Medicaid is
how their kids, their parents, and
neighbors with disabilities can get the
support and help they need.
These aren’t government programs to
them. They are lifelines promised to
them after a lifetime of work and service. That is why I have been and will
continue to be hyperfocused on protecting them.
I have worked across the aisle to introduce bipartisan legislation to keep
Social Security offices open and services running during government shutdowns because seniors shouldn’t lose
access to help just because Congress
can’t get its act together.
I have pushed the Social Security Administration to stop clawing back
overpayments when the mistakes were
not the fault of the seniors.
I introduced legislation to make sure
survivors of domestic violence are not
punished under Social Security rules
for leaving unsafe marriages.
If you have worked your entire life
and paid in every paycheck, Congress
should keep its promise in its Social
Security program.
The second big issue that people
raised was the cost of living and lowering costs. Families feel it everywhere:
gas,
groceries,
housing,
healthcare. It just costs too much to
live.
b 1015
People are working just as hard as
they always have, but they are falling
behind. That is why I have been fighting to extend the ACA’s tax credits to
lower healthcare costs, especially for
our most vulnerable citizens. It is why
I voted against the big, ugly bill that is
now putting healthcare coverage at
risk for millions of Americans while
raising energy costs for families.
In fact, just today there is a report
that came out that showed over 120,000
Ohioans chose to forgo their healthcare
because they simply couldn’t afford it.
These are real people, and that bill had
real consequences. Not only does it impact us in terms of healthcare in my
district, it also impacts our number
one economy, which is healthcare systems and hospitals.
Additionally, I introduced legislation
to crack down on junk fees that would
drain family budgets, and I have
worked in a bipartisan manner to lower
costs and improve clean water infrastructure in communities that need it
the most.
I have stood up for homebuyers,
pushing back against corporate prac-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1127

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

tices that drive up housing prices and
shut families out of the market.
Instead of staying focused on lowering costs, House Republicans have
spent too much time protecting tax
breaks for millionaires and billionaires, blocking reforms that would help
families, and threatening government
shutdowns that only add to more
chaos. I would also mention the no tax
on overtime that they have so happily
touted doesn’t really help so many people in organized labor. We do have a bipartisan fix for that, but we haven’t
been able to get to it because making
sure people have more money in their
pockets is simply not a priority for
House Republicans.
Finally, the third issue people raised
with me is they wanted to fight government corruption. People are tired of
feeling like the rules are different for
those at the top. They want accountability that actually means something.
They want ethics laws to apply to everyone, no matter their title or their
party. They are seeing that this corruption is raising their costs and making it more expensive. They see the
connection between the two.
That is why I have helped lead a
package of reforms with a new generation of lawmakers to close loopholes,
strengthen ethics rules, and bring some
common sense and some integrity back
to Washington, D.C.
Public service should be just that:
serving the public, not helping yourself. When you look at these survey results, Mr. Speaker, the contrast is hard
to miss. My constituents are asking us
to protect their earned benefits while
the leadership, Mr. Speaker, is keeping
them at risk.
They are asking us to lower costs
while House Republicans and this
President get distracted by the wrong
fights. They are asking us to clean up
corruption while Republicans enable
this President to treat accountability
as optional while he is getting richer
and everyone else is getting poorer.
That is not what the people sent us
here to do, and it is certainly not what
my constituents sent me here to do.
Mr. Speaker, listening to your constituents should not be controversial.
It is our job. I will keep fighting for
what the people of Ohio’s 13th Congressional District made clear when they
sent me here because this Congress
does not belong to party leaders or special interests. It belongs to the people.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF LARRY
BATTERTON
(Mr. BAUMGARTNER of Washington
was recognized to address the House for
5 minutes.
Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to honor another of the
bright lights of eastern Washington,
but I also rise with sadness as I honor
the life of Larry Batterton, a devoted
husband, father, and community leader
from eastern Washington who passed
away on January 16 of this year.

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Larry dedicated his life to service—
first to his country as an Air Force dependent, and later to his community in
Spokane and Stevens Counties. He was
active in We Believe, We Vote and active in civics, community, and government in Stevens County. In these roles
he led with faith, kindness, and conviction, always working to strengthen
trust in our elections and unity in our
civic life.
Larry and his wife, Susan, shared 54
years of marriage and built a wonderful
family of four children and many
grandchildren.
His faith guided everything he did,
and Larry’s steady leadership left a
lasting mark on eastern Washington.
We give thanks for the life of Larry
Batterton, his love of family, his enduring service to his community, and
our State. When our Founders created
this wonderful Republic that we live in,
they thought of its foundation of good
people like Larry Batterton. He will be
deeply missed.
IN OPPOSITION TO WASHINGTON STATE’S
PROPOSED MILLIONAIRE’S TAX

Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today in strong opposition to the
tax proposal in Washington State of
Governor Bob Ferguson and his socalled millionaire’s tax.
Mr. Speaker, I hear frequently from
folks back home that they are very
pleased with the work of this Washington and what Republican leadership
has done to give our country the largest tax reduction in history. They tell
me how much they enjoy and look forward to no taxes on tips, no taxes on
overtime, a tax deduction on interest
for loans for American-made cars, and
new tax credits for education.
All the work we have done here in
Washington, this Washington, reduces
the cost of living for Americans, but I
hear very frequently, as well, while
this is going on, in the other Washington, my home of Washington State,
that the Democrat leadership there is
increasing taxes.
It is time for a reality check about
budgets.
In Washington State, the legislative
session has just begun, and the Governor has proposed a new income tax
that would push Seattle’s top earners
into one of the highest tax brackets of
anywhere in the country. There would
be higher taxes in Washington State
than even deep blue States like New
York and California.
It doesn’t stop there.
Other taxes are being considered, too,
such as higher payroll taxes and higher
business taxes for starters. It is sad.
Just 3 years ago, Washington State had
a $14 billion surplus, and instead of saving for a rainy day, the Democrats in
Olympia spent recklessly.
State revenues went up by 25 percent,
billions of extra dollars, but it was all
spent, all to wind up $12 billion in the
red today. That is after last year when
the Democrats gave our State the largest tax increase in history, and now
they want even more taxes.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.004

H21JAPT1

H1128

Implementing this tax will hurt job
creators in Washington State, hurt our
innovative economy, hurt our family
farms, hurt job creation, and hurt
growth.
In the Federal Government we have a
better record. Again, I voted for the
largest tax reduction in history joining
my Republican colleagues. The Democrats and Governor Ferguson in Olympia need to learn this lesson, not go
even deeper into our pocketbooks and
drive even more job creators out of the
State.
My message to Governor Ferguson is
this: Get spending under control. Stop
taxing the good people of Washington
State.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING THE LIFE OF MATTHEW
J. FISHER
(Mr. KENNEDY of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. KENNEDY of New York. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to honor the life
of Matthew J. Fisher, a pillar of south
Buffalo, who tragically passed away on
December 12, 2025, at the age of 57.
Born and raised in south Buffalo by
his parents, Richard Sr. and Joann,
Matt grew up surrounded by family,
friends, and the close-knit parish of St.
Ambrose Catholic Church. It was there
that he built lifelong friendships and
learned what it meant to belong to a
community rooted in shared responsibility to one another.
A graduate of Canisius High School
and Buffalo State University, he studied in the community that raised him,
carrying those lessons with him
throughout his life.
Matt was a loving husband, a devoted
father, a man of deep faith and a humble voice for good whose impact will
continue to be felt in our community
for generations.
He lived out his values through acts
of service, compassion, and an unwavering belief that making the world a
better place begins in our neighborhoods, in our houses of worship, and in
the everyday moments where dignity
and care matter most.
That sense of belonging stayed with
him his entire life and guided his decision to raise his own family in the very
same neighborhood that raised him.
Matt was a devout Catholic, an active parishioner, and a eucharistic minister who lived his faith outwardly. He
prayed for those who were struggling.
He showed up for those in need, and he
treated everyone he encountered with
authenticity, humility, and genuine
care.
Matt’s spirit of service defined his
professional pursuits as a housing and
economic development professional.
Whether working for Erie County, the
city of Buffalo, or organizations like
the Old First Ward Community Association, Matt devoted his career to
public service. Because of his work,
countless families in western New York
were able to remain in their homes, in-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

vest in their families, and navigate systems that are often overwhelming and
complex.
Beyond his professional accomplishments, Matt’s heart was firmly planted
in our community. Matt served as
chairman of the South Buffalo Neighborhood Accountability Board and
founded South Buffalo CREW, Concerned Residents Engaged in Work.
In those roles, Matt championed
grassroots initiatives that focused on
beautifying our neighborhood and supporting our small businesses.
As president of South Buffalo Baseball, he mentored countless young people. He was committed to keeping the
program affordable, inclusive, and
rooted in the neighborhood because he
believed every child deserved a place to
belong.
Matt Fisher’s legacy reminds us that
the soul of this country is found in people who live extraordinary lives of
service and the neighbors who coach
little league teams, check in on the elderly, serve at their parish, and quietly
make their community stronger day by
day.
To his beloved wife, Dina, and to
their children Joseph, Hannah, Anthony, Veronica, Nicholas, and Aidan:
Our community, State, and Nation
mourns with you.
South Buffalo and western New York
are stronger because of Matt Fisher.
Our community and our country are
better because of him.
May we carry forward his example
and care for our neighbors with the
same faith, generosity, and love that
Matthew J. Fisher showed us every single day. May he rest in peace.
f

PROUD ANNOUNCEMENTS
(Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS of Iowa was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today to announce that through
community project funding, my team
and I have secured $3 million for southeast Iowa, delivering targeted investments in public safety, water infrastructure, and housing development.
These investments include: $500,000
for
the
SAFECity
Initiative
in
Oskaloosa, bringing advanced public
safety technology to the community to
help prevent crime, improve emergency
response times, and keep Oskaloosa
residents safe; $2 million for the Papoose Creek Redundant Force Main in
Muscatine to support a critical water
infrastructure upgrade. This will protect homes, improve flood control, support growth, and strengthen environmental safety for years to come.
I also secured $750,000 for the Veterans District sewer project in Knoxville to help build a sanitary lift station and storm and sewer lines to serve
more than 110 acres of future housing
in the Veterans District.
With these historic investments, I
have now secured over $8 million for
southeast Iowa and will continue fight-

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

ing to secure all the Federal resources
our communities need and deserve.
RECOGNIZING HALEY DEGREVE

Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today to recognize Haley
DeGreve, founder and president of The
Gray Matters Collective, and local
leader Jon Zumkehr for their partnership in raising awareness about mental
health and suicide prevention among
correctional officers and law enforcement officers.
Their work became a lifeline for
many after the tragic death by suicide
of correctional officer Blake Schwarz
who worked at Thomson Federal Prison but lived in Iowa, a loss that rocked
our community and exposed the silent
suffering of so many who serve behind
the walls.
In the aftermath, Jon Zumkehr, an
18-year veteran of the Federal Bureau
of Prisons, reached out to Haley and
invited her to Thomson. She shared her
own journey of survival and hope,
speaking openly about her struggles
and recovery and the realities that far
too many correctional officers face in
silence, many of whom are former military veterans.
On August 28, Haley nearly became
another statistic, believing suicide was
her only way out of pain. Instead, she
chose to fight and founded The Gray
Matters Collective, a nonprofit with
chapters for veterans and first responders. She has listened to hundreds of
stories like her own and like Blake’s,
and she has made it her mission to
break the stigma and offer real support.
Jon and Haley’s partnership has
made a real difference. Together, they
have sent 24 officers at Thomson to ASSIST training, organized suicide prevention walks, and led multiple staff
recalls focused on mental health and
resources. They have also created a law
enforcement support group open to all
staff with licensed counselors and free
to anyone who needs it.
After Blake’s death, I was honored to
sit down with Jon and work to introduce
Correctional
Officer
Blake
Schwarz Suicide Prevention Act, legislation aimed at providing the resources
and recognition our correctional officers deserve. I thank Jon and Haley for
their courage, compassion, and relentless advocacy bringing attention to
this very important issue.
Mr. Speaker, I want to wish a very
happy birthday to my nephew, Andrew
Martino.
Happy birthday, Andrew.
f

b 1030
CITIZENS UNITED 16TH
ANNIVERSARY
(Mr. MORELLE of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. MORELLE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today on the 16th anniversary of the
United States Supreme Court’s Citizens United decision, a decision that

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.006

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

disfigured our political landscape, reorienting power away from voters and
toward corporate and wealthy special
interests.
In Citizens United, a 5–4 conservative
Court majority endorsed almost unlimited political spending by corporations
and wealthy individuals, and alongside
several subsequent Federal Court rulings, demolished longstanding limits
designed to prevent undue influence in
our politics.
It is well beyond time for Congress to
pass a comprehensive campaign finance
reform package to protect our constituents from the widespread political
corruption that Citizens United unleashed.
Since 2010, more than $10 billion in
corporate and dark money has saturated every aspect of our politics.
Super-PACs and dark money groups
now spend vast sums to influence, and
sometimes determine, election outcomes while shielding their donors
from public scrutiny. Compounding the
problem, the Federal Election Commission has too often failed to enforce the
law, leaving voters vulnerable and unable to discern who is trying to influence them and why.
We know that transparency is a baseline requirement for a functioning democracy. We know, too, that its absence erodes public trust in politics
and fuels the belief that the system is
rigged for wealthy elites and insiders.
Most troubling, however, is that Citizens United threatens to compromise
the incentives of those of us who serve
in public office.
House campaigns now require previously unimaginable sums of money.
Members spend far too much time
courting wealth or corporate donors
rather than engaging with constituents.
Americans
reasonably
question
whether this imbalance helps explain
why
policies
related
to
taxes,
healthcare, corporate regulation, and
environmental protection so often
favor powerful interests over working
families, families who are struggling
with an affordability crisis that this
administration has exacerbated.
While Citizens United greatly harmed
our body politic, we will not let it
prove fatal. In a 1938 address to Congress, President Franklin D. Roosevelt
issued a stark warning: ‘‘ . . . the liberty of a democracy is not safe if the
people tolerate the growth of private
power to a point where it becomes
stronger than the democratic state
itself.’’
House Democrats recognize the fierce
urgency of this warning. At the request
of Leader HAKEEM JEFFRIES, I am coordinating
a
comprehensive
anticorruption legislative agenda to restore fairness, transparency, and a requisite principle of our Republic, that
government must serve the people, not
the highest bidder.
This sweeping agenda will address
corruption across all three branches of
government as well as, critically, un-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1129

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

fettered corporate influence in our broken campaign finance system.
The package will include pieces of
legislation that House Democrats have
long championed, like the DISCLOSE
Act, that will shine a light on the dark
money donors that seek to purchase
the outcomes of our elections. It will
fundamentally reform the FEC, so our
Federal campaign finance laws no
longer go unenforced.
Indeed, at present, the FEC has no
quorum and cannot function in a law
enforcement capacity at all. House
Democrats will put a cop back on the
beat.
Vitally, House Democrats will move
to ratify a constitutional amendment
to overturn the horrific Citizens United
decision.
House Democrats will ensure this
package reflects the pressing reform
interests of Americans from coast to
coast, Americans who demand an end
to the culture of corruption endemic in
Washington.
While Citizens United did not create
every problem in our politics, it has
undeniably enhanced the power of the
wealthiest few at the expense of the
many. When a single billionaire spends
more on an election than countless
thousands of voters combined, the principle that every voice counts equally in
our political system withers. We must,
and we can, remedy the rot at the deeply misguided Citizens United decision
introduced into American politics.
As ranking member of the Committee on House Administration, the
committee with jurisdiction over campaign finance legislation, I look forward to continuing to work to restore
trust and honesty to American governance.
f

RECOGNIZING THE SCARSDALE
FORUM
(Mr. LATIMER of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
recognize the civic commitment of an
organization of active and concerned
citizens in Scarsdale who labor to involve everyday residents in the important issues of the day, the Scarsdale
Forum.
The organization traces its roots
back over 120 years to 1904, with a charitable and educational mission at its
core. The forum sponsors events and
seminars
addressing
the
issues,
choices, and solutions that directly impact the community. The floor committees study substantive issues,
produce reports for discussion, and
interact directly with elected officials.
The leadership team, President Jill
Spielberg, Vice President Karen Brew,
along with Elaine Weir, Madelaine
Eppenstein, and a large cadre of talented neighbors in key roles, provide a
strong base of abilities all committed
to the benefit of Scarsdale.
From the floor of the House of Representatives, we salute the men and

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

women of the Scarsdale Forum who
have made the level of voluntary, active citizenship envisioned by our
Founding Fathers come to life in the
village of Scarsdale.
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION’S ATTACKS ON
FAMILIES

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to condemn the Trump administration’s recent attack on childcare
and family assistance. This administration has decided to freeze funding for
three critical programs in New York
and four other Democratic States. As
usual, they are putting their politically motivated agenda on full display.
The targeted programs include Temporary Assistance for Needy Families,
the Child Care and Development Fund,
and the Social Services Block Grant
program. This move threatens over $3.4
billion in annual funds that New York
depends upon to provide critical resources, including childcare, public assistance, domestic violence services,
homeless shelters, and emergency payments for families and children.
This action only serves to intensify
the massive affordability crisis that
New York and the rest of the country
continue to face. Playing politics with
people’s lives, let alone vulnerable children and families, is unacceptable.
While this administration continues
its cruel and vengeful behavior, my
Democratic colleagues and I remain
committed to protecting vulnerable
children and families.
POLIO RESURGENCE AND ROTARY

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I address this Chamber today as a longtime
member of Rotary International. Rotary’s top priority is eradication of the
deadly disease, polio. Its members have
invested billions of dollars and countless volunteer hours in polio vaccination campaigns in countries around the
world.
In 1988, Rotary helped to create the
Global Polio Eradication Initiative, a
partnership with the U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, the
World Health Organization, UNICEF,
the Gates Foundation, and the vaccine
alliance, Gavi, with additional critical
funding from the U.S. Agency for International Development, which no longer
exists. Yet the entire effort is threatened by the administration’s plan to
defund key GPEI partners.
Just at the time when this disease is
closer than ever to being eradicated,
the risk of outbreaks is greatly increased. We must do all in our power to
protect the gains already made, and
finish the job, including appropriating
the funds required.
People from my generation remember the terrible consequences of polio,
often paralysis and even death for
those with this highly contagious disease. Many Americans still live with
long-term post-polio syndrome.
Still, outbreaks continue around the
world and other countries that are just
a plane ride away. Complete eradication depends on continued vaccination of children everywhere and constant surveillance.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.008

H21JAPT1

H1130

Founded in Chicago in 1905 with the
motto of Service Above Self, Rotary
International is the headquarters organization for a vast number of Rotary
Clubs. It is one of the largest nonreligious and nonpolitical civil society
membership organizations. It provides
people-to-people assistance reaching
the community level with vital programs.
Rotarians have a wide range of political and partisan leanings, but they are
united in their commitment to serve
their communities and they share a
common determination to end polio.
We must hear their voices, and we
must not let them down.

I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
The SPEAKER. The Chair will entertain up to 15 requests for 1-minute
speeches on each side of the aisle.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess until noon
today.
Accordingly (at 10 o’clock and 38
minutes a.m.), the House stood in recess.

CELEBRATING SUCCESS OF WARREN AREA HIGH SCHOOL ROBOTICS TEAM
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to celebrate
the success of the Warren Area High
School robotics team, who have earned
numerous awards this season.
Earlier this month, the team competed in the Pennsylvania State qualifier and were undefeated. The team
earned three top awards: Tournament
Champions, Skills Champions, and the
Excellence Award.
This season, the team won three
awards at their first three competitions, a historic achievement for the
group.
The students have qualified for the
State tournament in March and have
been invited to an additional national
tournament, which will be held in
Iowa.
The team is working towards qualifying for the VEX Robotics World
Championship, which is hosted in St.
Louis this year. The team has qualified
for the world championships for two
consecutive years. At the world championship, participants are given the
same materials to build a robot and
must answer questions from a panel of
judges.
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the team
on this historic achievement, and I
wish them the best as they prepare for
more tournaments this year.

f

b 1200
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker at
noon.
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret
Grun Kibben, offered the following
prayer:
Deliver us, O Lord. We call on Your
name. Answer us. Remind us again that
You are with us in times of trouble.
You are our refuge and our strength.
You will rescue us because You love us.
And who can separate us from Your
love? In the face of hardship and hatred, famine and fear, with You alongside us, what can stand against us?
Dare we say that neither death nor life,
nor angels nor rulers, nor anything in
the present, nor in the future, can
stand in the way of your redeeming
love?
May we live this day convinced that
trusting in You we will find safety and
security. In the shadow of your outstretched arms, we need not be afraid.
Guard us then wherever we go. If we
stumble, bear us up. Keep us from falling. When we walk into harm’s way or
when we find ourselves surrounded by
that which would hurt us, keep us safe
from all evil.
In You, O Lord most high, do we
trust. And in Your sovereign name, we
pray.
Amen.
f
DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER. Will the gentleman
from South Carolina (Mr. WILSON)
come forward and lead the House in the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina led
the Pledge of Allegiance as follows:

f

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER. The Chair has examined the Journal of the last day’s proceedings and announces to the House
the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

f

FAREWELL RAY SALAZAR
(Ms. CLARK of Massachusetts asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute.)
Ms. CLARK of Massachusetts. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to bid farewell to
my floor director, the incomparable
Ray Salazar.
If you have had the privilege of serving in this Chamber, you know what a
gem, what a patriot, and what an indispensable pillar of this institution Ray
is. You also know what a reliable
friend and adviser he is, and you know
what a loss his departure will be for
the House of Representatives.

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

From his time with Leader HOYER to
his years on my team, every time he
stepped onto this floor he has strengthened our institution, always leading
with values and integrity, bringing a
steady hand to his work along with his
encyclopedic knowledge of parliamentary procedure.
I thank Ray for his 13 years of extraordinary service. He is the model of
what it means to be a public servant,
waking up every day to work for the
American people. We wish him all the
best in his next chapter.
f

ONE YEAR ACHIEVEMENTS OF
PRESIDENT TRUMP
(Mr. WILSON of South Carolina
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, 1 year ago, Donald Trump was
sworn in as the 47th President.
Taking over a weakened country
with a crumbling Biden economy, Republicans have delivered lower costs,
bigger paychecks, creating jobs.
President Donald Trump signed the
Working Families Tax Cuts Act, which
limits government, expands freedom,
and
provides
for
peace
through
strength.
The law allows Americans to keep
their own money. Promises made,
promises kept.
In conclusion, God bless our troops as
the global war on terrorism continues.
Trump is reinstituting peace through
strength, revealing war criminal Putin
lies, insulting Trump and mocking
Trump. On the day that war criminal
Putin invited envoys Steve Witkoff and
Jared Kushner to Moscow, Putin
launched 33 missiles and 339 drones on
civilian
infrastructure
to
freeze
Ukrainian families to death, repeating
the Stalin famine of mass murder.
Sadly, war criminal Putin continues
aggression, violating all agreements as
he tries to resurrect the failed Soviet
Union.
f

IN OPPOSITION TO ICE FACILITY
IN HUDSON VALLEY
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I want
to go on record standing beside my colleague, Congressman PAT RYAN, opposing plans by ICE to establish a facility
in New York’s Hudson Valley in the
town of Chester, Orange County.
The proposed site, currently an
empty warehouse formerly used by Pep
Boys, is opposed by Republicans and
Democrats of that area, including Republican County Executive Steve
Neuhaus, a U.S. Naval Reserve officer,
and State and local officials on both
sides of the aisle.
The mission to warehouse large numbers of humans is the exact opposite of
what the President and DHS Secretary

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.009

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

Kristi Noem constantly proclaim: to
root out the most dangerous thugs and
criminals. In fact, ICE is targeting the
least violent people in the greatest
numbers, who pose minimal pushback,
with the real mission to scare all immigrants, legal or otherwise.
America has existed for 250 years
without mass detention centers, but
apparently, Noem and her cohorts plan
for a different America to start the
next 250 years, one where masked, unmarked agents seize people without judicial warrant, whisk them away to remote detention centers en route to uncertain final destinations. When such
things have been done in other countries they are called pogroms and ethnic cleansing. This is not America.
f

b 1210
WOMEN’S HEALTH
(Ms. ROSS asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. ROSS. Mr. Speaker, this week
marks the 53rd anniversary of Roe v.
Wade when the Supreme Court finally
granted women the right to control
their own reproductive healthcare.
Tragically, in 2022, one-half century of
reproductive freedom was stripped
away when the conservative majority
on the Court overturned Roe.
Since then, we have seen extreme
abortion bans enacted across the country, including in North Carolina.
Today, Republicans at all levels of government are waging an all-out war on
Americans’ access to care, pushing
healthcare even further out of reach
for millions of women.
First they took away our right to
choose, and then they took away our
healthcare coverage. They came for our
freedom, and then they came for our
doctors and hospitals.
Women deserve better. Republicans
deserve the blame.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

END HUNGER NOW: VISIT TO QUINCY COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAMS
(Mr. MCGOVERN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, last
Friday, with my friend Congressman
STEVE LYNCH, I visited Quincy Community Action Programs in Quincy, Massachusetts, as part of my Statewide
End Hunger Now tour.
We kicked off our visit with QCAP
CEO Beth Ann Strollo and some of the
young kids in their Head Start program enjoying healthy breakfasts of
yogurt and berries. They were so enthusiastic.
Later on we heard from Ted Donnelly, who leads QCAP’s food and nutrition programs at their South West
Community Center. He spoke about the
record-breaking number of people com-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1131

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ing to the food pantry every month, especially when USDA let SNAP benefits
lapse during the Republican shutdown.
We also heard poignant stories from
a few of QCAP’s clients, Nisha,
Marybeth, Tanya, and Danielle. One
noted that she would love to work
more hours, but if she does, she will
lose all of her food benefits.
Mr. Speaker, my visit to QCAP
strengthened my resolve even more to
fight back against the Trump administration’s vicious attacks against our
antihunger programs and end hunger
now.
f

MIGHT DOES NOT MAKE RIGHT
(Mr. KHANNA asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Mr. KHANNA. Mr. Speaker, Donald
Trump’s threats to invade Greenland
have destroyed the world order. Prime
Minister Carney, quoting Thucydides,
has said that America is acting as if
might makes right. He is invoking
Vaclav Havel’s call for resistance not
against authoritarian communism but
against the arrogance of America.
Mr. Speaker, I am ashamed for my
country. I want Prime Minister Carney
to know that there is a new generation
of America that believes in a multiracial democracy that raises the sovereignty and self-determination of all
nations. I want him to know that there
is a new generation that believes in
statesmanship, not subjugation. I want
him to know that there is a new generation that believes in Kant’s vision
of perpetual peace with free nations
bounded by international law.
Prime Minister Carney and leaders of
the world, I ask for your patience and
faith that this new generation prevails
in the United States of America.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
FINE). Members are reminded to direct
their comments to the Chair.
f

SUPPORTING EASTERN NORTH
CAROLINA’S AGRICULTURE
(Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, eastern North Carolina farmers are facing a crisis. Over the past
few years, our farmers have been hit by
a perfect storm of drought, soaring
input costs, and growing trade uncertainty. When our farmers don’t have a
clear backup plan or real support, then
family farms and rural jobs are put at
risk.
Some say: Congressman, why do you
talk about farmers so much?
It is this simple. When farmers struggle, local businesses and entire communities feel the impact.
Our State’s agricultural economy
faces a potential $1.9 billion hit if
things don’t improve. That economic
hit would devastate our cotton, sweet
potato, peanut, corn, and soybean

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

farmers, tobacco farmers, and pork and
poultry producers.
We need bold, comprehensive action
that lowers costs, expands market access, strengthens disaster recovery, addresses labor concerns, and stands up
for our farm families.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 6945, SUPPORTING PREGNANT AND PARENTING WOMEN
AND FAMILIES ACT; PROVIDING
FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R.
6359,
PREGNANT
STUDENTS’
RIGHTS ACT; AND PROVIDING
FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.J.
RES. 140, PROVIDING FOR CONGRESSIONAL DISAPPROVAL OF
THE RULE SUBMITTED BY THE
BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT
RELATING
TO
PUBLIC
LAND
ORDER
NO.
7917
FOR
WITHDRAWAL OF FEDERAL LANDS;
COOK, LAKE, AND SAINT LOUIS
COUNTIES, MN
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, by direction of the Committee on Rules, I call up House Resolution 1009 and ask for its immediate
consideration.
The Clerk read the resolution, as follows:
H. RES. 1009
Resolved, That upon adoption of this resolution it shall be in order to consider in the
House the bill (H.R. 6945) to amend part A of
title IV of the Social Security Act to clarify
the authority of States to use funds for pregnancy centers, and for other purposes. All
points of order against consideration of the
bill are waived. An amendment in the nature
of a substitute consisting of the text of Rules
Committee Print 119–17 shall be considered
as adopted. The bill, as amended, shall be
considered as read. All points of order
against provisions in the bill, as amended,
are waived. The previous question shall be
considered as ordered on the bill, as amended, and on any further amendment thereto,
to final passage without intervening motion
except: (1) one hour of debate equally divided
and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Ways
and Means or their respective designees; and
(2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 2. Upon adoption of this resolution it
shall be in order to consider in the House the
bill (H.R. 6359) to require institutions of
higher education to disseminate information
on the rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for other
purposes. All points of order against consideration of the bill are waived. The amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee on Education
and Workforce now printed in the bill shall
be considered as adopted. The bill, as amended, shall be considered as read. All points of
order against provisions in the bill, as
amended, are waived. The previous question
shall be considered as ordered on the bill, as
amended, and on any further amendment
thereto, to final passage without intervening
motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally
divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on
Education and Workforce or their respective
designees; and (2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 3. Upon adoption of this resolution it
shall be in order to consider in the House the
joint resolution (H.J. Res. 140) providing for
congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.012

H21JAPT1

H1132

title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted by the Bureau of Land Management
relating to Public Land Order No. 7917 for
Withdrawal of Federal Lands; Cook, Lake,
and Saint Louis Counties, MN. All points of
order against consideration of the joint resolution are waived. The joint resolution shall
be considered as read. All points of order
against provisions in the joint resolution are
waived. The previous question shall be considered as ordered on the joint resolution
and on any amendment thereto to final passage without intervening motion except: (1)
one hour of debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority
member of the Committee on Natural Resources or their respective designees; and (2)
one motion to recommit.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from Georgia is recognized for 1
hour.
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, for the purpose of debate
only, I yield the customary 30 minutes
to the gentleman from Massachusetts
(Mr. MCGOVERN), pending which I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
During consideration of this resolution, all time yielded is for the purpose
of debate only.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that
all Members have 5 legislative days to
revise and extend their remarks.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Georgia?
There was no objection.
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, last night the Rules Committee met and reported a rule, House
Resolution 1009, providing for consideration of three measures. H.R. 6945, the
Supporting Pregnant and Parenting
Women and Families Act, is under a
closed rule.
The rule provides 1 hour of debate
equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking member of the Committee on Ways and Means or their respective designees, and provides one
motion to recommit.
H.R. 6359, the Pregnant Students’
Rights Act, is under a closed rule.
The rule provides 1 hour of debate,
equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking member of the Committee on Education and Workforce or
their respective designees, and provides
one motion to recommit.
H.J. Res. 140, providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of
title 5, United States Code, of the rule
submitted by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order
No. 7917 for Withdrawal of Federal
lands; Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis
Counties, MN, is under a closed rule.
The rule provides 1 hour of debate
equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking member of the Committee on Natural Resources or their
respective designees, and provides one
motion to recommit.
Mr. Speaker, we are here today to debate a rule on three pieces of legislation. Beginning with H.R. 6945, the
Supporting Pregnant and Parenting
Women and Families Act.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, across the country,
pregnancy centers serve as trusted,
community-based nonprofits that offer
a wide range of material assistance and
support, including pregnancy testing,
prenatal education, parenting classes,
ultrasounds, diapers, baby clothing,
adoption referrals, and connections to
housing and other services.
In 2024 alone, these organizations assisted nearly 2 million individuals nationwide, Mr. Speaker.
b 1220
Despite their longstanding role in
supporting families and advancing the
core purposes of Temporary Assistance
to Needy Families, a proposed rule
under the previous administration
raised uncertainty about whether
States could continue partnering with
pregnancy centers even though these
services clearly align with helping children remain in their homes and reducing dependence on government assistance.
H.R. 6945 addresses that uncertainty
by making clear that States may not
be restricted from choosing to work
with pregnancy centers and that Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
funds may be used for these services
consistent with Federal law.
This bill does not mandate participation. Again, Mr. Speaker, this bill does
not mandate participation, but instead
preserves State flexibility and protects
against future administrative overreach.
At a time when families are facing
rising costs and difficult choices, ensuring access to proven community resources matters. This legislation reinforces support for pregnant and parenting women, respects State decisionmaking, and strengthens efforts to help
families thrive.
Additionally, the rule provides for
consideration of H.R. 6359, the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act. Mr. Speaker, today’s student population looks
very different than it did decades ago.
Nearly one in five undergraduate students is raising children while enrolled,
yet many pregnant students remain
unaware of the rights and accommodations already available to them under
Federal law.
While Title IX clearly prohibits discrimination based on pregnancy and requires
reasonable
accommodation,
those protections are only meaningful
if students know they exist and understand how to access them. Too often,
that information is buried, inconsistently shared, or not communicated at
all.
H.R. 6359 takes a straightforward approach by requiring colleges and universities that receive Federal student
aid to clearly disseminate information
regarding pregnant students’ rights
and available accommodations, as well
as both on-campus and community resources. This bill also ensures students
know how to file a Title IX complaint
if those rights are violated.
This legislation does not expand Federal authority or create new rights. In-

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

stead, it promotes transparency, consistency, and accountability so that
pregnant students can remain enrolled,
complete their education, and plan for
their futures. By reinforcing access to
information respecting existing law,
H.R. 6359 supports students, families,
and institutions alike.
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the rule provides for the consideration of H.J. Res.
140, providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5,
United States Code, of the rule submitted by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order No.
7917 for Withdrawal of Federal Lands;
Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis Counties,
MN.
The Duluth Complex is home to one
of the largest undeveloped mineral reserves in the world. It contains roughly
8 billion tons, Mr. Speaker, of copper
and nickel, in addition to cobalt and
platinum. It is the world’s second largest copper deposit and the world’s third
largest nickel deposit.
Currently, China controls approximately 60 percent of global critical
mineral production, and we have seen
them use their control over the industry as a bargaining chip. It is clear, Mr.
Speaker, that increasing domestic production of critical minerals is vital for
America’s economic and national security.
However, in 2023, the Biden administration issued PLO 7917, which withdrew 225,504 acres from mineral development in the Superior National Forest. This PLO locked these reserves for
20 years and prematurely ended the
permitting process.
H.J. Res. 140 is simple. It permanently ends this irresponsible withdrawal and allows a transparent process to potentially develop the minerals
in the Duluth Complex to move forward.
As the gentleman from Minnesota
(Mr. STAUBER), the sponsor of this bill,
stated in the Rules Committee last
night, this legislation doesn’t greenlight mining in the Duluth Complex. It
reverses the Biden administration’s
mineral ban in the area and allows
companies to continue to compete
while following Federal permitting and
environmental processes. Again, they
will continue to follow Federal permitting and environmental processes.
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to consideration of these pieces of legislation. I urge passage of this rule, and I
reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman from Georgia for
yielding me the customary 30 minutes,
and I yield myself such time as I may
consume.
Mr. Speaker, we had plenty of time
last night in the Rules Committee to
debate these awful, lousy bills: H.R.
6945, H.R. 6359, and H.J. Res. 140. I encourage everyone to look them up.
Don’t take my word for it.
Two of these bills are about misleading pregnant women to stop them
from making decisions about their own

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.002

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

bodies. This is all part of the Republicans’ war on women. These bills are
aimed to please anti-choice protesters
who are flying into Washington this
week. The third is about making it
easier for a foreign mining company to
dump pollution into a pristine wilderness recreation area in Minnesota.
All of these bills are being brought to
the floor under completely closed
rules—no amendments, limited debate,
no nothing. I won’t waste more time on
these terrible bills. They are just more
of the same stupid garbage that this
majority has brought to the floor time
and time again.
What I do want to highlight, Mr.
Speaker, is that this week marks 1
year since Donald Trump was sworn in
as President of the United States. Republicans have had total control of the
entire Federal Government—the House,
the Senate, and the White House—for
over a year.
Yet still, after an entire year in
charge, Republicans continue to point
the finger at Democrats rather than
take responsibility for their own embarrassing failures and broken promises. Republicans and Trump ran on
fighting for working people, but every
single day, they have governed on behalf of billionaires and corporate donors.
Let’s take a look at some of these
broken promises. Donald Trump said
he would put America first. He has not.
What he has done is given a $40 billion
loan to Argentina. He stabbed American ranchers in the back, proposing
that we import beef from South America. He threw a fancy party at the
White House for a Saudi Prince who
murdered an American journalist. He
has not put America first.
He also promised no more endless
wars. Give me a break. He renamed the
Pentagon the Department of War. Last
year, he bombed Iran, Iraq, Nigeria, Somalia, Syria, and Yemen. He bombed
Venezuela and now says that we are
running the country, whatever the hell
that means. He is also threatening to
take an autonomous territory from
Denmark, a NATO ally.
Let’s go over another failure. Donald
Trump promised ICE would only deport
the worst of the worst. Guess what.
That is not true. ICE agents are terrorizing not just immigrants, but U.S.
citizens, sowing chaos, murdering an
unarmed American mom in broad daylight, and deporting veterans and asylum seekers who are here legally.
Another campaign promise: Donald
Trump said he would lower prices on
day one. Oh, my God, Mr. Speaker, has
anyone in this administration gone
shopping? Let me say this as someone
who buys his own groceries in Worcester, Massachusetts. Prices are not only
high, but they are going up even more
because of Trump’s reckless tariffs. Remember when Trump bragged about
how he would get gas down to $2 a gallon? It is $3 a gallon down the street
from my house.
Let’s keep going down the list.
Trump said he would get drugs off our

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1133

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

streets and put criminals in jail. Give
me a break. He pardoned the guy who
created the dark web market that
smuggled in tons of fentanyl. Then he
pardoned the Honduran ex-President
convicted of trafficking tons and tons
of cocaine into the United States.
Let’s not forget, he pardoned all the
January 6 rioters, many of whom have
since gone on to reoffend with illegal
gun possession and committing child
sex crimes after Donald Trump let
them out of jail.
Then, of course, we have the promise
that Trump would replace ObamaCare
with something better. Instead of
something better, Republicans let the
enhanced ACA tax credits expire at the
end of 2025, which means that now people are paying more. Tens of thousands
of people in Massachusetts alone have
now dropped coverage, meaning they
have no insurance at all.
Republicans don’t have a plan to replace ObamaCare. They never have.
Fifteen years later, I am starting to
think that they never will.
Now, another thing that Donald
Trump promised: no corruption and
full transparency. Remember that
promise? Seriously, how much money
does one family need to make off the
Presidency before Republicans admit it
is corruption? The Trump family has
gotten nearly $4 billion richer since he
took office last year. How much can
one family treat the Presidency like a
piggy bank before Republicans finally
step up and do something about it?
b 1230
Why is his ballroom being funded by
billionaire donors? What are they looking for?
What about the Epstein files? There
has been no transparency there. We
had to force a vote in Congress. He reluctantly signed the bill, and he still
hasn’t released all the files. Less than
1 percent of the files have been released. What the hell is taking so long?
What is he so afraid of? What is he hiding?
It has been clear to me since day one
of Donald Trump’s disgraceful Presidency what it has been all about. Look
at who was in the front row of his inauguration, all billionaires: his Treasury
secretary, a billionaire; his education
secretary, a billionaire; his entire Cabinet, Health and Human Services, Energy, Interior, all led by billionaires.
These people don’t shop for themselves or they don’t worry about paying rent. They don’t care about us.
Trump said he would drain the swamp.
What a bunch of BS. He moved the
swamp into the Lincoln bedroom for
God’s sake.
The bottom line is simple: He has not
done a single damn thing that he promised to do. Not only have they failed,
they have failed catastrophically, and
look no further than the bills on the
floor today.
There is nothing for workers, nothing
to lower grocery prices, nothing to
take on price gouging, nothing to bring

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

down rent, nothing to help people buy
a home, nothing to lower prescription
drug costs, nothing to raise wages,
nothing to strengthen workplace protections, and nothing to create jobs.
Just culture war garbage and corporate
giveaways is all the GOP knows how to
do.
After 1 year of total power, there is
nobody else to blame. This is the Republican record, and it is awful. This is
Donald Trump’s economy, and it sucks.
The people back home see it. They feel
it. They are living it. They see who
keeps getting help and who keeps getting hurt. They see the billionaires
cashing out while working families get
squeezed. The Republican Party has
had a year, and the American people
have had enough.
Mr. Speaker, I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote on
the rule, and I reserve the balance of
my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Mr. Speaker, before I yield to Mr.
BOST, I will say that by my count, I
think my colleague blamed Donald
Trump 14 times for the things the
Democratic Party did before he got
elected. Gas is very close to $2 a gallon
in Tifton, Georgia, and I think it costs
a lot less for gasoline in most Republican States than it does Democrat
States right now because of the Democrats charging more and more taxes on
their citizens.
As for the Affordable Care Act or
ObamaCare that you all take so much
credit for and are so proud of the way
you wrote it, the benefactors of that
legislation, the large insurance companies’ CEOs are actually going to be on
the Hill this week and will get to be
questioned. I hope you will question
them fairly hard, but I did bring one of
my bills because I expected you to say
that.
The charge is $546.53. The insurance
carrier discount is $509.93. Insurance
paid zero, nothing, not one dime. I paid
$36.60.
Now, if you wanted to fix it for the
American citizens, the question is:
Why was it even a $500 charge if the
fair value is $36? Republicans are trying to work to fix that. Unfortunately,
we can’t get a single Democratic vote
for a piece of healthcare legislation
that will actually work for all of the
American citizens.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 21⁄2 minutes to
the gentleman from Illinois (Mr. BOST),
my friend and chair of the Veterans’
Affairs Committee.
Mr. BOST. Mr. Speaker, I thank the
gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, Friday is the March for
Life. It is a moment for compassion,
common sense, and a commitment to
our most vulnerable. That is why I rise
today in strong support of the pro-life
bills included in this rule, including

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.016

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1134

safeguarding funding for pregnancy resource centers act and the Pregnant
Students’ Rights Act.
These bills are about something very
simple: Protecting the dignity of the
unborn and meeting very real needs of
mothers and families.
Pregnancy resource centers offer
counseling, medical services, parenting
resources, and support systems through
some of the most difficult moments
that a mother can face. They should
never be targeted or defunded because
they protect life.
At the same time, no woman should
be forced to choose between continuing
her education or continuing her pregnancy. Women who choose life should
be supported, encouraged, and empowered, not pushed aside or told that
their dreams for the future don’t matter.
I have always been proud to stand for
life, and that commitment has guided
my work not only here in Congress but
my work as a State legislator. My wife
and I make sure that we put our money
where our mouth is in supporting
young women who find themselves in a
situation with a pregnancy out of wedlock.
Being pro-life is about doing more
than just talking about it. It means
standing up for life at every stage and
backing it up with actions. This Friday, this Mall out here will be packed
with a powerful demonstration of the
sanctity of life. It is important that
the people’s House meets that moment.
We should be unafraid to say that
every life has value and that mothers
deserve our support, not our silence.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this rule and these pro-life,
profamily priorities.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consumer.
I will correct the RECORD on something. Donald Trump promised he
would lower gas prices to $2 a gallon. I
just did Google maps and looked at the
price of gas in the gentleman’s district.
It is like $2.80. That is a far cry from
$2.
Mr. Speaker, if we defeat the previous question, I will offer an amendment to the rule to bring up H.R. 12,
the Women’s Health Protection Act, to
restore the rights of women to an abortion nationwide and undo extremist
abortion bans in States across the
country.
Mr. Speaker, since the Supreme
Court’s Dobbs decision, 13 States have
imposed complete abortion bans and
many more have imposed extremely
short timeframes to get an abortion,
endangering women, threatening doctors with criminal prosecution, giving
politicians in State capitol buildings
extreme power over personal medical
decisions and fundamental freedoms.
The bills in this rule are part of that
dangerous trend. One bill actually diverts Federal TANF funds meant for
low-income families to fund so-called
crisis pregnancy centers, which provide
pregnant women oftentimes with fake

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

medical advice with the goal of dissuading them from accessing contraception or abortion care.
Republicans aren’t providing more
funding for TANF. God forbid they do
that. Giving this money away to these
fake medical clinics is stealing money
from low-income families who need
real help. The damage these fake pregnancy centers do isn’t theoretical.
In my district, a woman was told by
one of these centers that she had a viable pregnancy, but as time went on and
she continued to feel sharp pains, she
went to a real doctor and was diagnosed with an ectopic pregnancy that
threatened her life and resulted in an
emergency surgery. She will have lifelong complications. If she had received
actual medical care earlier, she could
have received the treatment she needed
before it was too late.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
defeat the previous question so we can
bring up a bill that will actually protect women and allow them to access
the full suite of reproductive care options.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of my amendment into the RECORD, along with any
extraneous
material,
immediately
prior to the vote on the previous question.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Massachusetts?
There was no objection.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, to discuss our proposal, I yield 3 minutes to
the gentlewoman from California (Ms.
CHU).
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, right now,
millions of Americans are struggling to
afford healthcare. Millions of new and
expecting mothers are seeing their premiums skyrocket and they are being
forced to go without health insurance.
Across this country, countless women
are being forced to flee their States for
lifesaving abortion care while too
many others have suffered or died waiting for care that should never have
been denied.
b 1240
Mr. Speaker, the legislation this
body is considering today does nothing
to address these real crises. Instead, it
diverts scarce Federal antipoverty dollars, TANF dollars, away from struggling families and toward so-called crisis pregnancy centers that exist to
shame, mislead, and delay women from
accessing abortion care.
This bill does nothing to lower
healthcare costs. It does nothing to
help families afford prenatal care,
childbirth, or postpartum care. It does
nothing to address the deadly consequences of extreme Republican abortion bans that are forcing women to
delay care and risk their lives.
Mr. Speaker, if we defeat the previous question on this rule, my Democratic colleagues and I will offer my
bill, the Women’s Health Protection
Act, or WHPA. WHPA is the Federal

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

solution to the extremist Supreme
Court’s decision to strike down Roe v.
Wade. It would restore the right for everyone, no matter what State they live
in, no matter their ZIP Code, to receive
abortion care.
In a world where doctors are being
threatened with prison time for doing
their jobs, it would protect providers
who are simply trying to save lives.
This is the legislation this body should
be considering today.
I urge my colleagues to defeat the
previous question so we can bring up
this important legislation.
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Colorado (Mr. CRANK).
Mr. CRANK. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman for yielding time.
Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but notice.
Some of my colleagues talk about
whether or not someone is a real doctor. I don’t understand how someone is
not a real doctor when they show a patient an ultrasound. Giving them all of
the information and letting a woman
make a decision is somehow not celebrated here.
If we were really for life, wouldn’t we
be excited that a woman looked at that
ultrasound and said: You know what? I
have decided I want to have that baby.
That is not a choice everyone in this
body wants that woman to make. They
want them to make a different choice
for some reason.
Mr. Speaker, I am here today to support the pregnancy centers across
America, including Life Network in my
home of Colorado Springs, Colorado.
Pregnancy centers offer hope, and they
offer opportunity. They promote life
and give necessary and lifesaving resources to struggling mothers and fathers. It is these very pregnancy centers whose only focus is for the enrichment and support of these often
inexpectant parents who are the target
of a punitive and distasteful action by
the previous administration.
In Colorado’s Fifth Congressional
District, Life Network has served 3,900
patients, providing high-quality pregnancy tests, ultrasounds, early pregnancy care, and more for free to anyone who walks through their door.
This is just the impact in my district. I know that the presence of similar pregnancy centers across the country are providing hope and support to
thousands of parents each day. Funding for these mothers and fathers,
many of whom are underserved, should
never be politically taken away.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Congresswoman
FISCHBACH for introducing the Supporting
Pregnant
and
Parenting
Women and Families Act, which I
strongly support, to provide a statutory protection for pregnancy centers
under the Temporary Assistant for
Needy Families program.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I would say to the gentleman who just spoke that some of us
had different experiences. In my district, a woman almost died from one of

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.018

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

these crisis pregnancy centers because
she got bad advice from a quack. Don’t
lecture us about our dedication to
making sure that women are not only
presented all options but treated by
people who are actually qualified.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the
gentlewoman from New Mexico (Ms.
LEGER FERNANDEZ), a distinguished
member of the Rules Committee.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, this week marks the 52nd anniversary of Roe v. Wade, a decision
that allowed women to make their own
decisions about what to do with their
bodies without the interference of politicians.
It allowed women to make those decisions in consultation with their own
faith, their own doctor, and the people
they love. Roe v. Wade proved that
when women have that freedom to
make our own healthcare decisions, we
live healthier and fuller lives.
Sadly, after Roe v. Wade was overturned, 22 States implemented full or
partial abortion bans. We have seen
women bleed to death or become infertile after the onset of sepsis because
they couldn’t get care for miscarriages
or other pregnancy-related complications.
House Republicans today are joining
the effort to limit women’s access to
full reproductive healthcare and information. Instead of acting to lower
healthcare
costs,
we
are
in
a
healthcare crisis. Instead of addressing
the affordability crisis, they are trying
to pass laws to siphon funds away from
needy families and offer a skewed vision of what a pregnant student should
hear from her university. Republicans
are using this moment to remind us
just how little they respect women’s
lives or our choices.
As chair of the Democratic Women’s
Caucus, I know that pregnancy can be
joyful. As a woman who almost died on
an operating table when I was pregnant, I also know how complicated
pregnancies can be. That is why I am
so mad about these bills.
Republicans’ so-called Pregnant Students’ Rights Act pretends to help
pregnant students. It provides no
childcare, no diapers, no formula, no
housing, nothing pregnant students actually need. What it does do is it controls. Republicans seem to be always
about controlling women, controlling
people in their doctor’s offices. It is
about control.
It requires schools to tell students
about carrying a pregnancy to term
but not about what resources might be
available for miscarriage, not about
abortion, and not about the full range
of medical care that they might need
to access.
If a doctor only tells a person about
one treatment option which might not
be the best for them, that would be
malpractice. Here on the House floor,
it is called Republicans’ priorities.
Then we get the Supporting Pregnant
and Parenting Women and Families
Act, which is another nice name but

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1135

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

another ugly attack on women. This
bill allows red States to siphon cash assistance meant for food, rent, and
childcare into unregulated crisis pregnancy centers, places that masquerade
as medical clinics. They spread misinformation, delay care, and shame
women who may choose to have an
abortion.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 1 minute to the gentlewoman from New Mexico.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, what is worse is their bill
blocks the Federal Government from
monitoring States’ use of TANF dollars
for those anti-abortion clinics. They
don’t want accountability on those
clinics.
I would tell my Republican colleagues not to lecture us about waste,
fraud, and abuse when they refuse to
monitor anti-abortion clinics and when
they stay silent when Trump pardons
over 44 people convicted of fraud. That
is a conviction of fraud, not just a suggestion.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
oppose this rule.
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, while the gentlewoman was
speaking, I did take a second to pull up
a couple of things on gas prices since
they are blaming President Trump for
it. They are correct.
In Worcester, the gas price is $2.91 a
gallon on average. In Oklahoma, it is
$2.21. In Wyoming, it is $2.22. In Texas,
it is about $2.23. In Georgia, it is about
the same thing.
Do my colleagues know what the difference is? We all have Republican
Governors. Our Republican Governors
are working to lower the cost of energy. The Democratic Governors are
obviously keeping energy prices high
and blaming the President for that. I
reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting. Now
the gentleman is blaming the Governors and not Biden. I don’t even
know where the hell Worcester is. I
never heard of that place the way he is
saying it. It is certainly not in Massachusetts.
Mr. Speaker, in any event, while this
Chamber is wasting more time on yet
more messaging bills, a real crisis is
unfolding in plain sight. Our allies are
preparing for a possible military conflict with the United States. Let me repeat that again.
Our closest allies, our partners in
freedom and peace for decades, are reinforcing their territory because the
President of the United States has
plunged us into the greatest transatlantic crisis in a generation.
Are we supposed to be relieved by the
fact that finally, after a week of chaos,
he said he won’t use force? Is that supposed to somehow comfort us? I don’t
really feel very comforted because
these are the same people who told us

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

they wouldn’t invade Venezuela the
week before they invaded Venezuela.
Let me remind everyone how this
started.
Last weekend, Donald Trump sent a
message to Norway’s Prime Minister. I
want the President’s words in the
RECORD because the American people
deserve to hear them.
b 1250
‘‘Dear Jonas, considering your country decided not to give me the Nobel
Peace Prize for having stopped eight
wars plus, I no longer feel an obligation
to think purely of peace.’’
Now, let’s listen to that again. Since
he didn’t get the prize, the President of
the United States says he no longer
feels obligated to think of peace.
Then he pivots from grievance to
threats, saying that he wants ‘‘complete and total control of Greenland.’’
That is nuts. Again, this is truly
crazy. This is the President of the
United States talking about a NATO
ally the way that Putin talked about
Crimea before he invaded Ukraine.
‘‘ . . . if we don’t do it the easy way,
we are going to do it the hard way.’’
Again, that is not a Putin quote. It is
a Trump quote. You can hardly tell the
damned difference anymore. Wake up,
America.
Are any of my friends on the other
side of the aisle going to step up and
put an end to this insanity, or are we
all just going to shrug it off and move
on? The President’s own words show
that he is living in a different reality.
He told The New York Times that acquiring Greenland is psychologically
important to him. Not to the United
States, but to him personally.
Mr. Speaker, just so we are all on the
same page, the U.S. does not need to
invade Greenland to protect America.
We already have a U.S. military presence there, and Denmark has basically
said that they are happy to partner
with us even further, because our militaries already work very closely, to
make sure that Russia or China doesn’t
gain a foothold in the Arctic, so his
own justification is total BS.
Threatening to annex Greenland actually makes us less safe. If we wanted
to stand up to Russia, I can think of a
really easy way to do that that doesn’t
involve invading a NATO ally. No, no,
no. In no way is this about national security or defending the Arctic. It is a
cover story.
This is about a thin-skinned, petty
man throwing a global tantrum because he didn’t get the prize that he
thinks he deserves. Through all of this,
barely a peep from most Republicans—
not a whisper. Imagine if this were a
Democratic President. They would be
up in arms. We would be having investigations and subpoenas, and it would
be a national scandal. Yet, we are hearing nothing from Republicans because
they are in a cult.
I will say what they won’t: None of
this is normal. This is not a joke. This
is not something Republicans can

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.020

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1136

shrug off or turn away from. This
President is threatening a NATO ally
in writing, and the world is responding.
European allies have begun sending
troops to Greenland to protect it from
an American invasion. Canada has signaled that such an invasion would activate Article 5, meaning our allies
would be obligated to take military action against us. Record-setting protests are taking place in Greenland and
in Denmark because they have no interest in being taken over by Trump.
Instead of deescalating, Trump is
ramping up—tariffs, threats, blackmail, trying to bully our allies into letting him grab territory.
Do you know what the kicker is to
all of this? Working people will pay the
price for Trump’s little temper tantrum. When you blow up alliances, you
don’t just blow up diplomacy. You blow
up supply chains. You blow up markets. You blow up global stability, and
it is never the billionaires who eat the
cost. It is families. It is farmers. It is
workers. It is regular people.
Maybe that is why 91 percent of
Americans think that taking over
Greenland is a stupid idea, but here is
the bottom line: China benefits when
America alienates Europe. Russia benefits when NATO is weakened and distracted. Every authoritarian on Earth
benefits when the President of the
United States starts acting like a twobit tyrant.
I will just end on this: The world
where America invades Greenland is a
horrible, horrible world. It is a world
with no moral compass. It is a world
with no North Star towards liberty and
justice. It is a world where China, Russia, and America conspire together to
subvert
freedom,
democracy,
and
peace. It is a world I don’t want to live
in, but it is the world that will come to
be if we allow this President to do what
he says he wants to do.
My message to our allies is simple:
Do not mistake this President for the
American people. Stand up to him. Do
not appease him, and know that there
are Americans and there are Members
of Congress who will stand with you in
defense of democracy, alliances, and
the rule of law.
My message to House Republicans is
even more simple: It is time to take
the car keys from grandpa. Stop worshipping this President. Stop acting
like you are in a cult. Grow a spine,
and for once in your lives, cut the BS
and do something to stop him.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from Massachusetts is reminded again to refrain from engaging
in personalities towards the President.
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, may I inquire as to how much
time is remaining.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from Georgia has 171⁄2 minutes
remaining.
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, I want everybody to
take a deep breath, and I want you to
know that Donald Trump, nor the
United States is going to invade Greenland. It is not going to happen. It is
just not.
Now, Russia might invade it, and
China might invade it. As far as Canada and the NATO alliance goes, I just
have to tell you that Canada committed to buying approximately 90 F–
35s. Do you know how many they actually purchased? Less than 20.
Canada’s national security strategy
is to pick up the phone and call Donald
Trump to protect us. Donald Trump
has done the right thing by making
NATO and our partners stand up and
acknowledge that they don’t have the
defenses in place that they need.
While some people might not want to
believe it, I will tell you one that does.
Mark Rutte, NATO chief, praises
Trump at Davos by saying that he
forced Europe to step up on defense.
Now, this is the head of NATO. He is
the head of NATO. A couple of comments about President Trump.
‘‘ . . . I’m not popular with you now
because I’m defending Donald Trump,
but I really believe you can be happy
that he is there because he has forced
us in Europe to step up, to face the
consequences that we have to take care
more of our own defense,’’ Rutte said.
Wednesday, in remarks at Davos,
Switzerland: ‘‘No way. Without Donald
Trump, this would never have happened. They are all on 2 percent now.’’
It went on during a panel at the
World Economic Forum.
‘‘I’m absolutely convinced, without
Donald Trump we would not have
taken those decisions. And they are
crucial, particularly for the European
and the Canadian side of NATO to really grow up’’—‘‘grow up,’’ this is the
head of NATO saying this about
NATO—‘‘in the post-Cold War world.’’
‘‘The Americans still have over 80,000
soldiers in Europe. . . . including in
Poland, in Germany . . . they are still
heavily invested in European defense.
And yes, they have to pivot more towards Asia. So, it is only logical for
them to expect us in Europe to step up,
over time.’’
I will tell you: Donald Trump doesn’t
have any plans to invade Greenland,
but the Russians do. The Russians do.
If NATO is not willing to do what it
takes to defend Greenland, then the
United States should.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to my
friend from North Carolina (Mr.
MCDOWELL).
Mr. MCDOWELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
in support of two commonsense,
profamily bills before the House today.
This week, as thousands gather in
Washington for the March for Life, we
are reminded that being pro-life means
standing with mothers, children, and
families.
The Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families Act allows
States to better partner with pregnancy centers who are providing real

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

help to new mothers who are taking
the journey of parenthood. These centers are a pillar for nearly 2 million
families every year, making it easier
to provide and foster a loving bond
throughout communities just like mine
in North Carolina.
No longer will political discrimination keep compassion at the doorway.
No longer will bureaucrats in Washington prevent pregnant mothers from
accessing services and assistance from
faith-based pregnancy centers, which
help their families grow and thrive.
Mr. Speaker, we need to be a country
that affirms life.
In tandem, the Pregnant Students’
Rights Act communicates a simple
truth to young women: The birth of
your child is not an ultimatum of
choosing to grow your family or continuing your education. If you are a
young woman who gets pregnant and is
getting your education, this bill
strengthens Title IX protections to
make sure that your school clearly informs you of your rights and ensures
accountability if those rights are violated.
For too long, young women have felt
isolated, pressured, and unsupported.
That is unacceptable, and it needs to
stop.
Mr. Speaker, these bills reflect what
the pro-life movement has always
stood for: dignity, opportunity, and
hope. I urge my colleagues to support
the rule, support these families, and
stand on the side of life.
b 1300
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, it is
incredible to be lectured by people who
claim they are pro-life but who vote to
take food away from hungry kids in
this country, who vote to cut SNAP by
$200 billion in the big, ugly bill, who
vote to cut Medicaid by $1 trillion in
the big, ugly bill. It really is incredible. It takes my breath away.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentlewoman
from
Oregon
(Ms.
BONAMICI).
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the ranking member for yielding me
the time.
Mr. Speaker, I thought maybe I was
in the wrong place when I heard the debate when I walked in today. I do want
to add that I agree it is not pro-life to
cut services to families and to make
childcare more expensive. These bills
are anti-choice.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in opposition to these two deceptively titled
bills: H.R. 6945, the Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families Act, which allows Health and
Human Services funds to be sent to crisis pregnancy centers, and H.R. 6359,
the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act,
which unfairly limits the information
it requires colleges to provide to students and the students it chooses to
support.
Most crisis pregnancy centers are
sham organizations. They have the sole
purpose of advancing an anti-choice

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.022

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

agenda. They routinely engage in deceptive advertising to get people in the
doors, hold themselves out as medical
clinics, and then use blatant misinformation about the services they provide.
For example, a pregnancy resource
center in Pennsylvania told a pregnant
woman that she had a miscarriage, so
she left. Then, later, she was still experiencing pregnancy symptoms, so she
went to a real doctor who told her she
still had a viable pregnancy.
This deception is wrong on so many
levels, and these centers should be held
accountable, not receive government
funds.
I introduced the Stop Anti-Abortion
Disinformation Act to prohibit unfair
or deceptive advertising about abortion
services and services that crisis pregnancy centers do and do not offer.
Also, pregnant students deserve access to medically accurate, comprehensive planning resources and a full range
of reproductive healthcare options.
Yet, the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act
only requires colleges to provide information about carrying a child to term.
I offered an amendment to this bill
that would have colleges also provide
comprehensive, medically accurate information to students, but my Republican colleagues rejected it.
Deciding whether and when to have a
child is a deeply personal—
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MCDOWELL). The time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from Oregon.
Ms. BONAMICI. Deciding whether
and when to have a child is a deeply
personal decision. It should not be
made by politicians, and it certainly
should not be made by anti-choice extremists.
The biased, anti-choice efforts underpinning these two bills will make it
harder for students to make informed
decisions about what is best for them.
They are the ones who should be making these decisions. Promoting partisan legislation that fails to address
the full healthcare needs of students
does not lead to academic success.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
join me in opposing these bills, reject
H.R. 6359 and H.R. 6945, and instead
stand up for those who are making that
personal decision themselves.
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I know a lot of people
who work in these centers. They are
honest, dedicated, hardworking people
who care about the pregnant mothers
and the unborn children. I think that
the attacks on them are unfounded, unwarranted, and unprofessional.
Mr. Speaker, I have no further speakers on the rule, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, in
closing, I yield myself the balance of
my time.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1137

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, first of all, let’s be
clear, all of these crummy bills that
are coming to the floor today are under
completely closed rules.
The gentlewoman who just spoke, her
amendment was blocked from being debated and voted on on the House floor
by my Republican colleagues. Everything is just closed—their way or the
highway. It is a terrible pattern that
has developed here.
Mr. Speaker, after 1 year of total Republican control, there is nowhere left
to hide. Republicans ran on helping
working people. They ran on lowering
costs. They ran on grocery prices and
rent. What did they do? They delivered
all right—for billionaires and big donors.
If Wall Street wanted a tax break, it
would get done in a nanosecond. If
Amazon wanted another loophole, it
would materialize out of thin air. If Big
Oil wanted another permit, they would
roll out the red carpet. If Big Pharma
wanted to rip off people, Republicans
look the other way.
That is how things have worked
around here for the last year. It is
never a problem paying for tax breaks
for billionaires, but somehow, when everyday people needed help, Republicans
were nowhere to be found. They cut
food assistance, cut Medicaid, and cut
help for regular people. They stole
from those with the least to give more
to those with the most.
I am so sick of the excuses. For a
year, we have heard Republicans blame
everyone but themselves: blame Biden,
blame Democrats, blame George Soros,
blame the Clintons, blame Kamala
Harris, blame the blue States, blame
the media, blame fill-in-the-blank.
Here is a thought, Mr. Speaker: Why
don’t you guys blame yourselves? You
control the House, the Senate, and the
White House. You are in charge. You
set the schedule. You control the government. You have been in power for
an entire year. If you are still blaming
someone else, that is really not a strategy. It is a confession.
As much as you guys might need a
priest, I am not here to offer forgiveness or absolution. I am here to demand accountability.
Republicans need to take ownership
of your pathetic, incompetent, disastrous inability to deliver on anything
you said you would.
Mr. Speaker, I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote on
this rule and a ‘‘no’’ vote on the underlying bill, and I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
BRESNAHAN). Members are reminded to
direct their comments to the Chair.
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself the balance of
my time.
Mr. Speaker, after listening to that, I
can’t help but go back to when 99 percent of Republicans voted to keep the
government open just a couple of
months ago, and 100 percent of Democrats voted to shut it down, how the
Democrats were running around say-

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

ing: See what the Republicans did. I
mean, it is a totally false narrative.
Mr. Speaker, this week, the House
can advance three simple pieces of legislation under this rule.
H.R. 6945, the Supporting Pregnant
and Parenting Women and Families
Act, addresses uncertainty and makes
clear that States may not be restricted
from choosing to work with pregnancy
centers and that TANF funds may be
used for these services consistent with
Federal law. This is not a mandate, Mr.
Speaker. We are not saying that the
States have to do this.
H.R. 6359, the Pregnant Students’
Rights Act, requires colleges and universities that receive Federal student
aid to clearly disseminate information
regarding pregnant students’ rights,
available accommodations, and both
on-campus and community resources.
H.J. Res. 140 rescinds the Biden administration’s mineral ban on almost a
quarter of a million acres in the Superior National Forest and allows a
transparent process to develop the
minerals in the Duluth Complex to
move forward.
Mr. Speaker, all three of these measures are worthy of support, and I urge
my colleagues to join me in voting
‘‘yes’’ on the previous question and
‘‘yes’’ on the rule.
The text of the material previously
referred to by Mr. MCGOVERN is as follows:
AN AMENDMENT TO H. RES. 1009 OFFERED BY
MR. MCGOVERN OF MASSACHUSETTS
At the end of the resolution, add the following:
SEC. 4. Immediately upon adoption of this
resolution, the House shall proceed to the
consideration in the House of the bill (H.R.
12) to protect a person’s ability to determine
whether to continue or end a pregnancy, and
to protect a health care provider’s ability to
provide abortion services. All points of order
against consideration of the bill are waived.
The bill shall be considered as read. All
points of order against provisions in the bill
are waived. The previous question shall be
considered as ordered on the bill and on any
amendment thereto to final passage without
intervening motion except: (1) one hour of
debate equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking minority member of the
Committee on Energy and Commerce or
their respective designees; and (2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 5. Clause 1(c) of rule XIX and clause 8
of rule XX shall not apply to the consideration of H.R. 12.
SEC. 6. The Clerk shall transmit to the
Senate a message that the House has passed
H.R. 12 no later than three calendar days
after passage.

Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, I yield back the balance of
my time, and I move the previous question on the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, on
that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.024

H21JAPT1

H1138

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will be postponed.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess subject to
the call of the Chair.
Accordingly (at 1 o’clock and 9 minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1330
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. BRESNAHAN) at 1 o’clock
and 30 minutes p.m.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Proceedings will resume on questions previously postponed.
Votes will be taken in the following
order:
Ordering the previous question on
House Resolution 1009; and
Adoption of House Resolution 1009, if
ordered.
The first electronic vote will be conducted as a 15-minute vote. Pursuant
to clause 9 of rule XX, the remaining
electronic vote will be conducted as a
5-minute vote.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 6945, SUPPORTING PREGNANT AND PARENTING WOMEN
AND FAMILIES ACT; PROVIDING
FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R.
6359,
PREGNANT
STUDENTS’
RIGHTS ACT; AND PROVIDING
FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.J.
RES. 140, PROVIDING FOR CONGRESSIONAL DISAPPROVAL OF
THE RULE SUBMITTED BY THE
BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT
RELATING
TO
PUBLIC
LAND
ORDER
NO.
7917
FOR
WITHDRAWAL OF FEDERAL LANDS;
COOK, LAKE, AND SAINT LOUIS
COUNTIES, MN
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on ordering
the previous question on the resolution
(H. Res. 1009) providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 6945) to amend
part A of title IV of the Social Security
Act to clarify the authority of States
to use funds for pregnancy centers, and
for other purposes; providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 6359) to require institutions of higher education
to disseminate information on the
rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for
other purposes; and providing for consideration of the joint resolution (H.J.
Res. 140) providing for congressional
disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

United States Code, of the rule submitted by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order No.
7917 for Withdrawal of Federal Lands;
Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis Counties,
MN, on which the yeas and nays were
ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 212, nays
210, not voting 9, as follows:
[Roll No. 34]
YEAS—212
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher

Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)

Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—210
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop

Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)

Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone

Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—9
Casar
Gimenez
Hunt

McClintock
Smith (NE)
Stefanik

Swalwell
Torres (NY)
Womack

b 1358
Messrs. GOTTHEIMER and CONAWAY changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’
to ‘‘nay.’’
Mr. BARR changed his vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the previous question was ordered.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the resolution.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
RECORDED VOTE

Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I demand a recorded vote.
A recorded vote was ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.027

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—ayes 213, noes 210,
not voting 8, as follows:
[Roll No. 35]
AYES—213
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher

Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal

Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney

Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

NOES—210

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H1139

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez

Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)

Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—8
Casar
Hunt
McClintock

Miller (OH)
Stefanik
Swalwell

Torres (NY)
Womack

b 1404
So the resolution was agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Mr. WOMACK. Mr. Speaker, I was unavoidably absent and unable to vote. Had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call
No. 34 and AYE on Roll Call No. 35.
f

SUPPORTING PREGNANT AND PARENTING WOMEN AND FAMILIES
ACT
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
pursuant to House Resolution 1009, I
call up the bill (H.R. 6945) to amend
part A of title IV of the Social Security
Act to clarify the authority of States
to use funds for pregnancy centers, and
for other purposes, and ask for its immediate consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
LALOTA). Pursuant to House Resolution 1009, the amendment in the nature
of a substitute consisting of the text of
Rules Committee Print 119–17 is adopted and the bill, as amended, is considered read.

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:
H.R. 6945
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled.
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Supporting
Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families
Act’’.
SEC.

2.

PROHIBITION ON DISCRIMINATION
AGAINST PREGNANCY CENTERS.

Section 404 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 604) is amended by adding at the end the
following:
‘‘(l) USE OF FUNDS FOR PREGNANCY CENTERS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—Nothing in this part shall
be construed to prohibit a State from using a
grant made under section 403 to support pregnancy centers.
‘‘(2) DEFINITION OF PREGNANCY CENTER.—In
paragraph (1), the term ‘pregnancy center’
means any organization, such as a pregnancy
resource center, pregnancy help center or organization, or pregnancy medical center, that—
‘‘(A) supports protecting the life of the mother
and the unborn child; and
‘‘(B) offers resources and services to mothers,
fathers, and families, including but not limited
to relationship counseling, prenatal and pregnancy education, pregnancy testing, diapers,
baby clothes, or other material supports.’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill,
as amended, shall be debatable for 1
hour equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Ways and
Means or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Missouri (Mr.
SMITH) and the gentlewoman from California (Ms. CHU) each will control 30
minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Missouri.
b 1410
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and submit extraneous material on the bill
under consideration.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Missouri?
There was no objection.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in favor of the
Supporting Pregnant and Parenting
Women and Families Act led by Representative FISCHBACH.
What this bill does is really pretty
simple. It ensures States will be able to
continue to use TANF funds for pregnancy resource centers and the maternal care they provide to pregnant
women and moms. That is it, Mr.
Speaker.
Pregnancy resource centers offered
material support and care to over 2
million women at more than 2,700 locations in 2024 alone, including diapers,
prenatal vitamins, parenting classes,
and transportation, just to name a few
of the many services provided to these
mothers.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.030

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1140

These services meet the core purposes of TANF. Yet, the Biden administration proposed a regulation to discriminate against the pro-life mission
of pregnancy resource centers by forbidding States from using TANF funds
for these centers. It was a deliberate
attempt to sidestep the law to achieve
a partisan political agenda. Nothing,
Mr. Speaker, in the TANF statute gave
the Biden administration or any other
future administration the ability to
target pregnancy resource centers.
Following pressure from the Committee on Ways and Means and this
Chamber, the Biden administration
withdrew the rule in its final days.
Think of what would have happened to
maternal care in this country. One of
the few places women can get care and
support would have been closed.
In my home State of Missouri, $3 out
of every $4 the State gives to pregnancy resource centers comes from
TANF, and it is not just Missouri.
Women in other States would have had
fewer choices for their own care.
That is why we are passing this bill,
to give pregnant women and moms a
choice about where they receive maternal care and to stop any future administration from taking the same action
as the Biden White House.
Democrats will talk until they are
blue in the face, Mr. Speaker, about a
woman’s right to choose, but they oppose this bill, which is all about empowering women to make their own
choices.
Why is that, Mr. Speaker? Simply because it doesn’t align with their political agenda. The hypocrisy is absolutely stunning, Mr. Speaker. Democrats only believe in choice when it is
the choice that their party would
make.
Republicans are on the side of pregnant women, moms, and children who
choose to get the help they need at one
of these centers.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this bill, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself
such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, as families across the
country are being crushed by rising
costs and stripped of their healthcare,
it is shameful that Republicans have
chosen to bring a bill to the floor that
does nothing to address these crises for
pregnant women and families.
Instead, the bill before us today
would allow Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families, or TANF, dollars to be
used to fund so-called crisis pregnancy
centers that have a proven track
record of intentionally lying to, misleading, and endangering women.
It is no coincidence that this bill is
being rushed to the floor this week as
Republicans once again prioritize appeasing a national anti-abortion group
in town for its annual rally instead of
addressing the real crises facing American families.
I want to paint a picture as to what
happens to a young woman who sus-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

pects that she may be pregnant. She
has a mix of emotions. She may have
overwhelming fear and anxiety, especially if she has few resources. She goes
to what she thinks is a medical center
or clinic, and it is called a pregnancy
center of some sort.
When she gets there, she is greeted so
warmly with open arms. There are people in white coats, who she assumes are
medical professionals. They tell her
she can get so many things for free:
pregnancy tests, ultrasounds, pregnancy counseling, and, after the birth,
even free diapers and formula. It all
sounds so wonderful to this woman
that she says sign me up.
They don’t tell this woman that, in
order to get these free services, she has
to first sit through an ideological or religious indoctrination session in which
all the reasons not to have an abortion
are given.
They don’t tell her that the person
administering the ultrasound has no
medical credentials, that, in fact, this
is not an official ultrasound, and that
she could be misdiagnosed.
They don’t tell her that half of the
personnel in the so-called clinic have
no medical credentials at all and,
therefore, are not equipped to advise on
any medical complications, such as an
ectopic pregnancy.
They don’t tell her that this is not a
medical clinic at all. In fact, because it
is not, this woman’s privacy is not protected, and her information could be
shared with the public.
The real world of the crisis pregnancy centers is exemplified by an OB/
GYN in Iowa, who has seen patients
who visited these centers and were told
that using contraceptives was the same
as having an abortion. She has seen patients who suffered miscarriages and
ectopic pregnancies because they were
misdiagnosed by these anti-abortion
centers.
These women were told that their
pregnancies were in the early stages or
that they were experiencing normal
amounts of pain because the staff
members they saw were not actual,
qualified medical professionals.
As a result, these women ended up in
the hospital, needing emergency care
and surgery to save their lives.
In Illinois, a woman seeking an abortion was deliberately misled by a fake
clinic. She was subjected to graphic
videos and told that having an abortion
would make her infertile and, ultimately, mentally ill.
Ultimately, she was coerced into carrying a pregnancy to term. After giving birth, she lost her job and health
coverage, and the so-called clinic never
offered real medical care or follow-up
support.
This is why the American Medical
Association and the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
have raised serious ethical and medical
concerns about these clinics.
Now, Republicans want to guarantee
that taxpayer dollars through these
TANF funds will fund these centers and

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

that there will be no accountability for
these dollars.
Let’s first be clear about what TANF
is actually supposed to be for. TANF
exists to help families experiencing
poverty meet their most basic needs
and stabilize their lives so parents can
work and children can thrive. TANF
was never intended to subsidize antiabortion propaganda or unregulated
sham clinics that endanger women’s
health. Yet, that is exactly what this
bill does.
Not only that, it goes beyond the regular TANF program, which requires reporting and accountability. Actually,
this bill says that nothing shall be construed to restrict TANF funding for
these centers, meaning that funding
could not be taken away from them
even if the center engages in deceptive
practices or even causes a woman’s
death.
b 1420
When the Ways and Means Committee marked up this bill last week,
Democrats
offered
commonsense
amendments that should have been
uncontroversial to anyone who cares
about women and families. We simply
proposed that TANF funds not go to
pregnancy centers that have engaged
in deceptive or misleading practices
that provide medically inaccurate information or that have endangered the
health of a woman seeking care.
We also offered amendments to address the real crisis affecting the TANF
program, which is the Trump administration’s decision to seek revenge
against five Democratic Governors by
preventing them from accessing $10 billion in already appropriated funds for
TANF and childcare.
Republicans rejected every one of
these amendments.
Clearly, this bill is not about supporting pregnant women and families.
It is about shielding deceptive actors,
supporting Trump’s revenge tactics,
and using public funds to advance an
extreme anti-abortion agenda.
If Republicans truly cared about
pregnant women and families, we
would be debating how to undo their $1
trillion cut to Medicaid, which rips
healthcare away from millions of pregnant women, new mothers, and children, and how to help the millions of
women seeing their health insurance
premiums skyrocket due to months of
Republican inaction.
Instead, this bill is merely an attempt to distract from these devastating realities with the ultimate
goal of appeasing the anti-abortion advocates parading around Washington
this week as countless women suffer
and die under extreme Republican
abortion bans. Their priorities are
clear and profoundly misguided.
I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘no.’’
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 5 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Minnesota (Mrs. FISCHBACH), the
sponsor of this bill.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.034

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the chairman for the opportunity to speak. I am so proud to rise
today in support of my legislation,
H.R. 6945, the Supporting Pregnant and
Parenting Women and Families Act.
For too long, previous Democrat administrations have weaponized the Department of Health and Human Services against pregnancy resource centers by attempting to cut off their
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, or TANF, funding. This bill puts a
definitive stop to that harassment. It
clarifies that these centers fundamentally meet the statutory purposes of
TANF by providing essential assistance
to children and expectant mothers.
The TANF block grant is built on
four specific statutory goals, and
States have broad authority to pursue
them all.
Let’s look at the second goal: to ‘‘end
the dependence of needy parents on
government benefits through work, job
preparation, and marriage.’’ Cash assistance alone does not end dependence. It often merely just manages it.
Pregnancy resource centers offer the
best hope of achieving this goal by providing parenting classes and life skills
training to help that mother move
from a crisis to self-sufficiency.
Pregnancy centers are the backbone
of community-based support. The impact of their work is undeniable.
In 2024 alone, over 2,700 centers aided
nearly 3.8 million women, children, and
families. These centers provided over
$452 million in total medical care, education, and material goods.
As Democrats continue to attack
pregnancy care centers, I have asked
them repeatedly if they have ever visited a center, ever bothered to go and
see what they are talking about because if they had, they would see the
compassion, the support, and love that
are present in these facilities. These
centers are staffed by trained men and
women who guide and support mothers,
fathers, children, and families. They
are for the families from pregnancy
through childbirth and beyond with
parenting classes and assistance such
as formula, diapers, and whatever else
that family may need.
The attempt to strip TANF funding
from these centers was never about fiscal responsibility. It was a targeted,
ideological attack on organizations
that provide a real alternative to abortion.
Democrats say choice, choice, choice
over and over, but they try to deny
women the choice to choose life.
H.R. 6945 codifies the operations of
TANF to ensure this funding stream
remains focused on its mission, helping
needy families and children, rather
than serving as a tool for ideological
gatekeeping.
I am incredibly proud of this bill,
which protects the most vulnerable
among us and ensures that every
woman facing adversity has the options, resources, and support she deserves.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1141

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, I would like
to point out that the previous speaker
said that these clinics have trained
staff, but many of these centers pose as
clinics, offer incorrect medical advice,
and even go so far as to wear scrubs
and white coats to appear as though
they are trained. Actually, fewer than
half of crisis pregnancy centers have a
licensed medical professional on staff.
Mr. Speaker, 95 percent do not provide
prenatal care, and only 1 out of 607 provides contraception, and the facilities
are unregulated.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Illinois (Mr. DAVIS).
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois. Mr. Speaker,
as we begin 2026 with Trump and Republican policies squeezing workers,
spiking costs, tanking job security, the
Republican leadership advances this
bill to divert money intended for poor
children to dangerous anti-abortion
centers.
When my home State of Illinois and
four other States are facing an illegal
reduction of about $8.9 billion in TANF
and SSBG funds due to political retaliation, the Republican leadership
chooses to move a bill restricting women’s reproductive choices.
If Republicans really wanted to help
parents care for their children, they
would work with Democrats to ensure
that HHS follows the law and immediately releases the childcare funds
that HHS is illegally delaying from
States across the country.
Illinois receives about $400 million
from the Child Care and Development
Fund and another $500 million from
TANF that help low-income working
families afford quality childcare.
Disruption to this funding will have
substantial, immediate, and destructive consequences to children, families,
businesses, and communities.
I am upset but not shocked that the
Republican leadership rejected my
amendment to this bill that would penalize HHS for illegally withholding
payments of TANF, Child Care Entitlement to States, or SSBG funding if the
agency fails to pay an amount due to a
State within 5 days by requiring the
agency to make a monthly payment of
the amount due plus interest.
HHS should be held accountable for
harming individuals, families, and
businesses.
I strongly oppose this bill that tramples on women’s rights to choose their
own best health interests.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 5 minutes to the gentleman
from New Jersey (Mr. SMITH), an incredible advocate for the unborn.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the distinguished
chairman for yielding and for his leadership. I especially want to thank
MICHELLE FISCHBACH for her leadership
and compassion by offering and authoring this legislation to protect pregnancy care centers from discrimination
and to ensure that they can continue
their important work of assisting families in need.

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Mr. Speaker, I was at a New Jersey
pregnancy center dinner a few years
ago when two women through tears of
joy expressed their deep and abiding
gratitude for the incredible love, respect, and care that persuaded them to
reverse their decision to abort their babies.
They spoke of how desperate, even
hopeless, they were. They spoke about
the pressure that they were under to
abort until they met the director of the
pregnancy resource center who reached
out to both of them at different times
but within about a month in a gentle
and nonjudgmental way.
b 1430
They chose life and thanked God, the
director, and the pregnancy resource
center for helping them avert the loss
of their precious babies’ lives.
Then, Mr. Speaker, two teenaged
girls took to the podium and spoke
about their lives: schools, sports,
friends, and their reverence for the
sanctity of human life.
Near the end of their remarks, they
turned toward the director of the center and thanked her for being there for
their moms through those very difficult times and said: If you weren’t
there for them, we would be dead.
This is coming from two girls standing at the podium, and that has been
replicated many, many times throughout the country. There are more than
55 pregnancy care centers in my district. I have been to many of them.
They are filled with the most loving,
compassionate, and honest people I
have ever met.
So I find all the smear that we always hear so objectionable. They are
an amazing group of women. They are
almost all women, who run these pregnancy care centers.
Consider the story of Jean Marie
Davis, a mother and a survivor of
human trafficking.
I know a little about human trafficking. I have written five laws on
trafficking, including the landmark
Trafficking Victims Protection Act of
2000. There is a big, heavy, trauma-informed emphasis on victims, and we
have one now pending to further that
effort.
This woman, Jean Marie Davis, is a
survivor of trafficking who says that
her life was saved by a pregnancy care
center.
She said: ‘‘I was trafficked in 33
States.’’
She went on: ‘‘Even though I was losing weight from the drugs, my belly
kept growing, and I soon discovered the
pregnancy that would ultimately save
my life.’’
Fighting despair and with only $1.38
to her name, she had almost no place
to turn. She was connected with a
woman named Phyllis at a local pregnancy care center.
She says:
The pregnancy center provided me
with free resources and support, and
then when the child was born to take

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.036

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1142

care of my son. I was able to realize
and pursue dreams I had never imagined.
That is because these people have
such compassion, not the smear we
hear from the other side. They have
compassion, and I am just amazed at
that, that the other side says these
things about these wonderful people.
Years later she applied, and now she
is the executive director of the
Branches Pregnancy Resource Center
in Vermont. She is giving back. She
was given so much by these individuals, and now she is giving back.
Across the U.S., there are more than
2,700 pregnancy centers offering mothers and their precious children an oasis
of love, compassion, and care.
One report found that in 2024, $452
million in free medical care was provided. I have been to these. There are
so many nurses at these pregnancy
care centers. They do ultrasounds.
Frankly, when the woman does see
the baby, it is transformational. Mr.
Speaker, you don’t get that in a
Planned Parenthood clinic at all. They
talk about the child being a nonentity
and not a human being.
Recognizing the extraordinary care
provided at these centers, some
States—there are at least six of them,
including the distinguished chairman’s
from Missouri—do provide TANF funding. Biden was in the process of promulgating a rule that would have precluded that.
We can’t allow that to happen now or
ever. This important legislation—
again, I can’t thank Michelle enough
for it—would ensure that pregnancy
centers cannot be excluded or restricted from receiving TANF funding
as a result of discrimination and the
smear campaign that they suffer.
Hopefully, the Supreme Court will
soon render its decision on a very important case coming out of my State,
and I do think it will be favorable.
These are amazing centers, and we
ought to be supporting them, not
smearing them.
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself
such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I wish the previous
speaker could have met this Massachusetts woman who sought care at a crisis pregnancy center after a Google advertisement led her to believe it was a
legitimate medical facility where she
could confirm her pregnancy. At Clear
Way,
a
nurse
administered
an
ultrasound and told the plaintiff that
she had a viable intrauterine pregnancy. The nurse was not licensed to
diagnose viable pregnancies and did not
undertake appropriate medical measures to rule out an ectopic pregnancy.
Rather than referring the patient for
immediate medical evaluation, Clear
Way staff focused on encouraging her
to continue the pregnancy. As a result
of the misdiagnosis, this woman’s ectopic pregnancy ruptured, causing massive internal bleeding and requiring
emergency surgery. She lost a fallopian
tube and narrowly avoided death.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Illinois (Mr. SCHNEIDER).
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Mr. Speaker, I include in the RECORD links to three articles. The first is: The American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
‘‘Issue Brief: Crisis Pregnancy Centers.’’ https://schneider.house.gov/sites/
evo-subsites/schneider.house.gov/files/
evo-media-document/crisis-pregnancycenters-rep-schneider.pdf.
The second is from the AMA Journal
of Ethics: ‘‘Why Crisis Pregnancy Centers Are Legal but Unethical.’’ https://
schneider.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/
schneider.house.gov/files/evo-mediadocument/why-crisis-pregnancy-cen
ters-are-legal-but-unethical-rep-schnei
derl0.pdf.
The third is an article by a number of
doctors from Women’s Health Reports:
‘‘Truth and Transparency in Crisis
Pregnancy Centers.’’ https://schneider.
house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/schneider
.house.gov/files/evo-media-document/
truth-and-transparency-in-crisis-preg
nancy-centers-rep-schneider.pdf.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Mr. Speaker, I
think it is shameful that my Republican colleagues have brought this bill
to the floor to funnel money to socalled crisis pregnancy centers and
away from programs that truly help
families in need.
My Republican colleagues are saying
that these centers help women. In reality, too many of these centers trick
women before they even walk in the
door.
They advertise themselves as real
medical clinics. They are not. They
might look like a normal doctor’s office with ultrasound machines and employees wearing lab coats, but the
coats are for show, and the employees
are not medical professionals.
Mr. Speaker, don’t be fooled. The primary purpose of these centers is to deceive women, and the organizations
promoting these centers are the same
organizations advocating for a national
abortion ban.
Here is what should concern us all:
These centers routinely spread medical
misinformation
and
intentionally
cause delays in accessing legitimate
healthcare. Their theory is delay long
enough and women in crisis are effectively forced to continue their pregnancies.
Now, Mr. Speaker, you will hear my
Republican colleagues tout that these
centers offer maternal care. They
don’t. Real maternal care requires real
medical professionals who offer real,
ethical, and comprehensive health
services, who are licensed and regulated, and who don’t have a personal
bias counter to their patients’ medical
interest or decisions.
Yet, my Republican colleagues want
to divert Federal TANF funding away
from families in need and to these clinics instead. This is a disgraceful diversion. If my Republican colleagues were
serious about helping children and families in need, let them speak out

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

against this administration’s illegal
payment freeze for childcare and child
welfare funding.
Right now, as we debate this bill on
eligibility for TANF spending, the
Trump administration is illegally holding up more than $10 billion in Federal
funding for childcare and family assistance funding, including TANF funds, to
States, including my own of Illinois, as
well as California, New York, Colorado,
and Minnesota.
The administration is illegally withholding payments to States for
childcare, foster care, child protective
services, and cash assistance to low-income families.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, I yield an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Illinois.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. They are hiding behind false claims and unauthorized administrative barriers in order to inflict
pain on States that the President dislikes.
Let me be clear. These payments are
legally required under the law, and this
freeze is unlawful.
The administration needs to pay the
States what they are owed.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘no’’ on the bill.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from
California (Mr. FONG).
Mr. FONG. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
in strong support of H.R. 6945, the Supporting
Pregnant
and
Parenting
Women and Families Act.
Across our Nation, more than 2,700
pregnancy centers serve nearly 2 million women and families each year. I
have seen firsthand my local pregnancy
centers in California and the services
they provide offering diapers, baby
clothes,
prenatal
education,
ultrasounds, housing referrals, and additional real, compassionate support
during life’s most vulnerable moments.
These services are valued at over $450
million annually and help families
choose stability, self-sufficiency, and
hope.
The Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families program was created to
strengthen families, reduce dependency, and ensure children can be cared
for in their own homes.
Pregnancy resource centers, especially in rural communities, clearly advance those goals. However, under the
Biden administration, a proposed rule
was issued that singled out pregnancy
centers and preemptively suggested
State spending on these organizations
would no longer be allowable.
The Biden rule was never finalized,
but there is a need to make sure future
administrations do not pursue similar
actions. H.R. 6945 ensures fairness. It
clarifies that States may continue
partnering with pregnancy centers
without political interference now and
in the future.
Mr. Speaker, this bill stands for
mothers, children, and families, and I
urge my colleagues to support it.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.038

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

b 1440
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, I wish we
could think of the woman in Pennsylvania who was pregnant who sought
care at what she thought was a medically certified clinic, but during her
appointment, the staff told her she had
already miscarried and was sent home.
As time went on, though, she continued experiencing pregnancy symptoms,
so she later went to a licensed doctor
who told her she was still pregnant and
that the crisis pregnancy center had
given her the wrong information. This
misdiagnosis greatly increased her risk
of having pregnancy complications.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from California (Mr. THOMPSON).
Mr. THOMPSON of California. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman for
yielding.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in opposition to this legislation that prioritizes
a partisan agenda over the health, privacy, and autonomy of women.
Most of these so-called pregnancy
centers are not licensed medical clinics. What does that mean? It means
they can and often do share women’s
private medical information without
their consent. It means they can and
often do provide false and misleading
medical information about abortion,
contraception, and other reproductive
health services for women.
In California, my home State, our attorney general was compelled to issue
a consumer alert warning the public
about deceptive practices employed by
these centers.
At a time when access to reproductive healthcare is under attack, our
Republican colleagues are advancing a
bill that funnels resources to organizations that mislead women rather than
provide comprehensive medical care.
Let me repeat: Most of these socalled pregnancy centers are not licensed medical clinics. How can we, in
good conscience, send our constituents
for healthcare to unlicensed facilities?
I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘no’’ on
this measure.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentlewoman
from South Carolina (Mrs. BIGGS).
Mrs. BIGGS of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, the proudest title that I carry
is one that was given to me some 26
years ago from my son: Mama. I have
also been a nurse for more than 30
years. Not only do I have my doctorate
in family practice but also in psychiatric mental health.
I have spent my entire life caring for
others, especially women and families
in crisis. I have listened to their fears,
and I have worked to make sure that
they weren’t facing those moments
alone. That is why I rise today in support of H.R. 6945, the Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families Act.
As thousands gather in Washington
for the March for Life, we are reminded
that the pro-life cause isn’t just about
protecting the unborn, but it is about

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1143

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

honoring life at every single stage.
That means showing up with real help,
not just during the pregnancy, but as
families begin the journey of nurturing
a child.
Under the Biden administration,
there were efforts to block States from
partnering with pregnancy centers.
This bill pushes back. It protects a
State’s ability to work with trusted
local organizations, centers that offer
prenatal care, parenting classes, counseling, and everyday necessities like
diapers, formula, and baby clothes.
I have visited centers like this in my
own district and seen the compassion
that they offer firsthand. These are
places where women are met with dignity, not judgment, and where families
are supported not just through pregnancy, but long after.
This bill reflects what we believe:
that every single life is a gift from
God, every mother deserves compassion, and every child deserves a chance
because, as Scripture reminds us: ‘‘I
will praise thee; for I am fearfully and
wonderfully made.’’
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support
this important legislation, and I urge
my colleagues to do the same.
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, may I inquire
as to how much time is remaining.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentlewoman from California has 121⁄2 minutes remaining.
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, I would like
to talk about Kentucky, where a
postpartum nurse with 20 years of experience was motivated to volunteer at
a crisis pregnancy center. During her
training, she learned that the clinic
was using expired disinfectants to sanitize ultrasound equipment. Not only
that, the kind of disinfectant that the
clinic was using was ineffective in targeting human papillomavirus, which
causes 90 percent of cervical cancer
cases.
The volunteer nurse quit. She filed
whistleblower complaints with the
State, but nothing was ever done, highlighting the lack of accountability at
the centers.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 21⁄2 minutes to
the gentleman from Texas (Mr. DOGGETT).
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Speaker, in their
incessant drive to impose a national
ban on all forms of abortion, Republicans continue to block relief for millions of Americans who are struggling
with soaring ObamaCare health insurance premiums. Now, today, they offer
this bill to funnel taxpayer dollars to
fake health clinics.
To deceive women, these so-called
pregnancy crisis centers use medical
jargon and dress up in scrubs, yet most
of the 2,600 clinics do not have a single
licensed medical professional. Instead,
they rely on fear and misinformation
to discourage vulnerable women as
they are trying to make one of the
most important healthcare decisions
about what is best for them.
Much more shocking than the waste
that is promoted through this bill is

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

the indifference with which so many
extremist Republicans have shown to
the right to life, the right to life for
the mother, the right to life for American women.
I chaired an Austin field hearing last
August, and I heard dozens of tragic
stories from Texas women like Kaitlyn
Kash and Amanda Zurawski, forced to
the brink of death before they could receive care for a miscarriage, hemorrhage, or sepsis.
An obstetrician, Dr. Donell Oliver,
testified: ‘‘Women are dying; families
are suffering; and medical professionals’ hands are being tied.’’ That is
the result of the kind of strict abortion
ban Republicans have imposed on
Texas women that some here want to
impose on all 50 States and all women
in our country.
I think the death certificates for so
many other women who have been denied treatment for pregnancy complications should really read the truth,
which is ‘‘Cause of Death: Republican
abortion ban.’’
For every American whose life is
threatened by Republican extremist interference, I strongly oppose this bill
and urge its rejection.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
Democrats are fear-mongering today.
The majority of pregnancy resource
centers have voluntarily signed on to
industry standards, a call to commitment of care and competence created
by Heartbeat International. These
standards set an ethical code where
they agree to adopt a transparent and
honest service model.
According to a recent report that
surveyed 2,750 different pregnancy centers in 2025, there were 4,779 licensed
medical professionals on staff, and 5,396
licensed medical professional volunteers.
I include in the RECORD a copy of
Heartbeat International’s ‘‘Our Commitment of Care and Competence.’’
OUR COMMITMENT OF CARE & COMPETENCE
Clients are served without regard to age,
race, income, nationality, religious affiliation, disability or other arbitrary circumstances.
Clients are treated with kindness and compassion, in a caring manner.
Clients always receive honest and open answers.
Client information is kept securely and
confidentially and only released with the client’s signed authorization or as required by
law.
Clients receive accurate information about
pregnancy, fetal development, lifestyle
issues, and related concerns.
We do not offer, recommend, or refer for
abortions or abortifacients, or contraceptives. We are committed to offering accurate
information about related risks and procedures.
All of our advertising and communications
are truthful and honest, and accurately describe the services we offer.
We provide a safe environment by screening and equipping all staff and volunteers
interacting with clients.
We are governed by a Board of Directors
and operate in accordance with our articles
of incorporation, bylaws, and stated purpose
and mission.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.040

H21JAPT1

H1144

We comply with applicable legal and regulatory requirements regarding employment,
fundraising, financial management, taxation, and public disclosure including the filing of all applicable government reports in a
timely manner.
All services are provided in accordance
with pertinent and applicable laws. Medical
services are provided in accordance with
medical standards, under the supervision and
direction of a licensed physician (or advanced clinical provider as permitted by
law).
All of our staff and volunteers receive appropriate training to uphold these standards.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 4 minutes to the gentleman
from Indiana (Mr. YAKYM).
Mr. YAKYM. Mr. Speaker, from hearing my Democratic colleagues talk
today, it is clear that none of them has
ever been to a pregnancy resource center, and they certainly have never used
their services.
Mr. Speaker, 17 years ago, my wife,
Sallyann, and I found out we were expecting our first child. Sallyann
thought she was having some issues
with our pregnancy when she was only
7 weeks pregnant. We were young, and
we were scared. We didn’t have a place
to turn until one of her friends suggested that we go to a pregnancy resource center.
We went down to the Women’s Care
Center in South Bend, where they welcomed us with open and loving arms.
They gave her an ultrasound, and for
the very first time, we saw our child,
who, at that time, was about the size of
a peanut. Half of that peanut was a
heartbeat. Most importantly, they assured us that our child was okay and
would be just fine.
b 1450
When we went to leave, I had just one
question for them: How much do we
owe you? They looked at us and they
said: Guys, the services that we provide
here are free. You can go on your way.
They assured us that our baby was
healthy, and they gave us such peace of
mind.
Here we are, 17 years later, and our
daughter Elle is smart. She is beautiful. She is a junior in high school,
and we are out looking for colleges.
The pregnancy resource center in my
community was there for us when we
were young and scared, when we had
very limited resources, but, unfortunately, if my Democrat colleagues had
their way, our healthcare would have
been denied.
Why deny the Sallyann Yakym’s of
the world access to the care that they
need? Why deny people like my daughter, Elle, the care to make sure that
they are okay?
I wish my friends from the other side
of the aisle would simply join me in
voting ‘‘yes’’ today on this measure.
Mr. Speaker, I thank my colleague,
the gentlewoman from Minnesota (Mrs.
FISCHBACH), for the introduction of this
bill, and I urge my colleagues to vote
‘‘yes.’’
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, let me say,
there is a comprehensive study by the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Alliance for Women’s Rights and Gender Equality that studied 607 crisis
pregnancy centers across nine States,
and they documented a consistent pattern of deception, misinformation, and
patient harm.
Nearly two-thirds of the centers promoted patently false or biased medical
claims about pregnancy, abortions,
contraception, or reproductive health
providers, and fewer than half reported
having a licensed medical professional
on staff.
These are not isolated incidents.
These are standard practices for these
centers.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentlewoman from Minnesota (Ms.
MORRISON).
Ms. MORRISON. Mr. Speaker, I rise
in strong opposition to H.R. 6945.
The Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families Act is yet
another Republican betrayal cruelly
masked by a misleading title.
After spending the last few weeks
threatening access to childcare support
and doing literally nothing to help millions
of
Americans
afford
their
healthcare, Republicans want to direct
taxpayer dollars away from helping
families afford necessities like food,
rent, and childcare to crisis pregnancy
centers that prey on vulnerable women
seeking
legitimate
reproductive
healthcare.
We have heard today that wonderful,
caring people staff these crisis pregnancy centers, and I don’t doubt that,
but crisis pregnancy centers do not
provide medical care, though they
imply that they do. Crisis pregnancy
centers are unregulated, deceptive, and
dangerous.
As an OB/GYN myself for more than
20 years, I have seen far too many patients who have had, at best, confusing
and, at worst, life-threatening experiences at crisis pregnancy centers. They
don’t serve patients. They serve the
anti-abortion agenda.
Let me be clear: Every person has the
right and deserves the dignity to make
their own healthcare decisions, free
from intimidation, deception, and coercion. At a time when our country has a
shameful maternal and infant mortality crisis and is facing a worsening
shortage of obstetricians, the so-called
pro-life movement is focused not on
helping women or supporting their
families or delivering the IVF coverage
the President promised; they are focused on denying women their reproductive rights and failing to deliver for
American families.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
stand for women and families, for dignity and for freedom, and vote ‘‘no.’’
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
holy cow. The things that you hear
from the other side in this body could
not be so—not truthful—false.
They paint with a broad brush and
say the most ridiculous items, saying
that pregnancy resource centers do not
help anyone. Give me a break. Where I
come from, whenever someone says

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

something useless, we call it hogwash.
They are swimming in hogwash on that
side of the aisle.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, well, it is not
hogwash to this woman in Georgia. She
sought care from an unregulated clinic
that offered free ultrasounds and medical advice. She thought that was so
great. The ultrasound technician incorrectly informed her that her baby’s
kidneys were filled with water and that
she needed to see a primary care doctor.
The diagnosis was incorrect, but the
stress of that misdiagnosis severely impacted the mother. She said: The irony
in all this is that they could have
caused me to lose a perfectly healthy
pregnancy.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the
gentlewoman from Wisconsin (Ms.
MOORE).
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. Mr. Speaker, I include in the RECORD a news article titled: ‘‘Child care providers reporting unnerving stakeouts’’ by Kristen
Taketa.
[From the Union-Tribune, Jan. 21, 2026]
CHILD CARE PROVIDERS REPORTING
UNNERVING STAKEOUTS
(By Kristen Taketa)
Some San Diego child care providers say
they are being harassed and fear for their
safety amid a campaign by conservative activists and the Trump administration over
broad but unsubstantiated suggestions of
fraud.
Meanwhile, billions of dollars in child care
funding is up in the air after the Trump administration last week moved to freeze $10
billion in funding for social services, including child care and cash assistance for low-income families, in five Democratic-led states
until it investigates.
A New York federal judge temporarily
halted the freeze on Friday, a day after the
five states challenged the freeze in court.
The states called it a politically motivated, ‘‘extraordinary and cruel action’’ and
said the administration has shown neither
evidence of fraud nor the legal authority to
withhold mandated program funding.
The freeze could affect $5 billion in funding
due to California that helps pay for state
child care subsidy programs serving more
than 300,000 children of low-income families.
The subsidies come in the form of vouchers
that families use to pay child care providers.
In the past week, conservative activists
have been posting on social media the names
and phone numbers of child care providers,
including in San Diego County, suggesting
without evidence that they are benefiting
from public funding but not actually providing child care.
Several local providers say that since then,
they have begun seeing people loitering outside their homes or sitting in parked cars
with cameras, watching them.
One San Diego child care provider whose
name and phone number were posted online
by a local activist said that ever since then,
her phone has been ‘‘flooded’’ with calls, and
she has seen people loitering around her
home with recording devices. The San Diego
Union-Tribune is not identifying her due to
safety concerns.
‘‘This has raised serious safety concerns
for my family and my business. It’s not
right!’’ she wrote in a text message.
The harassment is also racist, providers
say—those in San Diego who have been targeted are overwhelmingly of African or Middle Eastern descent.

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.008

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

Samsam Khalif, a Somali American who
has been a family child care provider in San
Diego for 18 years, was frightened last week
when, as she was driving children to her
home for a day of child care, she saw two
men with a camera sitting in a car outside
her home.
She circled the block a few times, but they
didn’t leave until she got out of her car and
walked the children to her home. They drove
away, she said, after they saw her with the
children.
Khalif said she is so scared that she avoids
going out unless she has to go shopping. She
reactivated her home security system last
week.
The safety concerns are especially acute
for family child care providers, who run child
care businesses out of their own homes.
Some providers have their own children or
other family members living at their place of
business.
Yessika Magdaleno, a family child care
provider of 25 years, said last week she
hasn’t faced harassment yet but worries she
will, considering she is an officer with a
child care providers union.
She counseled her young-adult children
last week on safety, telling them to look out
for anybody who may be watching or following them, and to be ready to call 911 if
anyone threatens them.
‘‘You do your work with fear. You don’t
know who’s going to show up at your place,
and you have all of these little children in
your care,’’ said Magdaleno, who lives in Orange County and is the United Domestic
Workers union president for the district that
includes San Diego County.
‘‘They’re doing things that, as a child care
provider, you will never think will happen to
you. Because all you’re doing is taking care
of the children and educating them, right?’’
The harassment has drawn attention from
local Democratic leaders.
‘‘What the hell are we doing here where
children, at day care, might be subjected to
extremists showing up at the door of the
home that they’re receiving care, to investigate whether or not there’s actually child
care
happening?’’
San
Diego
City
Councilmember Sean Elo-Rivera said at a
UDW news conference Thursday. ‘‘Child care
should be universal and should be affordable
for everyone, and it sure as hell should be
saved from extremists.’’
The targeting—plus the potential loss of
funding—has shaken an industry in California that has been historically underpaid,
understaffed and run almost entirely by
women, most of them women of color and
many immigrants.
Government subsidies for child care cover
only some of the cost of care, despite California’s recent additional increases in subsidy
rates for providers and funded child care
slots.
Child care providers frequently make personal sacrifices to run their businesses, often
putting in long days, enlisting family members to work unpaid or forgoing adequate
pay and benefits, such as time off for themselves.
In 2024, the median annual wage for a child
care worker in California was $38,220, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
‘‘Child care providers are some of the most
hardworking, selfless, incredible humans
that are raising our future generation,’’ said
Kimberly McDougal, senior vice president at
YMCA Childcare Resource Service in San
Diego County. ‘‘The fact that they’re even
having to go through this is sad.’’
Child care leaders now worry that losing
funding could force some child care providers
to close their doors, which would exacerbate
California’s child care shortage.
‘‘It’s very fragile. Child care providers operate . . . on a very, very razor-thin line,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1145

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

subsidies being so low,’’ said Max Arias,
chair of Child Care Providers United, a union
that represents more than 40,000 family child
care providers in California.
The harassment comes as the White House
targets child care providers and Somali communities, part of a growing conservative
focus following years of state and federal investigations into allegations of fraud in Minnesota’s child care system and social services, some involving Somali American business owners.
That has culminated in what the Trump
administration has called its largest immigration enforcement action, with thousands
of officers deployed last month to Minnesota
in part to investigate the child care fraud allegations.
That crackdown led to last week’s killing
of Renee Good by an ICE officer Wednesday.
In early December, Trump shocked observers with his comments during a Cabinet
meeting in which he called Somali people
‘‘garbage’’ and said, ‘‘They contribute nothing. I don’t want them in our country.’’
Weeks later, a conservative YouTuber
named Nick Shirley posted a video in which
he recorded Minneapolis Somali-run child
care businesses and accused them of fraud,
claiming they got public funding but did not
serve children.
Afterward, Minnesota investigators visited
10 businesses he identified and found that
nine were operating normally; the 10th had
not yet opened for the day when officials arrived.
Shirley’s video prompted other conservative activists around the country, including
in San Diego, to follow his lead.
In San Diego, one proponent of unfounded
fraud allegations has been activist Amy
Reichert, who founded Restore San Diego in
2020, an organization whose stated goal is to
‘‘get the government out of our lives.’’
In the past week, Reichert has promoted
her claims on Fox News and identified by
name more than a dozen San Diego County
family child care providers on the social
media platform X, saying they do not actually serve children.
Her posts contained excerpts from publicly
available state reports, with providers’
names and phone numbers listed, that noted
if there were no children present at the time
of their unannounced visits; some reports
also noted violations of state regulations,
such as missing child or employee records.
Child care providers have called the claims
reckless and based on false assumptions.
‘‘There are many reasons why children may
not be present when an inspector is on-site,’’
said McDougal of YMCA’s Childcare Resource Service.
Providers identified on social media said
children weren’t there at the time of inspection because they serve children after school
or at night; others had kids absent due to illness.
Not all children who are enrolled are
present in child care at the same time, depending on their families’ schedules.
‘‘They (are) just accusing us. And that’s
lying. And that’s wrong for you to put lie(s)
out there,’’ Khalif said.
Reichert told the Union-Tribune she had
not contacted any of the providers; she said
she ‘‘didn’t want to give any appearance of
harassment.’’
The child care subsidy system has several
procedures in place to protect against fraud,
McDougal said. Her organization and Child
Development Associates are the two nonprofits that administer subsidies to providers
in San Diego County.
The nonprofits check providers’ enrollment
with their licensed capacity, review thousands of monthly attendance sheets, validate
signatures and verifications of employment

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

and eligibility and compare providers’ rate
sheets to invoices, among other things,
McDougal said.

Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to H.R. 6945.
Despite the grandiose title, Supporting
Pregnant
and
Parenting
Women and Families Act, this bill
carves out—let’s keep the main thing
to main thing. What it does, it carves
out an earmark for an industry with a
narrow ideological mission to provide,
I guess what I call anti-abortion, but
Mr. Chairman over there, he called it
pro-life counseling services.
Actually, this just does not fit within
the four core purposes of the TANF
bill, which is why the Biden administration prohibited this. No more that
we provide moneys for abortion counseling, which if you stop and think
about it, it would fit more neatly into
the core provisions of the TANF bill,
and that is to prevent unwanted pregnancies. We don’t provide abortion
clinics with TANF moneys nor should
we provide it to these clinics.
Mr. Speaker, I hear the tortured explanation of how this fits into the core
duties of the TANF bill, and I hear
them talking about the diapers and the
formula and all the wonderful things.
The March of Dimes provides all that
stuff, too, but we don’t provide them
with TANF funds.
No. This is a diversion from the already underfunded TANF program
which has been flat funded for 30 years
at $16.5 billion and now we have, according to the chairman, millions of
women, 2 million, and 7,000 centers
that are now going to be able to access
TANF dollars.
These TANF dollars were meant not
to provide baby wipes and diapers for
babies up to 6 months old, but to help
a woman navigate her way into the
workforce to get job training, to have
cash assistance until she can get on her
feet, not to provide moneys to stand up
this ideological and, quite frankly, religious organization.
That is why I oppose this bill. Mr.
Speaker, I am going to later on offer an
amendment that would allow States to
use TANF dollars, again, not undermining this bill, but adding a section
that would allow States to use TANF
dollars for security at childcare facilities and to be able to gather evidence
of harassment of childcare providers
and to give local law enforcement the
ability to secure a place for children
because one of the core responsibilities
of the TANF funding is to provide
childcare.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
SIMPSON). The time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, I yield an additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman
from Wisconsin.
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. This all
comes because there have been vigilantes showing up at childcare centers.
These are people who are not Health
Department officials, not auditors
showing up and harassing TANF recipients who need childcare as we deny

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.011

H21JAPT1

H1146

States’ moneys for childcare, but we
have vigilantes, right-wingers that are
showing up and they are creating safety concerns in our daycares.
Mr. Speaker, I include in the RECORD
my amendment.
Ms. Moore of Wisconsin moves to recommit the bill H.R. 6945 to the Committee on
Ways and Means with instructions to report
the same back to the House forthwith with
the following amendment:
Strike all after the enacting clause and insert the following:
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Supporting
Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families Act’’.
SEC.

2.

PROHIBITION ON DISCRIMINATION
AGAINST PREGNANCY CENTERS.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Section 404 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 604) is amended by adding at the end
the following:
‘‘(l) USE OF FUNDS FOR PREGNANCY CENTERS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—Nothing in this part
shall be construed to prohibit a State from
using a grant made under section 403 to support pregnancy centers.
‘‘(2) SAFETY.—Nothing in this part shall be
construed to prohibit a State from using
funds from a grant made under section 403 to
provide security for child care facilities or to
obtain information about harassment of
child care facilities for law enforcement purposes.
‘‘(3) DEFINITION OF PREGNANCY CENTER.—In
paragraph (1), the term ‘pregnancy center’
means any organization, such as a pregnancy
resource center, pregnancy help center or organization, or pregnancy medical center,
that—
‘‘(A) supports protecting the life of the
mother and the unborn child; and
‘‘(B) offers resources and services to mothers, fathers, and families, including but not
limited to relationship counseling, prenatal
and pregnancy education, pregnancy testing,
diapers, baby clothes, or other material supports.’’.

b 1500
Mr. Speaker, let the record reflect
that this bill maintains the status quo
of funding. Right now, people can use
TANF dollars for funding. That is how
it has always been. This is just protecting that it continues to do so because the prior President, President
Biden, decided to try to eliminate it for
the first time in history. We are trying
to prevent it so that no future administration can do that. Mr. Speaker, I do
want to talk about one individual. We
hear all kinds of examples over here.
Let me talk about a 21-year-old
named Faith who found out she was
pregnant. While driving down the highway, she saw a sign for a pregnancy resource center in Rolla, Missouri, my
congressional district.
While sharing her initial visit, Faith
said that the center specifically told
her: ‘‘Anything you need, we will help
you get it.’’ She was shunned by her
family and pressured by her fiance to
abort their unborn child.
After being shunned, Faith decided to
return to the pregnancy resource center in Rolla, Missouri. Through talking
with those at the center, Faith realized
that she ultimately did want to have
her child. She gave birth to her son,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Noah. Now, years later, Faith volunteers at the very center that helped her
life and protected her son, Noah.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself
such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I would like to clarify
that this bill actually allows these
funds to be free of any accountability.
It actually changes the way in which
these TANF funds are being used.
Right now, there has to be accountability if States use TANF funds for
the crisis pregnancy centers. What this
bill does is, by amending section 404 of
the Social Security Act to state that
nothing in this part may be construed
to restrict TANF funding for pregnancy centers, this bill actually overrides TANF’s statutory purposes, reporting requirements, penalty authority, and HHS enforcement provisions.
As a result, any future Federal effort
to limit condition or review TANF
funding for these crisis pregnancy centers could be challenged as prohibited
by this statute.
Even if that center engages in deceptive advertising and does actions that
even result in the death of a woman,
there would be nothing that could be
done about that crisis pregnancy center.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the
gentlewoman from Wisconsin (Ms.
MOORE).
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. Mr. Speaker, I have a motion at the desk. I am
closing. I have an amendment at the
desk, Mr. Speaker.
As I indicated, my amendment, Mr.
Speaker, would be added onto section 2
of the bill and would just enable
childcare
centers—TANF
to
fund
childcare centers, which are now under
siege and really compromising the security of our children.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
SIMPSON). Is the gentlewoman asking
for unanimous consent to insert the
text of her amendment?
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, I ask for unanimous consent.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Wisconsin?
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I object.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Objection is heard.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself
the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, the truth is abundantly
clear. Both the American Medical Association and The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists have
raised serious ethical and medical concerns about so-called crisis pregnancy
centers.
These facilities are unregulated.
They have no obligation to provide accurate medical information. They are
not subject to HIPAA. They are not required to protect patient confidentiality. Yet, Republicans are deter-

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 9920

mined to send them Federal taxpayer
dollars anyway.
I talked about this very comprehensive report by the Alliance for Women’s
Rights and Gender Equality, which
studied 607 crisis pregnancy centers
across 9 States. They documented patients’ experiences at the centers.
In one case, a patient seeking abortion care was misled into believing she
was too early in pregnancy to receive
medical care and was encouraged to
delay seeing a licensed provider, despite experiencing symptoms consistent with a pregnancy complication.
In another documented case, a patient was falsely told that abortion
would cause infertility and severe mental illness, information that directly
contradicted established medical evidence.
Several patients reported being reassured that severe pain or bleeding was
normal, only to later require emergency medical intervention when complications were left untreated.
If Republicans truly cared about
TANF oversight, they would have spoken out when millions of TANF dollars
were stolen from struggling families in
Mississippi to build a volleyball stadium and when the Trump administration stepped in to shield the perpetrators from accountability. Instead, they
were silent.
The bottom line is simple. Anti-abortion centers that spread misinformation and put women at risk should not
receive taxpayer dollars. Certainly,
they should not receive taxpayer dollars that are completely unregulated.
If we want to support parents and
pregnant women, let’s continue helping
them. That is why the House should reject this particular bill, and I urge my
colleagues to vote ‘‘no.’’
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, Democrats will make
all kinds of wild and ridiculous claims
about pregnancy resource centers.
They have tried to twist giving diapers
and ultrasounds to moms into some
sort of nefarious activity, giving diapers to moms.
The millions of women who have
sought and received care at a pregnancy resource center know the truth.
I hope every American is watching this
debate today on this floor.
Democrats distract and fearmonger
because they can’t admit that pregnancy resource centers fulfill the purposes of TANF. These centers provide
material support and assistance to
women in need and reduce dependence
on government assistance. They are eligible for State TANF funds, period.
I thank Representative FISCHBACH for
her very hard work on this bill. She has
been a champion—a champion for
women, mothers, and children her entire career. I am glad she once again
led the effort this Congress to preserve
funding for pregnancy resource centers.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.044

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

Ms. DELBENE. Mr. Speaker, I have heard
story after story of people seeking care from
crisis pregnancy centers only to be provided
with misleading or deceptive medical information or services that endanger their health.
That is why during last week’s markup on
this bill, I introduced a responsible amendment
that would have prohibited fraudulent centers
from receiving TANF funds funded by taxpayer
dollars.
Republicans regularly talk about rooting out
government waste, fraud, and abuse, but not
a single one supported my amendment.
It’s clear that Republicans have no interest
in addressing fraud if it conflicts with their dogmatic ideology even at the cost of their constituents’ health.
Republicans are outraged at the idea of
simply holding crisis pregnancy centers to the
same medical standards as licensed health facilities.
Why are Republicans willing to categorically
turn a blind eye to the countless horror stories
happening at these sham health clinics?
It is because for Republicans, when it
comes to women’s health, accountability isn’t
required.
This bill defines pregnancy centers as organizations that support ‘‘protecting the life of the
mother and the unborn child,’’ but Republican’s commitment to funneling taxpayer dollars to medical grifters endangers both.
I urge my colleagues to vote No on this irresponsible bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 1009,
the previous question is ordered on the
bill, as amended.
The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
MOTION TO RECOMMIT

Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. Mr. Speaker, I have a motion to recommit at the
desk.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will report the motion to recommit.
The Clerk read as follows:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Ms. Moore of Wisconsin moves to recommit the bill H.R. 6945 to the Committee on
Ways and Means.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 2(b) of rule XIX, the previous question is ordered on the motion
to recommit.
The question is on the motion to recommit.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. Mr. Speaker, on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will be
postponed.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1147

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

b 1510
PROVIDING FOR CONGRESSIONAL
DISAPPROVAL OF THE RULE
SUBMITTED BY THE BUREAU OF
LAND MANAGEMENT RELATING
TO PUBLIC LAND ORDER NO. 7917
FOR WITHDRAWAL OF FEDERAL
LANDS; COOK, LAKE, AND SAINT
LOUIS COUNTIES, MN
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to House Resolution 1009, I call
up the joint resolution (H.J. Res. 140)
providing for congressional disapproval
under chapter 8 of title 5, United
States Code, of the rule submitted by
the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order No. 7917 for
Withdrawal of Federal Lands; Cook,
Lake, and Saint Louis Counties, MN,
and ask for its immediate consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the joint
resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 1009, the joint
resolution is considered read.
The text of the joint resolution is as
follows:
H.J. RES. 140
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled, That Congress disapproves the rule submitted by the Bureau of
Land Management of the Department of the
Interior relating to Public Land Order No.
7917 for Withdrawal of Federal Lands; Cook,
Lake, and Saint Louis Counties, MN (88 Fed.
Reg. 6308 (January 31, 2023)), and such rule
shall have no force or effect.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
joint resolution shall be debatable for 1
hour equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Natural Resources or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Arkansas (Mr.
WESTERMAN) and the gentleman from
California (Mr. HUFFMAN) each will
control 30 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Arkansas (Mr. WESTERMAN).
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on H.J. Res.
140.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Arkansas?
There was no objection.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of this
Congressional Review Act resolution,
which would overturn the Biden administration’s reckless withdrawal of more
than 225,000 acres in the Superior National Forest from mineral exploration
and development.
Mr. Speaker, at issue is the Duluth
Complex in northern Minnesota, one of
the largest mineral deposits on the
planet, including the world’s largest
copper-nickel deposit.

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

The Federal Government routinely
granted and renewed mineral leases to
these deposits beginning in the 1960s.
Decades of planning, exploration, investment, and environmental reviews
have gone into the region, and with
good reason.
The minerals in the Duluth Complex
include copper, nickel, and cobalt.
They are the ones that make up the
21st century economy and help it run.
They are the essential inputs for telecommunications devices, cutting-edge
defense systems, and much more.
As we are all keenly aware, the Chinese Communist Party has a stranglehold on far too many mineral supply
chains. Mining in the Duluth Complex
was poised to change that. It was going
to help usher in a new era of American
mineral dominance and create and support thousands of American jobs. It
was going to help end our dependence
on foreign adversaries and reorder the
entire global mineral market, positioning the United States at the center
and driving our rivals to the margins.
When President Biden abruptly
closed off 225,000 acres of Federal land
in the Duluth Complex for mineral development, he threw a future of American abundance, security, and global
leadership into chaos. The decision undermined America’s economic, military, and strategic interests and those
of our allies.
The minerals in the Duluth Complex
are called ‘‘critical’’ for a reason. We
need them. The whole world needs
them. Nations, businesses, militaries,
and individual consumers are going to
acquire these minerals. The only question is whether they will be mined here
in the United States by American
workers, protected by American labor
laws, and with the strongest environmental standards and most advanced
mining techniques, or not.
The Duluth Complex is also home to
a world-class helium reserve, which has
attracted investment from investors.
Specifically, the withdrawal itself
locks up roughly 11,000 acres for helium
exploration, blocking development of
one of the largest and most concentrated helium deposits in the entire
world.
Don’t let the rhetoric around this
issue confuse what is at stake here.
The resolution before us today is about
more than just one project. There are
two options, Mr. Speaker: mineral
dominance or mineral dependence.
There isn’t a third option, and it is
long past time for the Federal Government to act like it.
Our global allies rely on America’s
leadership. If we are to remain a leader
in the global economy, then domestic
mineral abundance is a strategic necessity, not a political football.
The resolution before us does not
mandate projects, mining sites, firms,
or schedules. It simply reverses the
Biden
administration’s
unilateral
short-circuiting of the normal permitting process.

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.010

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1148

This resolution is a step toward balance and the rule of law. It is a step toward the mineral abundance that the
American people deserve and that
Washington has denied them for too
long.
I thank the gentleman from Minnesota (Mr. STAUBER) for introducing
this resolution and for his tireless
work on behalf of his constituents.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support the legislation, and I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in strong
opposition to H.J. Res. 140, a resolution
that would threaten America’s beloved
Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness in northern Minnesota.
Mr. Speaker, Boundary Waters draws
more visitors than any other wilderness in the country. Millions of Americans have paddled, fished, swum, and
found solace among its pristine lakes
and forests. It supports a multibilliondollar outdoor economy, thousands of
jobs, and a way of life that has been
passed down for generations.
It is an area that Presidents, reaching back to Teddy Roosevelt, and Members of Congress on both sides of the
aisle have long recognized in terms of
its value, and we have protected it as
part of our American heritage.
Yet, the Boundary Waters have been
under threat for years. Twin Metals,
owned by Antofagasta, a Chilean mining company with close ties to China,
has been lobbying for years to set up a
mine just outside the wilderness area,
along the banks of waters that flow
north, directly into the wilderness.
The type of mining that Twin Metals
has proposed has a 100 percent track
record of toxic pollution. There has
never been a mine of this kind that did
not leach toxic pollution.
Despite what the other side of the
aisle might say, there is no guarantee
that the precious minerals that were
just talked about produced from this
mine would actually stay in the U.S.
and benefit the American economy or
American national security at all.
Antofagasta sends most of its minerals to China, where they are then
sold on the global market, likely the
same fate for these minerals if this
mine is allowed to happen.
All of this is why, nearly 3 years ago,
Secretary of the Interior Deb Haaland
protected the lands surrounding the
Boundary Waters and its headwaters
from mining for 20 years through a
public land order, a standard tool and
process
backed
by
peer-reviewed
science and extensive public engagement.
The Congressional Review Act resolution on the floor today would overturn those protections, once again putting our beloved Boundary Waters at
risk of toxic pollution from a foreignowned mine.
If that weren’t enough to convince
my colleagues that this resolution is a
terrible idea, I will briefly touch on the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

abuse of the Congressional Review Act
itself that this resolution represents.
The Congressional Review Act, or
CRA, has been used to overturn rules
finalized by administrations of both
parties since it was signed into law in
1996.
This Congress, the Trump administration and Republicans in both Chambers have been using the CRA to overturn public lands protections that have
never been considered rules in the past.
In an entirely unprecedented move,
they are moving forward, even though
the Government Accountability Office
hasn’t yet ruled on whether they believe this public land order constitutes
a rule that would be subject to the
CRA.
This administration and its allies in
Congress have just unilaterally decided
that they can do this, despite the fact
that the Department of the Interior
has never before considered a land
withdrawal like this to be a rule.
Congress received notice of this withdrawal 3 years ago. If the resolution’s
sponsor wanted to pursue a CRA, he
should have inquired then.
If this CRA succeeds, it won’t just
open the Boundary Waters to pollution
but would set a terrible and dangerous
precedent for Congress to roll back protections for any of our treasured public
lands with little oversight or notice,
just because Republicans have decided
they would rather pillage them for
profit.
Some places are just worth protecting, and this pristine, one-of-a-kind
place is one of those incredible places.
Mr. Speaker, I urge all of my colleagues to vote ‘‘no’’ on this backdoor
attempt to open our public lands to
foreign mining, and I reserve the balance of my time.
b 1520
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Facts can be stubborn things. There
are some things that we all can agree
on. The Boundary Waters Canoe Area
is a wonderful place, but the Boundary
Waters Canoe Area has been protected,
is currently protected, and will be protected even after this CRA is passed.
The Congresses that came long before
us made sure this was the case, long
before the Obama administration ever
did a lease withdrawal in the area.
They established the Boundary Waters
Canoe Area. Then, they set a buffer
zone around the Boundary Waters
Canoe Area, and they said this other
part of the Superior National Forest
could be used to develop mining and
also used for forestry purposes.
Any deposits that we are talking
about are not inside the Boundary
Waters Canoe Area. They are not inside
the buffer zone to the Boundary Waters
Canoe Area. They are out in the forest
that the Biden administration said
can’t be developed anymore, even after
Congress had already said this was the
case.

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

I think what we are doing today is we
are exercising our Article I power
where an administration abused it and
tried to make rules. The Government
Accountability Office said this bill or
this rule is subject to the Congressional Review Act, so here we are, to
right the wrong.
Mr. Speaker, I yield such time as he
may consume to the gentleman from
Minnesota (Mr. STAUBER), the chairman of the Subcommittee on Energy
and Mineral Resources and the lead
sponsor of this legislation.
Mr. STAUBER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in strong support of H.J. Res.
140, to reverse Public Land Order 7917,
which enacted the Biden administration’s dangerous mining ban in northern Minnesota.
The district I am proud to represent,
Minnesota’s Eighth Congressional District, is blessed with an abundance of
mineral wealth. On the Iron Range in
northern Minnesota, we have been responsibly mining for 145 years. We
mined the iron ore that won us two
world wars and currently mine the taconite that is used to make 80 percent of
this country’s domestically produced
steel.
Before Biden’s mining ban, we had
the opportunity to mine the copper,
nickel, cobalt, and other critical minerals that are necessary for this country to compete and win in the 21st century. That is because northern Minnesota is home to the Duluth Complex,
the largest untapped copper-nickel deposit in the entire world. It is home to
one-third of our country’s copper reserves, 95 percent of our nickel reserves, 88 percent of our cobalt reserves, and 75 percent of our other platinum group metals.
Public Land Order 7917 locked up the
Duluth Complex and ended this opportunity that we had. This PLO withdrew
225,504 acres—that is nearly a quarter
of a million acres—in the Superior National Forest, which is a working industrial forest where timber harvesting
and mining are desired activities. This
ban was a 20-year ban, where, I will
note, again, the Forest Service plan
states mining and timber harvesting
are desired activities.
This PLO sacrificed thousands of
good-paying union jobs that would support families for generations, along
with billions of dollars of revenue for
our schools, State and Federal governments, and, most importantly, our Nation’s mineral security.
It didn’t only block our access to precious critical minerals, Mr. Speaker, it
also cut us off from one of the largest
and most concentrated deposits of helium, a gas that is necessary in everything from medical and manufacturing
equipment to state-of-the-art defense
systems. Just like our critical minerals, we are blocked from responsibly
accessing the helium, making the
United States more dependent on foreign imports and increasing Russia’s
share of global helium markets.
When issuing this ban, the Biden administration even went so far as to

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.050

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

state that its purpose was to prevent
mineral and geothermal exploration
and development. When former Secretary of the Interior Deb Haaland testified before the Committee on Appropriations following the withdrawal, she
stated: I didn’t think there were any
critical minerals there.
The Secretary of the Interior had no
idea that the biggest copper-nickel find
in the world was in northeastern Minnesota, where she banned mining. It
was a dangerous, purely political decision that disregarded the science and
the facts.
Under the Federal Lands Policy and
Management Act, or FLPMA, the Department of the Interior is required to
notify Congress of public land orders
impacting in excess of 5,000 acres. The
Biden administration failed to properly
transmit Public Land Order 7917 to
Congress when it was finalized in January 2023.
Public Land Order 7917 implemented
a broad policy that hinders access to
American resources and is wholly detrimental to our Nation’s national and
mineral security. It is exactly the kind
of action Congress intended to review
under the Congressional Review Act.
H.J. Res. 140 would overturn this
mining ban under the CRA and allow
important proposed mining and helium
development projects to continue
through the regulatory and permitting
process, which they will have to complete at both the State and Federal levels before moving forward.
Mr. Speaker, this CRA will not
green-light any proposed project. All it
does is remove the dangerous, misguided ban that stops us from considering any project. This ban disregarded
the science. It disregarded the facts.
Lifting this ban will simply allow the
science and the facts to prevail.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support H.J. Res. 140, and I include in
the RECORD a copy of Public Land
Order No. 7917.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Bureau of Land Management
[LLES960000.L14400000.ET0000.234; MNES059784]
PUBLIC LAND ORDER NO.7917 FOR WITHDRAWAL
OF FEDERAL LANDS; COOK, LAKE, AND SAINT
LOUIS COUNTIES, MN
AGENCY: Bureau of Land Management.
ACTION: Public Land Order.
SUMMARY: This Order withdraws approximately 225,504 acres of National Forest System lands in Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis
counties, Minnesota, from disposition under
the United States mineral and geothermal
leasing laws, for a period of 20 years, subject
to valid existing rights, to protect and preserve the fragile and vital social and natural
resources, ecological integrity, and wilderness values in the Rainy River Watershed,
the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness
(BWCAW), the Boundary Waters Canoe Area
Wilderness Mining Protection Area (MPA),
and the 1854 Ceded Territory of the Lake Superior Chippewa in northeastern Minnesota
from the potential adverse effects of mineral
and geothermal exploration and development.
DATES: This Order takes effect on [Insert
Date of Publication in the Federal Register]

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1149

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: F. David Radford, Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) Eastern States Office,
during regular business hours, 8 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. Individuals in the United States who
are deaf, deafblind, hard of hearing, or have
a speech disability may dial 711 (TTY, TDD,
or TeleBraille) to access telecommunications
relay services. Individuals outside the United
States should use the relay services offered
within their country to make international
calls to the point of contact in the United
States.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The
National Forest System Lands described in
this Order are within Lake, Cook, and Saint
Louis counties, Minnesota. This Order does
not apply to non-Federal interests within
the boundaries of the area described herein.
If the non-Federal interests within the
boundaries of the area described in this
Order are subsequently acquired by the
United States, the non-Federal interests will
become subject to this withdrawal.
ORDER

By virtue of the authority vested in the
Secretary of the Interior by Section 204(c) of
the Federal Land Policy and Management
Act of 1976, 43 U.S.C. 1714(c), it is ordered as
follows:
1. Subject to valid existing rights, the National Forest System lands, and all non-Federal lands that are subsequently acquired by
the Federal government, within the Townships identified below, as depicted in the attached map, are hereby withdrawn from disposition under the United States mineral
and geothermal leasing laws, including the
Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 (30 U.S.C. 18 et
seq., as amended), the Geothermal Steam Act
of 1970 (30 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.), the Mineral
Leasing Act for Acquired Lands of 1947 (30
U.S.C. 351 et seq., as amended), Section 402 of
the President’s Reorganization Plan No. 3 of
1946, 16 U.S.C. 520, and 16 U.S.C. 508b, in order
to protect and preserve the fragile and vital
social and natural resources, ecological integrity, and wilderness values in the Rainy
River Watershed, the Boundary Waters
Canoe Area Wilderness, the Mining Protection Area, and the 1854 Ceded Territory of
the Chippewa Bands in northeastern Minnesota from adverse effects of mineral and
geothermal exploration and development.
The purpose of the withdrawal is also to protect the health, traditional cultural values,
and subsistence-based lifestyle of the Tribes
that rely on resources in the region, such as
wild rice, which are particularly susceptible
to adverse impacts associated with mineral
exploration and development. The Federal
lands would remain subject to laws authorizing the disposal of mineral materials, as
defined by 36 CFR 228, subpart C.
NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM LANDS—SUPERIOR
NATIONAL FOREST

Fourth Principal Meridian, Minnesota;
Tps. 61 and 62 N., R. 5 W.; Tps. 60 to 62 N., R.
6 W.; Tps. 59 to 61 N., R. 7 W.; Tps. 59 to 61
N., R. 8 W.; Tps. 58 to 61 N., R. 9 W.; Tps. 57
to 62 N., R. 10 W.; Tps. 57 to 63 N., R. 11 W.
Tp. 59 N., R. 12 W.; Tps. 61 to 63 N., R. 12 W.;
Tps. 61 to 63 N., R. 13 W.
Further information on the project is
available at BLM’s ePlanning site at https://
eplanning.blm.gov/eplanning-ui/project/
2022642/510 or at the USFS Superior National
Forest, Duluth, Minnesota.
2. The withdrawal made by this Order does
not alter the applicability of laws governing
the use of National Forest System lands
other than the geothermal and mineral leasing laws.
3. This withdrawal will expire 20 years
from the effective date of this order unless,
as a result of a review conducted before the

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

expiration date pursuant to Section 204(f) of
the Federal Land Policy and Management
Act of 1976, 43 U.S.C. 1714(f), the Secretary
determines that the withdrawal shall be extended.
(Authority: 43 CFR 2310)
DEB HAALAND
Secretary of the Interior.

Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, to the claim that Secretary Haaland failed to notify Congress as required by law, I am holding
the notification that went out 3 years
ago to the gentleman from Minnesota,
personally, from the Secretary of the
Interior. Maybe there is a misunderstanding there, but we have the receipts on that one.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 6 minutes to the
gentlewoman from Minnesota (Ms.
MCCOLLUM).
Ms. MCCOLLUM. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman for yielding me
the time.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
this legislation, which risks polluting
the Boundary Waters Canoe Area, as
has been stated, our Nation’s most visited wilderness.
If this resolution passes and the mineral withdrawal is overturned, toxic
sulfide-ore copper mining will contaminate the water and the habitat in this
priceless wilderness.
The BWCA is a huge reserve of the
most pristine water in the United
States, so clean you can directly drink
from its lakes or streams. This water is
under threat once again.
In 2017, the Obama administration
applied for a mineral withdrawal of the
Rainy River Watershed—the watershed
is up here—which is the headwaters
that flows into the Boundary Waters
Wilderness and Voyageurs National
Park. It started a 2-year environmental
study, which included extensive public
input and scientific review.
While the Rainy River Watershed was
being studied, Paradise Valley in Montana and Methow Valley in Washington
State were going through the same
exact process. All three of those watersheds were threatened by sulfide-ore
mining.
In Montana and Washington, those
studies were able to be completed, and
their mineral withdrawals happened in
2018, protecting their waters, but the
Rainy River Watershed was left unfinished.
When President Trump took office,
his administration initially promised
to complete the study. Instead, President Trump honored his promise from
a campaign rally and did not protect
the watershed. His administration canceled the study for Minnesota’s watershed without releasing any of the scientific findings.
This is what we received in the committee instead, and it is an entirely redacted study—no information, nothing
scientific in it, nothing, all blank.
Now, I serve on the Defense Committee. If we needed to go in a SCIF, I
would have been happy to go in the
SCIF and get this if it was so classified

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.052

H21JAPT1

H1150

it had to be redacted. The protection of
the headwaters of the BWCA was abandoned.
The Biden administration decided to
finish the study, and they followed the
scientific recommendations and the
public input. In 2022, a comprehensive
environmental assessment was finally
completed. The Forest Service recommended a mineral withdrawal to
protect the Boundary Waters of Minnesota, just as it had for the waters in
Montana and Washington.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1530
Currently, we have 17 years left of a
20-year mineral withdrawal that is protecting and preserving this water, but
today Republicans want to overturn
those protections using, in my opinion,
a legislative stunt.
In January 2023, almost 3 years ago,
the mineral withdrawal was completed.
It was noticed under the Federal Land
Policy and Management Act. The law
was followed. The Department of the
Interior notified the Congress of the
withdrawal on January 26, 2023, and as
my colleague, the ranking member
from the committee, just pointed out,
we all received those letters. I received
one. Mr. STAUBER received one. The
chair of the committee received one.
Everybody got a letter.
Then Congress had 90 days to adopt a
resolution of disapproval. Republicans
have tried to disapprove of the withdrawal, but they weren’t able to bring
it to the floor. Congress didn’t ask, and
the window of disapproval closed.
Now they are trying to use the Congressional Review Act to get a do-over.
The CRA wasn’t created to overturn a
public land order, especially one that is
nearly 3 years old. CRA resolutions are
for rules, which public land orders are
not, and they are to be used within 60
days of the congressional notice, not 3
years later.
Let me point out another, in my
opinion, falsehood about this legislation. I am the ranking member of the
Defense Appropriations Subcommittee.
There is no immediate national security interest that would be advanced by
mining in this watershed.
How do we know this? We know this
because Antofagasta, as has been
pointed out, is a Chilean mining company who owns Twin Metals. It is lobbying to undo the current mineral
withdrawal and restore their leases to
extract the copper. Here is what
Antofagasta does with the extracted
copper, and we can’t say this enough:
They send it to China where it is
smelted and then it is sold on the open
market or it is used for its own defense
weapons.
This resolution is not about national
security. This is about water, the
world’s most critical natural resource,
and it must be protected not only for
today but for future generations. We
have a responsibility to future generations to have water available.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Also, in my opinion, some places are
just too precious to mine. I urge my
colleagues to oppose the resolution.
Mr. Speaker, before I do that, I would
like to enter the following documents
into the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD: The
January 2023 notification to Congress,
the letter we all received; the redacted
environmental assessment; and the
complete environmental assessment.
The links are as follows:
The combined letter notification to
Congress can be found at: mccollum.
house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/mccollum.
house.gov/files/evo-media-document/
blm-correspondence_rep-westerman_
rainy-river-withdrawal-combined.pdf.
The redacted environmental assessment can be found at: Mccollum.
house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/mccollum.
house.gov/files/evo-media-document/
sept-2018_fs-ea_fully-redacted.pdf.
The complete environmental assessment can be found at: mccollum.house.
gov/sites/evo-subsites/mccollum.house.
gov/files/evo-media-document/02-rainyriver-withdrawal-ea.pdf.
Mr. Speaker, I also include two letters. The first letter is a letter dated
January 16, 2026, from a group of hunters and anglers opposing this legislation; and the second letter is a letter
dated January 20, 2026, from a group of
environmental organizations opposing
this legislation.
JANUARY 16, 2026.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
Hon. HAKEEM JEFFRIES,
Democratic Leader, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
DEAR SPEAKER JOHNSON, LEADER JEFFRIES,
AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: On behalf of the 80 undersigned organizations and their millions of members, we
respectfully urge you to vote NO on House
Joint Resolution 140, which would revoke
critical protections for the watershed of the
Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness—
one of the nation’s most visited and expansive wilderness areas.
The Boundary Waters and downstream
Voyageurs National Park are currently protected by Public Land Order 7917, the 20-year
mineral withdrawal banning copper mining
on federal public lands in the headwaters of
these beloved wild lands. This mineral withdrawal was based on the U.S. Forest Service’s comprehensive Environmental Assessment, which concluded that sulfide-ore copper mining near the Boundary Waters would
cause irreversible harm to the ecosystem and
downstream Voyageurs National Park. The
analysis completed by the Forest Service in
2022 included 675,000 public comments, over
95% of which favored protecting the Boundary Waters and Voyageurs from sulfide-ore
copper mining.
In early January, this Public Land Order
(7917) was challenged under the Congressional Review Act (CRA), despite Public
Land Orders having never been deemed a rule
subject to the law. Instead, statutory requirements for Public Land Orders have always been dictated by the Federal Land
Management and Policy Act of 1976. Using
the CRA to attack these protections also
creates a reckless precedent that would
allow Congress to retroactively target virtually any public land action as a ‘rule.’

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Beyond setting a dangerous precedent, removing Boundary Waters protections by
passing this CRA would blatantly ignore the
voices of the American people and prioritize
the profits of a foreign mining company—
Chilean conglomerate Antofagasta—over the
interest of this nation’s citizenry and beloved public lands. Once compromised, the
Boundary Waters cannot be restored. This
region is much more than a beautiful place.
It embodies the best of our public lands:
clean water, expansive habitat, world-class
recreation, and a strong, sustainable local
economy. Generations of Midwesterners and
Americans from across the country have
formed deep connections to nature through
hunting, fishing, camping, canoeing, and
hiking in the Boundary Waters.
Allowing copper mining to proceed by
overturning the mineral withdrawal puts at
risk not only the environment but also the
regional economy. The outdoor recreation
economy in northeastern Minnesota supports
over 17,000 jobs and contributes more than $1
billion in annual sales. Studies consistently
show that protecting the Boundary Waters
generates stronger and more sustainable economic benefits than short term and toxic
sulfide-ore copper mining.
We urge you to vote no on H.J.R. 140. Do
not sell out our wilderness and public lands
against the will of Americans who want
these special places preserved.
Sincerely,
Alaska Wilderness League; Allegheny-Blue
Ridge Alliance (ABRA); American Bird Conservancy; American Hunters & Anglers; Big
Mountain Dreams; BlueGreen Generation;
Bolder Options; Californians for Western
Wilderness; Cascade Forest Conservancy;
Center for Biological Diversity; Change the
Chamber; Clean Water Action Minnesota;
Colorado Mountain Club; Colorado Wild Public Lands; Conservation Colorado; Conservation Lands Foundation; Conservation Minnesota; Conservation Northwest; Conservatives for Responsible Stewardship; Crow
River Trail Guards.
CURE; Earthjustice Action; Earthworks;
EcoFtight; Elders Climate Action; Endangered Species Coalition; Environment America; Environment Minnesota; Environmental
Action; Environmental Law & Policy Center;
Environmental Law & Policy Center; Friends
of the Boundary Waters Wilderness; Giniw
Collective; Great Old Broads for Wilderness;
Healthy Ocean Coalition; Inland Ocean Coalition; Izaak Walton League of America;
John Muir Project; League of Conservation
Voters; Living Rivers Colorado Riverkeeper;
Lutefisk Technologies, Inc.
MN Center for Environmental Advocacy;
mtn bio; National Parks Conservation Association; Natural Resources Defense Council;
Nebraska Division IWLA; New Mexico Wild;
New York State Division IWLA; Next 100 Coalition; Nimiipuu Protecting the Environment; Ocean Defense Initiative; Ohio Division IWLA; One Mississippi; Outdoor Alliance; Presbyterians for Earth Care; Quiet
Use Coalition; Rivers Without Borders;
Rocky Mountain Wild; San Juan Citizens Alliance; Sanitas Sales Group; Save Lake Superior Association; Save Our Sky Blue
Waters.
Save the Boundary Waters; Sheep Mountain Alliance; Sierra Club; Southern Utah
Wilderness Alliance; Standing Trees; Student Public Interest Research Groups; The
Conservation Alliance; The Wilderness Society; Vet Voice Foundation; Voyageurs Conservancy; Washington Wild; WaterLegacy;
West Virginia Division IWLA; Western Slope
Conservation Center; Western Watersheds
Project; Wild Montana; Wilderness Watch;
Wilderness Workshop; Wisconsin Division
IWLA.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.053

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

JANUARY 20, 2026.
DEAR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS: On behalf of
the undersigned hunting and fishing conservation organizations representing hundreds of thousands of members and supporters, we write to share our concern regarding H.J. Res. 140, a Congressional Review Act (CRA) resolution which would revoke critical protections for the watershed
of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness, a world-class fishing and hunting destination averaging over 150,000 visitors annually, and overturn existing precedent for the
management of our nation’s public lands.
The Boundary Waters and downstream
Voyageurs National Park are currently protected by Public Land Order 7917, the 20-year
mineral withdrawal placed in 2023, banning
sulfide-ore copper mining on over 225,000
acres of federal public lands in the Rainy
River Watershed of Northeast Minnesota.
This mineral withdrawal was based on the
U.S. Forest Service’s comprehensive Environmental Assessment, which concluded that
sulfide-ore copper mining near the Boundary
Waters would cause irreversible harm to this
sensitive ecosystem. The Forest Service’s
2022 analysis included 675,000 public comments, over 95% of which favored protecting
the withdrawal area from non-ferrous mining.
At nearly 1.1 million acres, the Boundary
Waters spreads across the northeastern tip of
Minnesota, containing over 1,100 lakes, 2,000
designated campsites, hundreds of miles of
rivers and streams, and the largest contiguous areas of uncut forest remaining in the
eastern United States. The three-millionacre Superior National Forest, which includes the Boundary Waters, contains 20 percent of all the fresh water in the entire National Forest System.
The Boundary Waters offers unparalleled
opportunities for fishing, hunting, camping,
and paddling. It’s a haven for hunters and
anglers who come to the region to pursue
walleye. smallmouth bass, northern pike,
whitetail deer, grouse, black bear, and one of
the largest selfsustaining populations of native lake trout in America. The potential
loss of these unique recreational opportunities is a stark reminder of the stakes involved in protecting this irreplaceable natural resource.
H.J. Res. 140 would overturn the 20-year
mineral withdrawal, which complied fully
with the Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA), including extensive public review and comment. Mineral withdrawals have never been considered ‘‘rules’’
eligible to be overturned by the CRA, which
is why Public Land Orders such as this have
never been submitted to Congress.
This CRA resolution is an entirely unprecedented maneuver that ignores the foundation of our public lands management system
and threatens not only the future of the
Boundary Waters, but how all federal public
lands are managed going forward. Attempting to revoke this mineral withdrawal
through this unprecedented manner completely sidelines the environmental analysis
and public process required under FLPMA to
amend or rescind mineral withdrawals.
Further, the CRA is a blunt legislative tool
that has historically been used only in rare
instances. In the first twenty years after enactment, the CRA was used to overturn a
federal rulemaking only once. Again, public
land orders have historically not been submitted to Congress under the CRA—setting
this precedent could open the door for overturning any public land order since 1996.
Further, this would open the door for Twin
Metals MN, a subsidiary of the Chilean mining company Antofagasta, to permit the
Twin Metals MN copper-nickel mine less
than a mile upstream from the Boundary

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1151

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Waters. More importantly, Antofagasta
plans to ship its metal concentrates from the
Twin Metals project to China for processing
and sale, and already has contracts in place
with Chinese smelters. This mine will not directly supply critical minerals domestically,
as the minerals will be funneled to a strategic adversary of the United States.
Notably, the Boundary Waters withdrawal
area includes only four out of eighteen
known mineral deposits in the Duluth Complex, the mineral rich formation found in
northern Minnesota. Neither does the withdrawal affect other mineral deposits in the
region, such as the Tamarack Intrusion,
where the electric vehicle manufacturer
Tesla committed to purchasing 75,000 metric
tonnes of nickel from Talon Metals’s Tamarack Nickel Project. Furthermore, recent research from the Colorado School of Mines,
By-product recovery from US metal mines
could reduce import reliance far critical
minerals, concluded that 90% recovery of
these minerals/metals as by-products at active U.S. mines now could meet nearly all
our critical mineral needs as a nation. In
other words. we don’t need to put the Boundary Waters at risk to meet domestic critical
mineral demands.
Overturning the Boundary Waters watershed mineral withdrawal jeopardizes not
only the environment but also the regional
economy. The outdoor recreation economy
in northeastern Minnesota supports over
17,000 jobs and contributes more than $1 billion in annual sales. Studies consistently
show that protecting the Boundary Waters
yields stronger, more sustainable economic
benefits than short-term, toxic sulfide-ore
copper mining.
As hunters, anglers, and outdoor enthusiasts who rely on places like the Boundary
Waters, we find this legislation troubling.
Removing existing safeguards by passing
H.J. Res. 140 would ignore the voices of the
overwhelming majority of the American
sporting community, prioritize the profits of
a foreign mining company, and set a dangerous precedent for similar protections
across the country.
We respectfully request that you uphold
protections for the Boundary Waters that ensure generations of incredible hunting, fishing, and paddling opportunities. Our sporting
heritage and the outdoor economy of Northeast Minnesota rely on an intact and waterrich backcountry habitat that millions of
Americans have visited. Please oppose H.J.
Res 140 and any similar actions taken in the
Senate.
Sincerely,
American Fisheries Society; American Fly
Fishing Trade Association; Angler Action
Foundation; Backcountry Hunters & Anglers; Bass Anglers Sportsman Society
(B.A.S.S.); Fly Fishers International; Izaak
Walton League of America; Minnesota Trout
Unlimited; Minnesota Wildlife Federation;
National Deer Association; National Wildlife
Federation; North American Falconers Association; North American Grouse Partnership;
Pheasants Forever; Quail Forever; Sportsmen for the Boundary Waters; Theodore Roosevelt Conservation Partnership; Trout Unlimited; Whitetails Unlimited; Wildlife Management Institute.

Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield such time as he may consume to
the gentleman from Montana (Mr.
ZINKE).
Mr. ZINKE. Mr. Speaker, as a former
Secretary, I don’t think anyone in this
body has spent more time on Twin
Metals reviewing the science than I
have, so I think we should separate the
hype from the science and the bull
from fact.

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

First of all, why are we here and why
is it important at all?
Well, this behind me are a few things
we need critical minerals for: particularly our military, medical, and supply
chain.
What do all these have in common?
The MQ–9 Reaper, the Javelin missile
system, the Virginia-class submarine,
the Tomahawk, the night vision, and
Amron, what do they have in common?
Those minerals are found in Twin Metals in the great State of Minnesota.
Now, is it in the boundary waters? Is
it in the area that is protected around
it? No, it is not.
I have seen these wonderful pictures
of canoeing, of waters, of streams, of
lakes, and they are absolutely beautiful. The problem is that is in the
boundary waters. That is not where the
mine is.
Then, oh, Deb Haaland—I respect Deb
Haaland. I had her in committee, Mr.
Speaker. I asked her one question after
a few: What minerals were in the mine
area which she rescinded and put a
moratorium on? I was amazed at her
answer. She couldn’t name one. So let’s
follow the science.
I agree. There is a place to mine, and
there is a place not to mine. I think
probably I stand on the conservation
side as much as any Member, but I
have actually read the documentation.
I have actually read the mining plans.
I have a degree in geology and looked
closely at it. Do you know what. There
are good projects, and there are bad
projects. We don’t mine like we used
to.
In Montana we have Virginia City.
They took a paddleboard up the river
stream, took everything, turned it
around. We don’t mine like that anymore.
We use science now, and when you
look at the science and documentation
on this mine, it uses the best technology.
Oh, by the way, water, it is a closedcircuit. What does that mean? That
means effluent doesn’t travel outside.
Its reuse is compressed. When you do
mine, what you do is you put core samples in. That core sample will tell you
how much overburden you have to remove. After the core samples, then you
have a mining plan that tells you
where the material is moved. In this
case it is not an open-pit mine. It is
subsurface.
I would invite my colleagues to look
at the science and look at the water tables. They say 100 percent of the mines
in the past were pollutants. They are
not pollutants if you have a mining
plan that undergoes the scrutiny that
this one has.
Lastly, I will speak about the law.
Notification and memo are not the
same thing as a rule. Mr. Speaker, I
would suggest that people actually
look at the mining plan and read it,
just like reading the law, what the law
says. It is not a trick. I am not here
tricking anyone.
What I am saying is this: Once again
there are good places to mine, and

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.016

H21JAPT1

H1152

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

there are bad places to mine, but you
have got to go with the science and not
the hype. When a mine is not located in
the wilderness, it is not located in the
buffer, it is located in a Forest Service
holding, which by nature, which by law
is multiple use, then mining is an appropriate use in it.
Mr. Speaker, on the basis of this, we
are facing a crisis in our country because foreign adversaries hold our critical minerals, which are critical to everything we do in medical and in our
military.
Secondly, follow the science and not
the hype. I understand political gerrymandering and fundraising and showing pictures of wonderful canoes going
across, and, oh, we are going to mine
right in the middle of the wilderness
area, but that is not the case.
Mr. Speaker, I ask and I urge my colleagues to support this. It is a good
mine. It is a good project.
By the way, it doesn’t approve anything. You still have to go through the
process. So approving this act today
you are not going to start the mine tomorrow. They still have to go through
the process. It is about process, and
that is what makes decisions good or
bad is going through the process.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
I appreciate that the gentleman from
Montana is suddenly so forthcoming
about all of the analysis that has gone
into this particular mining project because that wasn’t always the case.
When he was Secretary, we asked to
see that analysis, and what we got
back was page after page of redaction.
We got zero information.
I appreciate the newfound candor
from the gentleman, but I have to
question his scientific credentials when
he assures us that this will be the first
ever copper mine of its kind to have no
toxic pollution, even though 100 percent of mines using this particular
method have leeched toxic pollution.
Somehow, we are told this will be the
first one to not do that because of all
the extra scrutiny it has received.
Well, this series of black pages tells
you a lot about the transparency and
the scrutiny we have come to expect
from the folks across the aisle.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the
gentlewoman from Minnesota (Ms.
MORRISON).
b 1540
Ms. MORRISON. Mr. Speaker, today
I rise in strong opposition to H.J. Res.
140. This resolution would permanently
allow copper sulfide mining in the watershed of the Boundary Waters Canoe
Area Wilderness.
Copper sulfide mining is the most
toxic industry in America, and it is
particularly ill-suited to water-rich environments because it acidifies the
water. It leaches heavy metals like arsenic, lead, and mercury into that
water, which is part of the reason it
has never been done in Minnesota before. Remember, Mr. Speaker, we are

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

the Land of 10,000 Lakes. Minnesotans
do not want a toxic mine on the watershed of the Boundary Waters. In fact,
70 percent of Minnesotans want permanent protection for the Boundary
Waters, our State’s crown jewel.
Antofagasta, owned by a Chilean billionaire who is a crony of President
Trump’s, is the foreign mining company that wants to extract minerals
from this watery wilderness. They have
contracts set up to send copper they
extract to China for processing, and
from there, it will be sold on the open
market. Allowing a Chilean mining
company to extract copper from our
public lands, destroy the Boundary
Waters, and send minerals to benefit
billionaire owners and China will not
protect our national security. Some sacred places should be off-limits from
this kind of mining, and the Boundary
Waters Canoe Area Wilderness is clearly one of those places.
Mr. Speaker, remember too that
22,000 outdoor recreation jobs and the
$13.5 billion outdoor recreation economy in Minnesota will all be in serious
jeopardy if this resolution passes. The
Boundary Waters is a national treasure, the most visited wilderness area in
the United States. There is no place
like it on Earth, and once it is destroyed, it will be gone forever.
Like many Minnesotans, people
around the country and the world, my
husband and I have paddled and
camped with our kids on the Boundary
Waters every year since they were
small. We share magical and lifechanging memories from our adventures there that we all cherish. Preserving this wilderness for future generations should be our goal, not its destruction.
This resolution is an existential
threat to our beloved Boundary
Waters. I implore my colleagues to reject this resolution. Mr. Speaker, you
have the opportunity to stand up for
public lands and the Boundary Waters
and prevent the inevitable water, air,
noise, light, and land pollution that
will destroy this unique wilderness.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker,
again, I can’t emphasize this enough:
There is not going to be any mining in
the Boundary Waters Canoe Area.
There is not going to be any mining in
the boundary area around the Boundary Waters Canoe Area. If there is ever
a project approved, it would be in the
land set aside by Congress in the Superior National Forest for mining and
timber harvesting.
Mr. Speaker, I yield such time as he
may consume to the gentleman from
Minnesota (Mr. STAUBER).
Mr. STAUBER. Mr. Speaker, it won’t
surprise you that the Representative
from that area supports this resolution. My colleagues and friends across
the aisle, even from my great State of
Minnesota, mention mining in the
Boundary Waters.
Mr. Speaker, for the umpteenth time:
There will be no mining in the Boundary Waters. There will be no mining in

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

the buffer zones around the Boundary
Waters.
Mr. Speaker, that was settled in 1978.
Then-Democratic Congressman Jim
Oberstar said: Okay, if you are going to
make the wilderness area, do not take
our livelihoods away, which was timber
harvesting and mining.
These are good mining job. Mr.
Speaker, according to 2023 statistics,
the average miner in the State of Minnesota makes $115,000, and the seasonal
tourist employee makes $35,000.
Unions, LIUNA, NABtu, operating
engineers, the Iron Range, and building
and construction trades all support
this project. These are good union jobs.
By the way, there is a project labor
agreement. Three million work hours,
Mr. Speaker, are going to go into any
proposed mine. This is all union work
for all my constituents in northeastern
Minnesota so we can keep our schools
open, so we can keep our economy
going.
By the way, every school district
benefits from mining in the State of
Minnesota. These acquired Federal
lands, through the life of any proposed
mine, will bring $1.8 billion, Mr. Speaker, $1.8 billion in Federal royalties.
Over the life of the mine, that is about
$800 million in Federal taxes.
When my colleagues across the aisle
say that it is not going to do anything,
I just named a great portion and a benefit.
By the way, I go up to the Boundary
Waters. I canoe there, I fish there, and
I recreate there. We are not mining in
the Boundary Waters. That is a falsity.
That is not true. That has been misrepresented for a lot of years. Mr.
Speaker, in the State of Minnesota, we
have a saying: It is better in our backyard. It is better in our backyard.
We are not going to use child slave
labor like over in Congo. One-third of
the world’s cobalt comes from child
slave labor, forced slave labor. We have
88 percent of the reserves right in that
complex.
By the way, Mr. Speaker, this Congressional Review Act doesn’t approve
or disapprove any mining. It reverses
the mining ban, the dangerous mining
ban, that the Biden administration put
forward under Secretary Haaland. By
the way, Mr. ZINKE said she couldn’t
name one critical mineral in the mine,
yet it is the biggest untapped coppernickel find in the world.
We will not rely on China or other
adversarial nations. We can do it. This
can be a win-win-win. If anybody
knows how to mine, it is the Minnesota
miner. It is better in our backyard
than China, Russia, or other adversarial nations.
Minnesota has been mining for 145
years. We know how to do it. Mr.
Speaker, it is better in our backyard
where our environmental and our labor
standards are met or exceeded and our
State permitting is met or exceeded.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, just for
clarification, we are well aware that
the Twin Metals mine is proposed just

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.055

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

outside of the border of the Boundary
Waters Canoe Area Wilderness. We
have been very clear on that. However,
it is very much within the watershed of
the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness. In fact, it is right on the edge.
It is just a couple of miles upstream on
a river that flows right into this area.
Let’s stop kidding ourselves. To try to
say that it is outside the border on this
map and, therefore, the Boundary
Waters have nothing to worry about
when this mine leaks—because it will,
because every mine of this kind, 100
percent in the past, have leaked and
have caused toxic pollution—when it
happens, that pollution is going
straight into America’s most popular
wilderness. That is a fact.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from
Arizona (Mr. GOSAR).
Mr. GOSAR. Mr. Speaker, we have
heard this song and dance over and
over again: No mining. That is big key
because my State of Arizona has taken
the brunt of this.
This CRA needs to be done away with
because we have to have that ability.
The predecessor of the gentleman
across the way advocated no mining. In
fact, he used a national monument, disgracefully, to actually bring in a tinsilver mine. Yes, that is bad, but we
can have our cake and eat it too. That
is technology.
Mr. Speaker, if you look at the
Boundary Waters that everyone is debating, we have Canada actually doing
gold mining up here with more toxic
chemicals.
Have they had a break?
I don’t think so.
I am wondering what makes the difference here. It is not in my backyard.
I sit on the Natural Resources Committee. We kept asking the other side,
the opposition: Where would you like
to have it? Have you been to a mine?
Yes.
Guardians actually made that comment.
I said: Which mine did you go to?
They actually said: Resolution Copper.
I said: Really? How did you like the information and the precautions that
you have to take going down in the pit
that takes 20 minutes on an elevator?
Obviously, they had to rescind it because they didn’t go down there.
There have been problems from way
past, but that has been 100 years ago.
We have technology like this I am
holding in my hand that will actually
take away any oil and anything that
comes out. That is where our future is,
but to bind this up where you don’t
have a future is the wrong answer. This
CRA needs to go back and get serious
about mining.
b 1550
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, now we
hear about a gold mine on the Canadian side of the Boundary Waters watershed that has been producing min-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1153

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

erals without incident. I am beginning
to worry that my colleagues don’t understand basic hydrology and how
water flows and moves. To begin rebuttal, I include in the RECORD two articles on New Gold:
https://
www.northernontariobusiness.com/
industry-news/mining/new-gold-finedfor-2016-discharge-772366
https://www.tbnewswatch.com/localnews/new-gold-inc-fined-100000-aftersediment-spill-from-dam-988742
Mr. Speaker, the mine was fined
nearly $200,000 for discharging 19 million liters of pollution into the watershed. New Gold was fined again in 2018
after a sediment spill from a dam.
The only reason that that wasn’t catastrophic for the Boundary Waters is
because that mine is on the north side
of the wilderness, where the water
flows away from the protected areas.
That is how it works: Water in a watershed flows downhill in whatever direction that watershed takes it. I don’t
know why that basic principle seems so
hard to understand, but apparently we
have some hydrology problems across
the aisle.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, may
I inquire how much time is remaining.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MEUSER). The gentleman from Arkansas has 8 minutes remaining. The gentleman from California has 14 minutes
remaining.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield such time as he may consume to
the gentleman from Minnesota (Mr.
STAUBER).
Mr. STAUBER. Mr. Speaker, I said
it: Would it surprise you that the Representative from the district supports
the resolution?
I talked about jobs and the economy.
I am going to reiterate: NABTU, the
Operating Engineers, Teamsters, and
the Iron Range Building and Construction Trades have 3 million work hours,
with an average mine salary of $115,000.
This is good for my constituents.
As we go forward, I want to reiterate
to my colleagues: This CRA does not
approve any mine. The CRA simply removes the withdrawal. It reverses the
dangerous withdrawal that the Biden
administration put forth for purely political reasons. They stated in their
reasoning that it was to prevent mining. The Secretary, again, when asked
said: I didn’t think there were critical
minerals there.
In the biggest copper-nickel find in
the world, she signs the PLO that removes mining in the Superior National
Forest, where timber harvesting and
mining are desired activities.
Democratic Congressman Jim Oberstar was so far ahead of his time. When
the wilderness was enacted, he said:
Okay, if you are going to enact the wilderness, don’t take our livelihoods
away. He was so far ahead of his time.
Today, we are fighting that fight. I
am fighting for my constituents. I am

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

fighting for our economy. I am fighting
for our community, our technology,
and our national security. It is worth
it. It is deeply worth it.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Again, Mr. STAUBER said it, I have
said it, and others have said it. This
CRA simply reverses the withdrawal
that the Biden administration put out.
It takes us back to Congress’ original
intent to allow somebody to propose to
develop a project. It doesn’t change
any of the permitting laws. They still
have to go through every permitting
law.
There seems to be a lot of scare tactics on what this mine, which hasn’t
even been permitted or approved yet, is
going to do, but we know one thing. It
will have to stand up to all the rigorous permitting requirements that
the U.S. has to offer. It will also have
to stand up to the labor, health, and
safety requirements that we have here
in the U.S., unlike many of the places
around the world where these critical
minerals are mined.
This gives somebody a chance to develop a project to provide the things
that we need here in America, to provide jobs for northern Minnesota, and
to provide a stronger sense of national
security, as we all saw the equipment
that these critical minerals go into
that Representative ZINKE showed in
the poster.
Mr. Speaker, I have no further requests for time. I am prepared to close,
and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, we have been told time
and again by our friends across the
aisle that we have nothing to worry
about here because this mine, even
though it is proposed right next to the
Boundary Waters wilderness on a river
that flows directly into the wilderness
with a type of mining that has a 100
percent track record of leaching toxic
pollution, that, in spite of all that, we
have all these wonderful environmental
standards that will protect America’s
most popular wilderness.
That is pretty cold comfort, Mr.
Speaker, coming from lawmakers who
are working overtime to gut every single one of those bedrock environmental
protections.
It may not be in this particular bill,
but do I have to remind my colleagues
that, just a few weeks ago, we were
here on the floor debating their legislation to gut the National Environmental Policy Act. In our markup the
same week, Republicans led the charge
to eviscerate the Endangered Species
Act. Separately, in other committees,
they are going after the Clean Water
Act.
Every one of these safeguards that
we are told will be a backstop against
anything going wrong in the Boundary
Waters is under unprecedented attack

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.057

H21JAPT1

H1154

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

from the same folks who are pushing
this legislation right now.
Don’t be fooled that everything will
be fine because of our environmental
laws and standards. Those are under an
unprecedented attack.
Mr. Speaker, I strongly oppose this
resolution for both the extreme danger
that it poses to the Boundary Waters
and the outrageous abuse of the Congressional Review Act that it represents.
As you have heard today, the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness is
an American treasure with a strong,
nonpartisan history of protection, dating back to 1909 through treaties with
Canada and to 1964 with the Wilderness
Act, which passed with overwhelming
bipartisan support back when we had
great conservation champions in both
parties.
Americans from across the country
who have experienced the serenity of
this wilderness know exactly what is at
stake. Passing this resolution would
pave the way for toxic mining that
would, without a doubt, cause permanent and irreparable harm, mining that
wouldn’t even benefit the U.S. economy.
This move is deeply unpopular in
Minnesota and does not put American
critical mineral security first. This
material will go to China.
It would also have far-reaching consequences for the future of public lands
management, making beloved, protected lands across the country vulnerable to exploitation with very little
oversight.
At the end of the day, some places
really are worth protecting, and this is
one of those places. I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘no’’ on H.J. Res. 140,
and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield myself the balance of my time.
I include in the RECORD a coalition
letter from over 140 organizations in
support of H.J. Res. 140. These groups
include the Minnesota Chamber of
Commerce,
Minnesota
Power,
MiningMinnesota, Minnesota State
Building and Construction Trades
Council, Ely Public School District,
Jobs for Minnesotans, Laborers’ International Union of North America, and
more.
JANUARY 20, 2026.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
Hon. HAKEEM JEFFRIES,
Minority Leader, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
Hon. JOHN THUNE,
Majority Leader, U.S. Senate,
Washington, DC.
Hon. CHARLES SCHUMER,
Minority Leader, U.S. Senate,
Washington, DC.
DEAR SPEAKER JOHNSON, MAJORITY LEADER
THUNE, MINORITY LEADER JEFFRIES, AND MINORITY LEADER SCHUMER: Our organizations
represent a broad range of Americans who
care deeply about advancing opportunities
for individuals and families across the country and fostering a stronger nation. We rep-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

resent vital industries such as mining, manufacturing, transportation and energy; we
represent hundreds of thousands of union
workers; we include economic development
associations; we are business leaders and
much more.
We are writing to express our strong support for Congress’ efforts to utilize the Congressional Review Act to disapprove of the
mineral withdrawal that was enacted in
northeast Minnesota by the Department of
the Interior (DOI) in January of 2023 on more
than 225,000 acres of federal lands.
Minerals are fundamental to everything in
our modern world, from wiring in homes, to
energy technologies and infrastructure, medical technologies, transportation, defense capabilities, smartphones and laptops and
more. Simply put, critical minerals are vital
for a safe, secure and prosperous America.
Currently, China and other adversarial nations dominate the globe in critical mineral
production and processing, while U.S. dependence on foreign sources for these materials has recently reached an all-time high.
The ban on mining across a significant portion of Minnesota only set us further behind
as a nation.
As a result, this mineral withdrawal, an
administrative action which forbids any
mining or exploration activity on these
lands for 20 years, was enacted in an area of
the United States that contains enormous
amounts of the critical minerals our nation
needs to achieve its goals of energy independence, stronger domestic supply chains
and American job creation. These are goals
our organizations collectively work to advance.
Northeast Minnesota is home to the
world’s largest known undeveloped deposits
of copper, nickel, cobalt, platinum group
metals and more. The area contains 95 percent of domestic nickel resources, almost 90
percent of domestic cobalt and about a third
of our nation’s copper. Industries pursuing
the responsible development of these resources, from the mining companies who
have invested in the region to the suppliers
to the high-skilled workers seeking employment, have been negatively impacted by the
enactment of the mineral withdrawal, as
have the communities in the region that
want to see mining projects move forward
for the betterment of the local and statewide
economy.
Congress now has the opportunity to correct a detrimental action that ran contrary
to our national interest, and to do so assures
that these minerals will be produced domestically according to some of the world’s most
rigorous environmental standards.
Minnesota and the federal government
have already put in place comprehensive
rules and a framework to ensure the environment is protected and that any proposed industrial activity in the area meets stringent
regulatory standards. The U.S. also has some
of the most robust safety standards for workers. To ignore the opportunity to produce domestically for materials we use in our everyday lives means that we are relying upon nations with low-to-non-existent worker protections.
Disapproving the withdrawal in Minnesota
will undo an unnecessary and damaging action. It will also correct a course in which
industries seeking to generate jobs and revenue for generations to come, were simply no
longer allowed to propose mining projects in
the area and forbidden to go through the law
and science-based environmental review
process to prove they can meet the high
standards in place before earning permits to
construct a mine.
We collectively support the use of the Congressional Review Act to overturn the mineral withdrawal currently under consider-

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

ation in Congress, as it is an essential step
forward in unlocking the resources that our
nation needs to reduce our dangerous reliance on China and other adversarial nations.
Signed,
Laborers’ International Union of North
America (LIUNA); Minnesota State Building
and Construction Trades Council; The National Association of Manufacturers; International
Brotherhood
of
Teamsters;
MichAuto; Indigenous Business Advisors;
Better in Our Back Yard; Iron Range Building Trades; Minnesota Pipe Trades Association; LIUNA Minnesota and North Dakota;
Northern Midwest Regional Council of Carpenters; Minnesota Power; Whitebird Services Inc.; Duluth Seaway Port Authority;
Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions;
Minnesota Chamber of Commerce; Women’s
Mining Coalition; ClearPath Action; International Union of Operating Engineers Local
49; Plumbers and Pipefitters Local 589; Area
Partnership
for
Economic
Expansion
(APEX).
Range Association of Municipalities and
Schools (RAMS); Mining Minnesota; Jobs for
Minnesotans; American Exploration and
Mining Association; Society for Mining,
Metallurgy & Exploration; National Mining
Association; United Way of Northeastern
Minnesota; American Chemistry Council;
Teamsters Joint Council 32; Teamsters Local
346; Laborers Local 1097 ‘‘Iron Range’’; Sprinkler Fitters Local 417; UA Plumbers Local
15; Local 6 Plumbers and Pipefitters; International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers
Minnesota State Council; International
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 242;
International Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers Local Union 110; International
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 31;
International Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers Local Union 1426; International
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 160.
Up North Jobs Inc.; Minnesota Conservative Energy Forum; Green Bridge Metals;
City
of
Babbitt,
MN—Mayor
Andrea
Zupancich; Duluth Area Chamber of Commerce; Laurentian Chamber of Commerce;
Hermantown Area Chamber of Commerce;
Copper Development Association; Mt. IronBuhl School Board, MN—Lisa Kvas; Grand
Rapids Area Chamber of Commerce; American Coal Council; Industrial Township, St.
Louis County, MN—Don Carlson; Northeast
Technical Services; Grand Itasca Clinic and
Hospital; Lakehead Constructors; Ely Public
School District—Anne Oelke; Fight for Mining Minnesota; Road Machinery & Supplies
Co.; Feeley Township, Itasca County, MN—
Deb Langanki; Lake Country Power; Encampment Minerals, Inc.
Giant; B.R. Clark Consulting LLC; RMS
Tritec; Global Minerals Engineering; Wyoming Mining Association; American Peat
Technology; Millcreek Engineering Company; Mine Development Management LLC;
Borell Consulting Services LLC; StarPoint
Resources, LLC; Geobrugg North America;
Clementine Exploration; Idaho Mining Association; Agnico Eagle; Pebble Limited Partnership; Archkey—Parsons Electric; Superior Rock Bit; Innate North; GEOTEMPS/
GEOPROS, Inc.; Superior Marine Charters.
American Peat Technology; Wescom Inc;
Furin & Shea Welding & Fabricating, Inc.;
Sandvik Mining and Rock Processing; City
of Hibbing, MN—Mayor Pete Hyduke; City of
Kinney, MN—Mayor Patrick E. Haley; APi
Group Inc.; ME Global Inc; A Martin Consulting, LLC; Malton Electric Co.; Quick
Supply Co.; North Star Manganese Inc &
Electric Metals (USA) Limited; GR Engineering Services; Amvest Capital Securities;
Twin Metals Minnesota; Kalenborn Abresist
Corporation; Larkin Hoffman Attorneys; ME
Elecmetal; City of Biwabik, MN—Mayor Steven Biondich; Solenis LLC.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.058

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

Kirscher Transport; General Equipment &
Supplies Inc; JBW Consulting Engineers;
PX4 Software; Gerdau Amersiteel US Inc; QT
Environmental; Wolverine Fuels; Alaska
Miners Association; Furin & Shea Welding &
Fabricating, Inc.; Universal Polymer And
Rubber; TJR Technical Services, Inc.; Beaver
Bay, Inc.; AMIGOS; Hayday; Tidal Health;
Northeast Title; Marshall Area Chamber of
Commerce; Timberline Drilling; Ziegler Cat;
Kalenborn Canada Inc.
Superior Fuel Company; Baldwin Supply
Company; Dodge Industrial; Baldwin Supply;
Avivid Global Water; Vics Crane & Heavy
Haul; Hamilton Monroe & Co; Electric Power
Door; Duncan Co.; Victaulic; General Equipment and Supplies, Inc.; LRL Construction;
Contour Inc.; Borealis Fuels & Logistics;
Cenovus Energy Superior Refinery; Hibbing
Taconite Co.; Snowbird Willies Boat Canvas;
Hamilton Monroe; MHE Consulting; Salem
Republic Rubber; Enbridge.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, the
letter states: ‘‘Disapproving the withdrawal in Minnesota will undo an unnecessary and damaging action. It will
also correct a course in which industries seeking to generate jobs and revenue for generations to come were simply no longer allowed to propose mining projects in the area and forbidden
to go through the law and sciencebased environmental review process.’’
Mr. Speaker, I will just say that I actually have taken hydrology courses. I
am a professional engineer. It has been
a long time ago, but I remember something very distinct from those hydrology and hydraulic engineering courses,
and that is that water flows downhill.
If it doesn’t, you can get a pump. That
is an engineering joke. It is probably
not very funny.
b 1600
The thing about these mines in Minnesota is, they are below-grade mines.
They are not pit mines. They are actually digging tunnels down into the
earth to pull this ore out to take it to
the top to refine it. If there are
tailings, these tailings will be placed in
a secure area where there is no way
they can be leached back into the watershed.
Don’t let the scare tactics influence
the way you vote on this legislation because the inputs we need to sustain our
fast-growing electricity grid are right
under our feet. We should be leading
the world in technological innovation
and AI infrastructure.
The only reason we are mired in mineral dependence today and not enjoying
or sharing the benefits of American
mineral dominance is because of outdated or misguided policies like the
one we are overturning today.
The resolution before us would correct these policies by reopening mineral-rich land to exploration and reducing our reliance on China for minerals.
Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman
from Minnesota (Mr. STAUBER) for his
leadership on the issue. I urge my colleagues to support this resolution, and
I yield back the balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 1009,
the previous question is ordered on the
joint resolution.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1155

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the joint resolution.
The joint resolution was ordered to
be engrossed and read a third time, and
was read the third time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on passage of the joint resolution.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will be postponed.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Proceedings will resume on questions previously postponed.
Votes will be taken in the following
order:
The Motion to Recommit H.R. 6945;
Passage of H.R. 6945, if ordered; and
Passage of H.J. Res. 140.
The first electronic vote will be conducted as a 15-minute vote. Pursuant
to clause 9 of rule XX, remaining electronic votes will be conducted as 5minute votes.
f

SUPPORTING PREGNANT AND PARENTING WOMEN AND FAMILIES
ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on the motion to recommit on the bill (H.R. 6945)
to amend part A of title IV of the Social Security Act to clarify the authority of States to use funds for pregnancy
centers, and for other purposes, offered
by the gentlewoman from Wisconsin
(Ms. MOORE), on which the yeas and
nays were ordered.
The Clerk will redesignate the motion.
The Clerk redesignated the motion.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion to recommit.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 209, nays 213
not voting 9, as follows:
[Roll No. 36]
YEAS—209
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett

Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)

Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson

De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)

Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NAYS—213

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.024

H21JAPT1

Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie

H1156
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder

Stauber
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—9
Casar
Garamendi
Haridopolos

Hunt
McClintock
Stefanik

Swalwell
Torres (NY)
Womack

b 1631
Messrs.
PATRONIS,
LAHOOD,
MCCAUL, and TURNER of Ohio
changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to
‘‘nay.’’
Mr. CARSON, Ms. DEXTER, Mr.
BELL, Mses. CLARK of Massachusetts,
LEE of Nevada, Mrs. MCCLAIN
DELANEY, Messrs. CLEAVER, and
WHITESIDES changed their vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the motion to recommit was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
FONG). The question is on the passage
of the bill.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 215, nays
209, not voting 7, as follows:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 37]
YEAS—215
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz

Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Cuellar
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez

Jkt 069060

Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler

Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier

Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna

Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—209

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters

Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier

Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib

Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—7
Casar
Hunt
McClintock

Stefanik
Swalwell
Torres (NY)

Womack

b 1638
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONGRESSIONAL
DISAPPROVAL OF THE RULE
SUBMITTED BY THE BUREAU OF
LAND MANAGEMENT RELATING
TO PUBLIC LAND ORDER NO. 7917
FOR WITHDRAWAL OF FEDERAL
LANDS; COOK, LAKE, AND SAINT
LOUIS COUNTIES, MN
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on passage of
the joint resolution (H.J. Res. 140) providing for congressional disapproval
under chapter 8 of title 5, United
States Code, of the rule submitted by
the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order No. 7917 for
Withdrawal of Federal Lands; Cook,
Lake, and Saint Louis Counties, MN,
on which the yeas and nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the joint
resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the passage of the joint
resolution.
This is a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 214, nays
208, not voting 9, as follows:
[Roll No. 38]
YEAS—214
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.021

H21JAPT1

Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank

Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad

January 21, 2026
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)

Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Bacon
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)

Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

NAYS—208

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1157

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan

Jkt 069060

Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas

Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes

Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—9
Casar
Conaway
Hunt

Larson (CT)
McClintock
Stefanik

Swalwell
Torres (NY)
Womack

b 1645
So the joint resolution was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Ms. STEFANIK. Mr. Speaker, I was absent
for votes today. Had I been present, I would
have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 34, AYE on
Roll Call No. 35, NAY on Roll Call No. 36,
YEA on Roll Call No. 37, and YEA on Roll
Call No. 38.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Mr. WOMACK. Mr. Speaker, I was unavoidably absent and unable to vote. Had I been
present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call
No. 36, YEA on Roll Call No. 37, and YEA on
Roll Call No. 38.
f

HOUR OF MEETING ON TOMORROW
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that when the House adjourns today, it adjourn to meet at 9
a.m. tomorrow.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Florida?
There was no objection.
f

MAKING IN ORDER AT ANY TIME
CONSIDERATION OF H. CON. RES.
68, TO DIRECT THE REMOVAL OF
UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES
FROM VENEZUELA THAT HAVE
NOT BEEN AUTHORIZED BY CONGRESS
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that it be in order at any
time to consider H. Con. Res. 68 in the
House if called up by the chair of the
Committee on Foreign Affairs or his
designee; that the concurrent resolution be considered as read; and that the
previous question be considered as ordered on the concurrent resolution to
adoption without intervening motion
except for 1 hour of debate equally divided among and controlled by Representative MAST of Florida, Representative MEEKS of New York, and

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Representative MCGOVERN of Massachusetts, or their respective designees.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Florida?
There was no objection.
f

PERMISSION FOR MEMBER TO BE
CONSIDERED AS FIRST SPONSOR
OF H.R. 4327
Mr. ALFORD. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that I may hereafter be considered to be the first sponsor of H.R. 4327, a bill originally introduced by Representative Greene of
Georgia, for the purpose of adding cosponsors and requesting reprintings
pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Missouri?
There was no objection.
f

b 1650
WELCOMING
JARED
ANDERSON
AND FRIENDS OF CLUB 21 CHOIR
TO WASHINGTON, D.C.
(Mr. CRANK asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. CRANK. Mr. Speaker, I am honored to welcome Jared Anderson and
the Friends of Club 21 Choir here to
Washington, D.C.
The choir, composed of talented individuals living with Down syndrome and
who are based in Colorado’s Fifth Congressional District, will be performing
the national anthem to launch the
March for Life rally this Friday.
Club 21 came and visited me just a
couple of months ago here in Washington, D.C., and it is really one of the
highlights of my time as being a Member of Congress. They have uplifted the
Pikes Peak community onto the national platform, amplifying and empowering these brilliant performers
through the arts and education.
I thank them for dedicating their
time, their energy, and their passion in
advocating for every human life.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you join me
in giving a warm welcome to the
Friends of Club 21 Choir.
f

COLLEGE SPORTS
(Ms. STEVENS asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. STEVENS. Mr. Speaker, after
Monday’s college football national
championship, I rise to express my concern about the trend of private equity
firms attempting to buy up college
sports. These deals will be bad for athletes, students, and fans.
We have seen this play before. Media
corporations’ pursuit of college football and basketball viewers created
nonsensical conference realignment
that destroyed the regional nature of

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.019

H21JAPT1

H1158

college sport. For generations, the Big
Ten was known as the Midwestern Conference. In recent decades, that identity has slowly been eroded as coastal
schools were admitted in the name of
more revenue and higher profits.
Now private equity is looking to buy
college sports revenue streams. If these
deals are normalized, it is only a matter of time before private investors demand control over our university athletic departments. This creates the
risk of further conference realignment,
cutting nonrevenue sports, and expanding for-profit influence over universities.
This is why I have sent a letter with
my Republican colleagues to end the
NCAA.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

REMEMBERING THE LIFE AND
LEGACY OF NATALIE HASLAM
(Mr. BURCHETT asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. BURCHETT. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today remembering the life and the
legacy of a dear lady, Natalie Haslam,
who passed away on January 16. Natalie set the true example of what it
means to be a volunteer. She spent her
life giving back to our community and
the people who are in it, and, of course,
to our great University of Tennessee.
Born in 1931, Natalie was raised in
Knoxville and graduated from UT in
1953. In 1974, she married Jim Haslam,
the owner and founder of Pilot Company. She is known for her leadership
and philanthropy. Natalie became the
first woman to serve as the chair of the
East Tennessee Foundation Board in
1987.
I always remember Ms. Haslam when
my dad died. I was at the mortuary, actually, with my mama picking out my
dad’s casket. Big Jim and Natalie
called me and told me that everything
would be all right and if I needed anything, just to call. I also remember
when Mr. Haslam and I would be at
events together. She would always
shush us and then just give us a smile.
While serving the Knoxville community, her commitments to the University of Tennessee remained unmatched.
Natalie and Jim through the Haslam
Foundation donated $32 million to UT
with $10 million going toward the Natalie L. Haslam Music Center. It is one
of the finest music centers not just in
the State of Tennessee or the country,
but the world, Mr. Speaker.
Natalie is survived by her husband,
Jim; three granddaughters; three stepchildren; six grandchildren; and seven
great-great-grandchildren. She was a
true humanitarian. She will always be
remembered as someone in east Tennessee who gave back to a place where
she lived and loved. I will always remember her as a very classy lady.
f

CONGRATULATING ISABEAU
LEVITO
(Mr. CONAWAY asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. CONAWAY. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize and congratulate
my constituent, Isabeau Levito, who
officially qualified for the U.S. Olympic figure skating team where she will
represent Team USA at the 2026 Winter
Olympics in Milan, Italy, next month.
Isabeau Levito grew up in south Jersey, training for years at the Igloo Ice
Center in Mount Laurel.
Long before the spotlight, she was on
the ice before sunrise, balancing
schoolwork, family time, and relentless practice with remarkable discipline and grace.
This month, Isabeau achieved a lifelong dream. After earning a bronze
medal at the U.S. Figure Skating
Championships in St. Louis, she officially qualified for Team USA and will
represent our country at the 2026 Winter Olympics in Milan, Italy.
Isabeau joins what experts are already calling the strongest U.S. women’s Olympic skating team in decades,
and she stands proudly among the best.
We are incredibly proud of her. On
behalf of south Jersey, we wish Isabeau
Levito the very best as she skates for
the gold and for Team USA.
f

NATIONAL BLOOD DONOR MONTH
(Mr. WIED asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. WIED. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
in recognition of January as National
Blood Donor Month. Each winter, blood
centers across the Nation experience
reduced donor turnout, while the need
for blood remains constant.
In the United States, someone requires a blood transfusion every 2 seconds to treat patients facing trauma,
surgeries, childbirth complications,
cancer, chronic conditions, and so
much more, yet our blood supply remains critically low.
Because of the urgent and ongoing
need for blood donations, I recently introduced H.R. 5791, the Boosting Lifesaving Operations, Opening Donation
Centers Act, or the BLOOD Centers
Act, alongside my Democratic colleague, Congresswoman SCHRIER.
This commonsense, bipartisan legislation would streamline the bureaucratic burdens of opening a new blood
center while still ensuring oversight
and safety in donation facilities and of
the blood they collect.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support the BLOOD Centers Act so we
can expedite the ability of blood centers to open new locations and collect
lifesaving blood for those who need it.
Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I
also want to encourage everyone listening today to consider taking the
time to donate blood if you are able to.
First-time donors are always welcome,
and every donation has the power to
save a life.

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

PERKINS HIGH SCHOOL STEM
ACHIEVEMENT
(Ms. KAPTUR asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, last week
I visited Perkins High School in Sandusky, Ohio. My role: to celebrate excellence in STEM education.
This year, Kia Preston won the Ninth
Congressional District App Challenge
for a project titled ‘‘Light Teachings.’’
Kia’s interactive app helps users understand fundamentals of ray tracing,
a computer graphics technique that
simulates how light interacts with objects to create realistic images in video
platforms.
Kia’s app will be honored here in our
Nation’s Capital later this year.
I also paid tribute to the school’s robotics club that has partnered with
NASA. They were the only high school
in the United States of America selected alongside other higher education
institutions like MIT.
Bravo Perkins.
After 4 school years building a satellite named ‘‘Foras Promineo,’’ which
is Latin for ‘‘outreach,’’ it was
launched to the International Space
Station back in September.
Thanks to computer science teacher
Mike Leffler and Robotics Club adviser
John Stout for lighting the way for
these bright, young minds who are
going to lead America into the future
and beyond.
Mr. Speaker, I am just so proud of
them.
f

b 1700
REMEMBERING LENARD CONKLIN
(Mr. LAWLER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of Lenard
Conklin, a devoted son of Stony Point
who lived a life defined by service, tradition, and deep community roots.
Lenard was a lifelong resident, living
in the very home his great-grandfather
built on Gate Hill Road. Lenard was
known as the last hay baler of Rockland County.
Lenard proudly served our Nation
during the Vietnam war as a Navy Seabee, his dream position. In 2024, he was
honored on the Hudson Valley Honor
Flight, Mission 34, in Washington, D.C.
His commitment to hard work and
service continued at home, where he
spent 31 years at Algonquin Gas before
retiring from the Stony Point Sewer
Plant.
Whether sharing stories of his time
in service, his love of the Catskill
Mountains, his passion for trout fishing and hunting, or doting on the love
of his life, Nora, his presence made a
difference in the lives of everyone he
met.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.069

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

I extend my deepest condolences to
his siblings, stepdaughters, grandchildren, and the countless friends who
knew him. May God bless his memory.
f

HONORING RICHARD J. CODEY
(Ms. POU asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. POU. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor the life of former New Jersey
Governor and longtime State Senator
Richard Codey, known to all of us as
Dick Codey, a public servant whose 50
years of public service remain unmatched in our State’s rich history.
Dick Codey believed deeply in service, and he practiced it with heart.
Dick was a champion for people living
with mental illness long before it was
widely acknowledged or understood. He
was willing to go further than most,
even going undercover in a psychiatric
hospital to ensure dignity for those of
us too often forgotten.
As Governor, he brought steadiness
and integrity during a difficult moment for New Jersey, in return earning
extraordinary trust from the public.
What defined Dick for me was his
common touch. He returned constituents’ calls himself. He conversed in
diner booths late at night. He coached
youth basketball. He never stopped
being the same person, no matter the
title he held.
I had the privilege of serving with
Dick Codey in Trenton and of calling
him my friend. He cared so deeply
about the people he represented and
the institution that he served.
New Jersey is better because of Dick
Codey’s life and work. He will be deeply
missed by all who knew him.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

EPIDEMIC OF WASTE, FRAUD, AND
ABUSE
(Mr. KENNEDY of Utah asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. KENNEDY of Utah. Mr. Speaker,
I rise in opposition to the epidemic of
waste, fraud, and abuse that is ripping
off taxpayers with impunity.
Too often, Congress forgets that
every dollar of government money collected comes from an American who
worked hard for it. That is why waste,
fraud, and abuse are not abstract problems. They are real problems that hurt
real people.
When government programs pay
twice for the same service, fund
projects that never get built, or lose
track of billions, taxpayers suffer and
confidence in government weakens.
We need to honor hardworking families by pursuing the bad actors with a
vengeance. Stewardship is our sacred
responsibility.
We just found out about a case in my
own district where an individual was
collecting her dead mother’s Social Security checks for 3 years. Her blatant

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1159

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

fraud was finally discovered, and she
was sentenced and ordered to repay
$25,000 in restitution. This case is not
isolated. The Government Accountability Office estimates that the Federal Government loses up to $521 billion to fraud every single year.
The American people expect honesty,
fiscal discipline, and respect for their
sacrifice. I am proud of the Republican
Conference for doing just that.
f

BROWN STUDENTS RETURN TO
CAMPUS
(Mr. AMO asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. AMO. Mr. Speaker, today, students returned to class at Brown University to start a new semester after
the mass shooting in December that
took the lives of Ella Cook and
Mukhammad Aziz Umurzokov and injured nine other students.
My thoughts remain with the victims, their loved ones, and our whole
community during what, I am sure, has
been a difficult few days.
For the Brown students who returned
to campus this week, I want them to
know we have their backs, and we are
all thinking of them. If anyone is
struggling, they should reach out for
help.
As Brown, Providence, and Rhode Island continue to heal, I join countless
others in making sure our community,
our city, and our State have all the
support we need to recover. We are on
a long journey, but I know we are on it
together.
f

HONORING SETH NESMITH
(Mr. CARTER of Georgia asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Seth
NeSmith, a registered nurse at Atrium
Health Navicent, who has been named
one of the 2025 Hospital Heroes recipients by the Georgia Hospital Association.
This award recognizes the top three
hospital employees or volunteers from
GHA-member hospitals who dedicate
their time to improving both their organization and the world around them.
Mr. NeSmith has impressively received a registered nurse degree, bachelor of science in nursing, stroke certified registered nurse credential, and
critical care registered nurse certifications.
Mr. NeSmith was also awarded last
year’s
Atrium
Health
Navicent’s
DAISY Award for noticing a vehicle
stuck deep in a ditch, pulling the victim out, and providing immediate further care.
Mr. NeSmith’s leadership is vital for
shaping
the
next
generation
of
healthcare professionals who will go on
to serve communities across Georgia.

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

This recognition speaks to his extensive skills and expertise in nursing.
We appreciate Mr. NeSmith’s commitment to hard work, compassion for
everyone around him, and going above
and beyond for his patients.
f

RECOGNIZING ASHLYN GWYNN
(Mr. MOORE of Utah asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to recognize my constituent
Ashlyn Gwynn, who was recently involved in a near-death car accident.
Ashlyn was recruited to play soccer
at Cal State Fullerton. This past September, on her way to another sporting
event, she and her teammate Lauren
were struck by a truck. Both were
transported to the hospital, but Lauren
tragically passed away after 6 weeks of
intensive care. Her family’s words
were: ‘‘Lauren fell asleep in the Lord.’’
Lauren’s legacy of goodness and positivity will always be remembered.
After Ashlyn stabilized, doctors let
her family know that there was a
strong possibility that she may never
regain consciousness. If she ever were
to, it was possible that she would never
walk or talk again.
Thankfully, Ashlyn has made significant signs of improvement. She was
transferred to a step-down rehabilitation unit, and through the generosity
of a close friend of her father, she has
been transported back to Utah, where
she continues to receive physical and
speech therapy and close care from her
parents.
I don’t know Ashlyn, but I know her
parents, and Matt and Shelly Gwynn
are the best people I have ever known.
I am so fortunate to have gotten to
know them in this role. He is a police
chief back home as well as a State legislator, and they are giving her the
best possible chance of success.
I wish Ashlyn the best.
f

HIGHLIGHTING REPUBLICAN
SUCCESSES IN 2025
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. MOORE of
Utah was recognized for 60 minutes as
the designee of the majority leader.)
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days in
which to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material
on the topic of this Special Order.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
HARIDOPOLOS). Is there objection to the
request of the gentleman from Utah?
There was no objection.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
am glad to be joined by my colleagues
in this Conference Special Order. To
start us off, I would like to yield to the
gentleman from Utah (Mr. OWENS).
Mr. OWENS. Mr. Speaker, America is
back, and so is common sense.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.071

H21JAPT1

H1160

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

This last year has reminded us of
what is possible when America has a
competent and respected leader who
understands the unique role that our
great Nation should fill on the world
stage.
I am grateful to have President Donald J. Trump back in the White House
with the strength and vision needed to
be the leader of the free world. One of
the things I have admired most about
the President is that he is the same
man behind closed doors as he is in
front of the camera. Whether you like
him or not, you know what he stands
for exactly, and he will act on that.
b 1710
It is the type of leadership that has
delivered real results for the American
people. We have seen real results on
our southern border as illegal crossings
and the flow of illicit drugs has
dropped significantly.
Families are feeling real relief at the
gas pump and grocery store as their
wages are going up and opportunities
are increasing. In our schools and military, the emphasis is, once again, on
merit instead of discriminatory DEI
standards. In America, success should
be earned and not engineered by woke
bureaucrats. It is called common sense.
Every day of this last year, the President and House Republicans have
worked to ensure that you keep more
of your own money and remove the red
tape so you can thrive. We are blessed
to live in the greatest country in the
history of mankind every single day.
America’s brightest days are ahead of
us, and I am grateful to have a Commander in Chief who believes in the
spirit and promise of America. He is a
leader who is working to make sure
this beautiful country remains the land
of freedom and opportunity for all who
are willing to work hard, take responsibility, and dream big.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman from the greatest
State in the Union, Mr. OWENS, for his
remarks. I am biased, of course.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from Florida (Mr. BEAN).
Mr. BEAN of Florida. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Mr. MOORE so much for the time.
I appreciate it.
Mr. Speaker, it is a new year and
with every new year, I like to reflect
on where am I going. What am I doing?
What do I want to accomplish this
year? What did I accomplish the year
before? That is a great time to do it
with America. Where are we?
It reminds me, Mr. Speaker, at the
Constitutional Convention in 1787, Benjamin Franklin famously looked at the
chair behind the presiding officer that
was carved with a Sun and he asked a
question that still echoes throughout
history: Was the Sun rising or was the
Sun setting?
In that moment, a fledgling Nation
hung in the balance, and even the
Founding Fathers did not know whether liberty would prevail.
For far too long, Mr. Speaker, the
American people have felt the same un-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

certainty, years of what many viewed
as America last policies that left families struggling, dreams deferred, and
our Nation asking itself: Are we on the
rise or decline?
To answer that question, we need to
look at where we have been for the last
year. We need to look at the results
that this President, President Trump,
and where the House Republican leadership has taken this country over the
last year.
Together, we have accomplished real
results. It starts with tax relief for
American families with the working
families tax cut. Mr. Speaker, do I need
to remind you, it is only the largest
tax cut in U.S. history. Workers can
keep more of what they earn with no
tax on tips and no tax on overtime. To
our seniors, I have good news for you,
too. With the new deduction, you are
not going to pay any tax on Social Security benefits.
But wait, there is more, Mr. Speaker.
We have unleashed American energy,
restored our independence, and brought
down costs at the pump.
Do you know why we don’t hear why
eggs cost so much anymore, Mr. Speaker? Because they don’t. Thank you,
President Trump.
We have restored law and order and
brought accountability by securing the
border, supporting law enforcement,
strengthening the rule of law, shrinking the Federal bureaucracy, cutting
wasteful spending, and demanding accountability for every taxpayer dollar.
We are seeing it in real time. Finally,
things are happening.
We have rebuilt American strength
at home and abroad, revitalizing our
military, advancing peace through
strength, standing firm with allies, and
deterring adversaries. We have put veterans first by expanding access to care
and ensuring the benefits that they
have earned. Our country has made
that promise to them. We are honoring
promises, Mr. Speaker.
Finally, we have brought transparency and common sense back to our
institutions, dismantling DEI mandates, and restoring fairness, merit,
and basic common sense. We have
begun to make America healthy again
by examining finally what is in our
food supply, empowering patients, expanding health savings accounts, and
improving access and accountability
across our healthcare system.
We ran on these promises. We delivered on these promises.
Mr. Speaker, we are just getting
started. Is the Sun rising or setting? I
can say with absolute certainty, the
Sun is rising under the leadership of
President Trump, Speaker MIKE JOHNSON, and House Republicans.
Make no mistake, more is to come.
As the Sun rises, we are ushering in
America’s golden age: a time of renewed strength, prosperity, and opportunity for every citizen in every community across this great land. The best
days of our Nation are still ahead, and
together, we will make America

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

stronger, safer, and greater than ever
before. It is, once again, Mr. Speaker,
morning in America.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman from Florida for
his remarks. I feel ready to go out for
the second half now, so the Sun is rising. I wish there was a second half to
play.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from the Commonwealth of Kentucky
(Mr. BARR).
Mr. BARR. Mr. Speaker, I thank my
good friend from Utah for organizing
this Special Order.
Mr. Speaker, I rise to celebrate a
year of success, of restoring the American Dream, and of making America
great again.
One year ago, Mr. Speaker, President
Donald Trump returned to office with a
clear mandate from the American people: secure the border, rebuild the economy, tame inflation, restore American
strength, and put American workers
first again.
In just 1 year, he has delivered. Let’s
just start at the southern border.
President Trump restored order by ending catch and release, reinstating proven enforcement policies, and deploying
the resources necessary to defend our
homeland. The results were immediate
and historic.
Illegal crossings collapsed to their
lowest levels since the 1970s. Net migration turned negative for the first
time in 50 years. Fentanyl trafficking
at the southern border was cut by more
than half, saving American lives and
criminal cartels designated as terrorist
organizations were stopped and the
rule of law was reinstated.
Thanks to President Trump and his
administration, this country removed
more than 2.6 million illegal aliens
from the United States through deportations and voluntary self-departures.
More than 400,000 criminal illegal
aliens charged with or convicted of
crimes were deported and over 2 million self-deportations, ending Biden-era
release incentives and restoring credible consequences.
This administration proved what
Washington refused to admit for years:
that border security works when the
law is enforced. President Biden used
to say that Congress needed to pass bipartisan legislation. No, actually, as it
turns out, Mr. Speaker, all we needed
was a President with a backbone to secure our border; and that President is
Donald Trump.
At the same time, President Trump
rebuilt an economy that works for all
Americans. Congress passed the largest
tax cut in American history, delivering
relief directly to families and workers.
No taxes on tips, overtime, and Social
Security, but in my district, I will
share two perfect examples of why this
legislation really helps people.
The made in America tax provision
in the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, the
working families tax cut bill, resulted
in immediate investment. A $2.5 billion
investment in Harrodsburg, in Mercer

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.073

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

County, Kentucky, in my district
where Apple—making the iPhone—decided to move jobs out of China to Kentucky. Now, as a result of the President’s leadership and this Republican
Congress and the working families tax
cut bill, all the Gorilla Glass, as they
call it, will be made for the iPhone and
Apple watches at the Corning plant in
Harrodsburg, Kentucky. That is a $2.5
billion investment specifically because
of this bill in my district.
In addition, we are known as the
horse capital of the world in Lexington, Kentucky, and at Keeneland
Sales, a world-famous, world-class
horse sale, yearling sale, every September, it has a $6.5 billion economic
impact to the Commonwealth of Kentucky. We are very proud of that, but
because of the restoration of the 100
percent bonus depreciation, they set a
record this past September, $531 million of yearling horses sold. That
means jobs for working Kentuckians.
b 1720
Mr. Speaker, that means more economic activity for working families in
Kentucky. That means all the ancillary businesses all the way down to the
farriers and the grooms and the restaurants. All of that money gets recirculated into the central Kentucky
economy.
There were over 50 yearlings that
were sold for over $1 million each. The
results were phenomenal. It was a
record sale. People around the country
may not know about the horse industry, but that is just one industry that
was benefited by restoration of full
bonus depreciation. All the buyers at
our auction said it was bonus depreciation that resulted in this uptick in
sales and economic activity.
Inflation, which crushed households
under the previous administration, is
falling sharply. Wages are rising, and
the American people are going back to
work. Mr. Speaker, 2.4 percent is where
inflation is now—near the Fed’s target
for price stability—down 70 percent
from the height of Biden’s inflation
crisis. We also have the lowest mortgage rates in 3 years.
This is where I really think the administration’s economic record is
something to behold. We have seen the
largest and fastest blue-collar wage
growth in 60 years. It is not just that
prices are coming down. It is that real
wages, inflation-adjusted wages, are
going up for the American people.
This wasn’t an accident. It was the
result of pro-growth policy. It was not
just the tax cuts but deregulation. It
decreased the cost of business so those
businesses could afford to retain those
workers through higher wages and faster wage growth.
Confidence is returning to the American economy, and President Trump
has taken us from energy desperate
under the previous administration to
energy dominant again.
He declared a national energy emergency. He unleashed record oil and nat-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1161

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ural gas production. He reopened millions of acres for responsible energy development, and he rolled back radical
regulations that were driving up costs.
President Trump, in Kentucky,
thank you. Thank you for putting Kentucky coal miners back to work and
putting Kentucky coal back in our
bloodstream. We don’t have a choice
anymore. Under the last 16 years, we
prematurely retired 290 coal-fired
power plants, while China is building
two new coal plants a week. They are
committed to winning the AI race.
We took over 120 gigawatts of power
offline. The energy demands of our
country are skyrocketing because of
the technologies of the future, because
of digital asset innovation, because of
quantum computing and, yes, because
of artificial intelligence.
Mr. Speaker, it is predicted and projected that by 2030 power demands resulting from datacenter construction
will triple just at a time when we have
been taking all of this power supply off
of our grid and out of our system.
We now have a President who is reversing those disastrous choices and
putting our coal miners back to work
so that we can revitalize this signature
industry for the Commonwealth of
Kentucky and power the technologies
of the future to win the race for AI
dominance.
President Trump ended the war on
coal. He expanded coal leasing, rolled
back Biden-era rules targeting coalfired power plants, and restored commonsense permitting.
Coal remains critical for grid reliability, baseload power, and national
energy security. I am proud to fight
side by side with President Trump to
ensure that our miners can go back to
work, our lights can stay on, and our
energy stays American so that we can
compete and win against China.
It is no surprise that gas prices fell
to their lowest levels in years, lowering
costs for families, farmers, and manufacturers across our country.
Let’s not forget about all the accomplishments on the world stage. President Trump restored American leadership and American strength. He got rid
of DEI woke ideology at the Pentagon.
He focused on rebuilding American
military readiness and lethality and
prioritizing the strength of the American military over liberal leftwing politics. The result was clear. He restored
American leadership.
He destroyed Iran’s nuclear weapons
capability. He reimposed maximum
pressure on rogue regimes. He restored
peace to our key ally Israel, returning
the hostages. He dismantled and degraded the capabilities of Hamas and
Gaza. He worked with our allies in the
IDF.
He dismantled the narcoterrorist dictatorship of Nicolas Maduro in Venezuela. He negotiated peace agreements on four different continents,
proving that strength deters conflict
and leadership produces peace.
Our allies stepped up. Our adversaries
stepped back. America, once again, led

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

from a position of strength and confidence. The results speak for themselves.
We have a stronger economy, lower
inflation, higher wages, lower energy
costs, a secure border, energy dominance, and economic resurgence. We
have a restoration of the American
Dream and a restoration of common
sense.
There are no biological men in the
private spaces of our daughters. There
are no biological men competing
against girls in their sports.
Thank goodness we have common
sense in this country once again.
Thank goodness we have a President
who looks to the future and who wants
to position the United States to be the
leader, the crypto capital of the world.
He signed into law the GENIUS Act—
legislation, Mr. Speaker, that you and
I worked on together—and put in motion an AI action plan to ensure that
we can be the dominant leader in artificial intelligence. AI has applications
across financial services, education,
medicine,
pharmaceutical
development, and manufacturing efficiency
and productivity. We have only begun
to see all its potential. AI will help us
deter our adversaries through the applications
that
AI
presents
by
strengthening the capabilities of our
military.
Mr. Speaker, as President Trump
would say, the golden age is here. We
must continue to support our President
as he leads this Nation forward. I am
proud to work with him to make America great again.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman from the Commonwealth for his comments.
It is common among Members of Congress, both the House and the Senate,
to be strong on policy. Also, many
Members are strong communicators. It
is very rare, however, to get somebody
who is so good at both. The Commonwealth of Kentucky is extremely lucky
to have ANDY BARR representing that
amazing State. I thank him for his
shared words.
Yes, we know the horses. We get it.
There are horses. It is a big thing down
there.
Mr. Speaker, again, I thank my colleagues for being here to share their
perspectives as we look back on some
of the significant wins that we have experienced over the course of the last
year. I wanted to briefly share a little
bit about stuff that doesn’t get as
much attention.
As a proud father of four boys, we
know that family is everything. Family is at the center of Utah values, and
I have dedicated a lot of effort during
my time in Congress to advance profamily legislation.
I worked on legislation to permanently increase the child tax credit
from $1,000 to $2,000; indexing the
CTC—child tax credit—to inflation;
and provide an additional $500 for families through 2028.
We worked to make the adoption tax
credit partially refundable up to

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.075

H21JAPT1

H1162

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

$5,000—indexed for inflation—beginning
in 2025.
One of the most unique things that
we accomplished were the Invest America accounts, the Trump Accounts.
These
investment
accounts
demonstrate to American youth the power
of capitalism and compounding interest. There is so much more, but that
last piece is going to get a kickoff here
next week.
There will be $1,000 seeded to each
child born to this country over the
next 4 years. That child will be able to
track their investment account. Usually a person doesn’t even start investing until they are 30 years old.
The best estimates are you graduate
college. You have a little bit of student
debt. You start a new job. You don’t
really start contributing to an IRA
until you are 30, maybe even older. A
401(k) starts sometimes with your first
job.
We now have a whole new generation
of kids who are starting to invest in
their IRA at age zero. That is 30 extra
years of potential compounding growth
that will be an absolute game changer.
Plus, this has garnered an enormous
amount of attention from the philanthropic space where Michael and Susan
Dell have announced a commitment of
over $6 billion that will help children
ages 1 through 10 in areas that aren’t
as economically advantaged. That will
help those kids take advantage of this
program and also create those accounts
to watch those grow over time. It is a
game changer and something we are
really excited about.
b 1730
Mr. Speaker, we are voting on legislation this week to support families
and pregnant women. We just passed
the Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families Act, ensuring that young families have access to
prenatal vitamins, formula, and diapers. It also ensures that TANF dollars
can be used to support pregnancy resource centers.
The Pregnant Students’ Rights Act
provides guidance and resources to
pregnant students so that no student
feels forced to choose between her education and her child.
Last week, I also introduced the
SAFE KIDS Act to prevent foreign adversarial nations from abusing the
American surrogacy industry to obtain
U.S. citizenship for their children and
traffic infants abroad. Most of the developed world has already banned
international commercial surrogacy
due to the trafficking risks, and this
bill is a strong step in the right direction to prevent bad-faith actors from
taking advantage of U.S. surrogate
mothers and the children they bear.
I am proud to champion legislation
that directly benefits Utahns and families across the country. We have strong
families. We have strong communities,
and these bills reflect our dedication to
supporting them.
RECOGNIZING STEVE HIATT

Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to honor Steve Hiatt, the re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

cipient of the Hill Air Force Base 2025
Community Wingman Award.
Hill Air Force Base is one of the most
important contributors to northern
Utah’s economy and livelihood, employing over 23,000 military and civilian employees. Every year since 2007,
they have given one individual the
Community Wingman Award in recognition of their support for the base
and its personnel. This gives the base
an opportunity to recognize the impact
that Utahns in the surrounding communities have on the success of the
base.
Few people have supported Hill Air
Force Base more than Steve Hiatt. For
nearly a decade, he served the city of
Kaysville, Utah, as a city councilman
and a mayor. This is an adjacent community to Hill Air Force Base. During
this time, he ensured that the community fostered a strong relationship with
the base.
After serving in elected office, Steve
remained highly integrated in the Hill
community by serving as the vice
president of the Utah Defense Alliance,
as air combat command civic leader,
and three terms as honorary commander. In each of these positions,
Steve worked directly with servicemembers and leadership stationed at
Hill to better understand and assist
their mission. His work has ensured
that Hill will continue to be a successful and important contributor to our
national defense for years to come.
I am proud to recognize Steve’s
strong example of service, and I congratulate him for this will-earned
award. I thank him for his support of
Hill Air Force Base and his many contributions to our State as a councilman, mayor, and community member.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

RESTORING ELECTION INTEGRITY
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy
of
January
3,
2025,
Mr.
SUBRAMANYAM of Virginia was recognized for 60 minutes as the designee of
the minority leader.)
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days in
which to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material
in the RECORD.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
HARIDOPOLOS). Is there objection to the
request of the gentleman from Virginia?
There was no objection.
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker,
today marks 16 years since the Supreme Court’s disastrous decision in
Citizens United.
The decision overturned critically
important limits on political spending
by corporations and billionaires. We
said it at the time, and it has come
true: The decision has unleashed unprecedented spending by dark money
groups on our elections. Now cam-

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

paigns are often defined not by a candidate’s record or their ideas but, rather, by their access to dark money.
The wealthiest individuals and corporations can now help skew elections
singlehandedly by giving millions to
their preferred candidate. They can
block progress that they don’t want to
see. In fact, the world’s richest man
spent more than $250 million to help
President Trump get elected in 2024.
Let’s talk about that 2024 cycle.
Super-PACs spent $4.5 billion. That is
up from $2.3 billion in 2022, almost double in 2 years. That is more money
than the GDP of Greenland.
In the 2024 Presidential election, the
biggest super-PACs supporting majority party nominees raked in $865 million from donors who contributed $5
million or more alone. Each year, our
elections are increasingly defined not
by big spenders but by the biggest
spenders. Between 2010 and 2024, the
percentage of Federal election spending by the top 100 individual donors has
jumped from 2 percent to almost 15 percent. That is eight times as much.
This has resulted in Americans losing
faith in the integrity of our elections
and the integrity of our democracy because our democracy is predicated on
the idea that every voice matters, regardless of how much money you have.
When the wealthy few can drown out
the many, we lose sight of who we are
supposed to serve. Policymaking gets
overshadowed by these special interests.
Yet, after Citizens United, it is too
often small groups of corporations and
billionaires tipping the scales based on
who serves their business interests.
This can and must end. The American
people have a voice, and if the majority
supports a candidate or a reform, that
should win the day alone.
We must limit super-PACs, dark
money, and excessive campaign spending. We must restore trust in the political process. We must restore democracy to the way our Founders intended,
centered on equal access to government, and we must overturn Citizens
United. We have that power.
I thank my colleagues for joining me
today and for Assistant Leader NEGUSE
for organizing today. I look forward to
hearing from my many colleagues in
the next hour about how we can tackle
this important issue.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Arizona (Mrs. GRIJALVA).
Mrs. GRIJALVA. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman from Virginia
(Mr. SUBRAMANYAM) for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak
about the single greatest force that
continues to distort our democracy:
the role of money in our politics.
Mr. Speaker, 16 years ago today, the
Supreme Court’s Citizens United decision opened the floodgates to unlimited
corporate and billionaire spending in
our elections, drowning out the voices
of working people. The decision overturned longstanding precedent rooted
on independent political spending by
corporations and billionaires.

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.077

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

The conservative majority embraced
the idea that spending money on elections equals speech and that corporations are entitled to the same speech
rights as people, giving carte blanche
to corporations and billionaires to
spend unlimited money.
When money is allowed to dominate,
it blocks progress on everything else.
Private prison and immigrant detention contractors spend millions to influence elections and policy, all while
people die in their facilities. Mr.
Speaker, three people have died in just
the last 6 weeks at a privately run tent
camp in El Paso.
Fossil fuel and mining companies
pour enormous sums into elections to
block climate action while communities like mine in Arizona face record
heat, drought, and wildfires and continue to deal with the devastating impact to our water, land, and environment.
The gun lobby spends millions to
stop lifesaving reforms while my friend
Congresswoman Gabby Giffords continues to fight for commonsense gun
laws so that tragedies like that mass
shooting in Tucson never happen again.
Nowhere is this corruption more visible than in the White House, where policy decisions are increasingly shaped
by the interests of wealthy donors and
corporate insiders. Literally, it feels
like there is a sign in front of the
White House saying: Justice for sale.
We should be clear that Congress
doesn’t have to wait to act. We can ban
Members of Congress from holding and
trading stock. We can pass transparency laws like the DISCLOSE Act.
Ultimately, we need to pass a constitutional amendment reversing Citizens
United. This is a choice between democracy that serves donors or one that
serves people. The choice couldn’t be
clearer.
Mr. Speaker, 16 years after Citizens
United, we need to shift the power back
to everyday Americans and away from
those who can write the biggest
checks.
It is past time that we reverse course
on Citizens United. It is time to act
and end Citizens United.
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker,
there are a lot of reforms that people
have proposed to overturn the damage
done by Citizens United. I introduced
legislation, the Campaign and Election
Accountability Act. One of the things
that Citizens United did was make it
easier for foreign nationals to funnel
money into U.S. elections.
b 1740
The Federal Election Campaign Act
currently prohibits foreign nationals
from contributing to U.S. elections and
political campaigns. However, it does
not prohibit Americans from assisting
foreign nationals from seeking to do
so. We don’t know if they are wanting
to donate for nefarious reasons or if
they just like a candidate, but we must
ensure that our elections are free and
fair from foreign influence.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1163

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

It is a small tweak, but my bill will
prohibit Americans from assisting foreign nationals who want to contribute
to U.S. elections. This way, we can all
have faith that only Americans are
contributing to our campaigns.
For now, this is a step in the right direction as we all work toward the larger goal of overturning Citizens United.
I hear from a lot of constituents
about what is the disconnect between
Washington’s policies and what is happening for everyday Americans because
Americans are living through one of
the worst cost-of-living crises in modern history. Working families are
struggling with rising expenses, like
healthcare, housing and utilities, and
groceries, yet they have representation
that seems to reflect the very wealthiest. We just passed a tax cut for the
very wealthiest Americans this last
summer, and people don’t understand
why.
If you look back at what happened
with Citizens United, you realize that
that influence on our campaigns and
elections is why you end up with policies like that. This is why we have to
make sure that we overturn Citizens
United.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from Colorado (Mr. NEGUSE).
Mr. NEGUSE. Mr. Speaker, I thank
my colleague from Virginia for this opportunity to speak on the floor today.
He is new to the Congress, but he has
already made an outsized impact during the course of his 13 months of service in this august body taking on corruption. I am deeply grateful to him
for his efforts in that regard, not just
with respect to overturning Citizens
United, but tackling the corruption
that has become so pervasive here in
Washington, D.C.
Mr. Speaker, I stand on the floor of
the people’s House to deliver what I believe to be an urgent message: The
time to confront political corruption
and clean up government is now.
Sixteen years ago to this very day,
the Supreme Court issued its ruling in
Citizens United v. Federal Election
Commission. As you know, Mr. Speaker, that decision overturned longstanding precedent and limits on political spending by special interests.
The decision created a dark money
system, where money speaks louder
than everyday Americans. It has shifted power and influence away from everyday Americans, from the folks in
our communities that we are privileged
to serve, to instead these shadowy special interests that flood television
screens every evening.
In my view, Citizens United undermined what it means to be a country of
the people, by the people, for the people, and, above all, accountable to the
people. Unfortunately, for far too long,
this Chamber has failed to do what
needs to be done to renew the faith of
the American people in our democracy.
We cannot accept that. We have to do
something about it.
As you know, Mr. Speaker, earlier
this year, I introduced legislation in

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

the form of a proposed amendment to
the United States Constitution that
would revoke Citizens United. It would
ensure transparency through our campaign finance reform and prevent unrestrained spending and dark money in
our elections. Put bluntly, it would put
the power back in the hands of the
American people.
I thank my Democratic colleagues, 73
of them, who have already cosponsored
this legislation, who are joining us tonight to be part of this effort, this clarion call, supporting the restoration of
integrity and transparency to Washington.
Together, I honestly believe, with
enough reformers, we can change the
Congress. We can ban stock trading by
Members of Congress. We can end dark
money in our politics. We can overturn
Citizens United. We just have to have
the political will to do it.
Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman
from Virginia for having that will and
all of my colleagues who joined us on
the floor this evening.
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentlewoman from Hawaii
(Ms. TOKUDA).
Ms. TOKUDA. Mr. Speaker, today
marks the anniversary of Citizens
United. This decision did not rewrite
campaign finance law; it sold our democracy to the highest bidder.
Before Citizens United, elections
were about persuading voters. After it,
they became about courting billionaires.
As of 2025, there are 2,502 super-PACs.
For the 2024 election, they have taken
in over $5 billion, much of it dark
money, much of it undisclosed, and
much of it designed to drown out the
voices of everyday Americans.
Let’s be clear: This isn’t free speech.
This is legalized corruption.
Super-PACs were supposedly independent. In reality, they have become
shadow campaigns, circumventing coordination laws, allowing unlimited,
often anonymous, contributions, and
turning elections into auctions.
What does that buy? For a bargain
price of $300 million, Elon Musk bought
a gilded seat inside the Federal Government and walked away with billions
in contracts from the very agencies he
later DOGE’d. It is a parasitic, pay-toplay system disguised as innovation.
Meanwhile, teachers, nurses, construction workers, and police officers
pay higher effective tax rates than private equity executives. Families struggle with housing costs, healthcare, and
childcare while Congress stalls, paralyzed by fear of angering the superPACs that bankroll campaigns.
That fear is the point. Dark money
doesn’t just influence policy. It
changes behavior. It makes Members of
Congress think twice before doing the
right thing because they know one vote
could trigger a massive smear campaign.
The losers aren’t Democrats or Republicans. The losers in all of this are
the American people, across parties

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.079

H21JAPT1

H1164

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

and across States, whose voices are
being drowned out.
Fifteen years later, the verdict is in:
Citizens United has sold out our democracy and all Americans across the
country. It is past time to end the era
when billionaires buy access, buy silence, and buy power.
Congress must act to close the coordination loopholes, rein in the superPACs, and restore the simple idea that
in America, people, not money, govern.
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentlewoman for a lot of
great points there.
I yield to the gentlewoman from
North Carolina (Mrs. FOUSHEE).
Mrs. FOUSHEE. Mr. Speaker, today
marks 16 years since the Supreme
Court handed down its disastrous Citizens United decision, a ruling that
opened the floodgates to unlimited corporate money in our elections and fundamentally distorted our democracy.
By discarding decades of precedent,
the Supreme Court declared that unlimited spending in elections poses no
threat to our democratic system and
that corporations are entitled to the
same political rights as the people
whose lives are governed by the outcomes of those elections.
What emerged from this transfer of
power was an election system that no
longer depends primarily on voters but
rather on outside entities whose sole
purpose is to spend unlimited money,
often without public accountability, to
influence who holds power and how
that power is used.
Since Citizens United, we have
watched a parallel political system
take shape, one dominated by superPACs and dark money organizations
that can raise and spend unlimited
sums and operate with fewer rules, less
transparency, and the ability to determine election outcomes long before
voters cast a ballot. A small number of
wealthy donors now wield influence far
out of proportion to the voters they
seek to affect.
b 1750
This concentration of power has consequences for how this institution
functions. When unlimited outside
spending can be deployed against a single vote, it shapes the decisions lawmakers can take. It narrows the range
of feasibility policy. It rewards delay
and protects entrenched interests,
often at the expense of the public’s priorities.
Meanwhile, Americans face one of
the most pressing affordability crises
in
decades.
Healthcare,
housing,
childcare, energy, and grocery costs
are all rising, yet policies that could
provide immediate relief are repeatedly
stalled.
At the same time, industries that
benefit from higher costs or weaker enforcement continue to earn record profits and protect their advantage with
unlimited political spending. Although
Citizens United did not create these
problems, it enabled them to persist
and grow.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

While the long-term goal must be to
overturn Citizens United through a
constitutional amendment, Congress
has the power and the responsibility to
act immediately to limit its damage.
The American people deserve a government that answers to them. Sixteen
years of Citizens United is long enough.
We
must
restore
accountability,
strengthen transparency, and defend
the voice of every voter.
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker,
the concentration of political power
has often led to the concentration of
wealth in this country.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from California (Mr. DESAULNIER).
Mr. DESAULNIER. Mr. Speaker,
first, I want to thank the gentleman
from Virginia for giving me this opportunity to speak, but also for his leadership. This is such an important discussion for Americans, and I think most
Americans don’t realize what a deliberate effort this was for years to take
away their power and place it in the
hands of the wealthiest and, unfortunately, the most obscenely greedy people in this country who think only they
have the wisdom to govern.
I thank the gentleman for giving me
the opportunity to highlight how Citizens United has impacted not just the
political landscape and indeed this
room but also our Nation, our culture,
and certainly our economy.
With the floodgates opened by the
Supreme Court in 2010, corporations
and billionaires can now make unlimited independent expenditures. As a result, the wealthy few have even more
outsized influence on our politics.
According to the Center on Budget
and Policy Priorities, the 2017 Trump
tax cuts overwhelmingly favored the
rich. The lowest 20 percent of earners
got an average tax break of only $70
while the top 1 percent of earners received over $61,000 in tax breaks, and
the top tenth of a percent saw over
$250,000 of tax breaks. This is on top of
the situation where we have the largest
concentration of wealth in the history
of this country, making it more obscenely unfair.
Those same tax cuts lowered the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21
percent, which the Bipartisan Policy
Center projected will increase the Federal deficit by almost $1 trillion dollars
by fiscal year 2027.
Unsurprisingly, during the same period, billionaire spending on Presidential elections has skyrocketed, increasing from a total of $16 million before Citizens United was passed to over
$2.6 billion in the years since Citizens
United. What naive person would think
that these people who contributed
these obscene amounts of money did it
for altruistic purposes? No, they did it
for themselves. This is obscene greed.
How much do they need?
When billionaires and corporations
are able to spend unlimited amounts to
influence the results of our elections,
our elected officials are, in turn, unfortunately, more likely to respond by

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

passing legislation that benefits corporations and the richest Americans
while making life more expensive for
middle-class Americans. If you are surprised about affordability, Mr. President, this is how real Americans have
to live because of your policies and the
people who preceded you.
Our Nation and the world are experiencing record levels of income inequality, and the impacts of Citizens United
and other handouts to the obscenely
rich and powerful are only making it
worse.
It is past time that we change course
and correct what has created this inequality. Compare it to the years of another Republican President, Dwight
David Eisenhower, when we had the
largest middle class in the country and
the world in our history. Ironically,
President Eisenhower said about working people, the labor movement: Only a
fool—this is President Eisenhower—
would come between an American
worker and their ability to organize for
other workers.
American voters deserve Representatives who will bring about positive
change, not just cater to the interests
of these obscenely wealthy donors and
megacorporations. I am glad to be here
today, and, again, I thank my colleague for doing this.
It is my belief America is about representing all of us, ordinary people as
well as wealthy people. After all, are
we a country of, by, and for Americans,
or of, by, and for the obscenely
wealthy?
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Ohio (Mr.
LANDSMAN).
Mr. LANDSMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman for yielding to
give me this opportunity to speak.
I believe that the greatest issue that
we face in this country is the extreme
concentration of wealth and power at
the very top. It is unprecedented and
dangerous.
At the end of 2024, the 65 million
Americans with the least amount of
wealth had about $4 trillion in wealth
combined. The 905 billionaires at the
end of 2024 had nearly $8 trillion in
wealth. So put another way, 900 people
have nearly twice as much wealth as 65
million Americans. Mr. Speaker, 900
people is the size of a small high
school. Mr. Speaker, 65 million is almost the population of the entire Midwest. And $8 trillion is double, double
what every American owes in student
loans, car loans, credit cards, and nearly every other type of debt combined,
meaning that these 905 billionaires
could pay for everyone’s debt in the
United States and still be superrich.
Now, this may have gotten worse in
2025 in large part because of the One
Big Beautiful Bill Act that spent trillions and trillions of dollars on tax
cuts for the superwealthy at the expense of millions and millions of Americans and that cut over a trillion dollars in healthcare. Fifteen million
Americans are going to lose their

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.081

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

healthcare to pay for tax cuts for the
superwealthy. So that concentration of
wealth and power got worse, probably
worse in 1 single year, in one single
vote than any other time in American
history.
During my lifetime, since I was born,
CEO pay has increased by over 1,000
percent, while worker pay has increased by 25 percent. On average,
right now, a CEO makes more in a single day than a worker does in an entire
year. The concentration of wealth and
power has given a small group of
superelites the ability to make all the
big decisions in this country, and they
have used their power and influence to
further rig our economy and politics to
benefit themselves at the expense of
everyone else. This obviously got infinitely worse with Citizens United.
b 1800
This was a multidecade campaign
that big corporations and the superwealthy paid for to get a Supreme
Court that would change the law so
that they could spend whatever they
wanted on their politicians. Now they
can spend unlimited amounts of money
on elections, on campaigns, and on
politicians, and they don’t have to report any of it.
Every major issue in this country,
whether it is the attacks on our democracy, the issues with our economy, or
healthcare, it all can be traced back to
the concentration of wealth and power
and Citizens United.
It is why the American Dream is out
of touch for the vast majority of Americans by nearly every measure.
Mr. Speaker, look no further than
the fact that most Americans can no
longer buy a home, and one in four
Americans have zero dollars saved for
retirement.
This is a crisis and a moment of reckoning. All of the money is stuck at the
top, and our big mission, the thing that
our generation has to do, is reclaim
that money, that power and wealth,
back for the American people. That is
the number one thing. At the end of
the day, our generation has to reclaim
that power and wealth on behalf of the
American people and return it to them.
The first thing we have to do is fix
our democracy and politics, returning
power back to the people. This includes
banning dark money, reversing Citizens United, and ending voter suppression and eliminating partisan gerrymandering once and for all. It also includes government reforms to actually
get rid of waste, fraud, and abuse and
corruption of every kind.
Once power is back with people, we
will be able to address all of the other
major issues in our country.
We will have leaders who are willing
to fix our broken economy and overhaul our tax code so that hard work
pays off for every American.
Fixing the tax code does two things.
One, it will ensure that the superwealthy and big corporations pay all
their taxes just like the rest of us, and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1165

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

two, it will generate trillions of dollars
that will be invested back in the American people. There will be trillions to
help people with housing, healthcare,
and education. It will help us pay down
the debt. It will fix nearly everything
that is broken in this country.
The economy belongs to all of us, not
just the superwealthy. Fixing and reversing Citizens United will allow us to
fundamentally improve the lives of
every American and fundamentally improve our economy.
Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman
for leading this work, and I appreciate
him allowing me to say a few words.
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker, I
appreciate the gentleman’s remarks.
It is the cycle and the concentration
of wealth because of Citizens United
that has led to the concentration of political power that you can see even
more concentration of wealth. It is the
cycle that Citizens United has created
that is hurting our country and leading
to record income inequality. It is reflected in some of the policies that we
have passed that have hurt everyday
Americans, working Americans.
While the long-term goal is to overturn Citizens United, certainly through
a constitutional amendment—that is a
very difficult goal, but certainly one
that we should aspire to—Congress
does have the power to act immediately to curb some of its damage.
We are talking about bills like the
Freedom to Vote Act, the DISCLOSE
Act, the Protecting Our Democracy
Act, and the Ban Corporate PACs Act.
These bills will help reduce and mitigate the influence of big money,
strengthen transparency around it, and
limit corporate power. This is a moment to draw a line between a political
system that serves donors and one that
serves the American people. What we
really want in the end is to serve the
American people.
If you just look back at the past couple of decades since Citizens United,
since 2010—in 2010, in that cycle, $3.6
billion in total cost of Federal elections by election cycle, then it goes up
to $6.3 billion. By 2022 it is at $8.9 billion. By 2024 it is at $15.9 billion.
This past cycle was a record high.
Again, all of that is because of Citizens
United and because of the ability to
just flood these PACs, these superPACS, dark money super-PACs, with as
much money as they want with no accountability. Now there are ways to
hide some of these donations, as well.
We have to do something. We have to
act now, otherwise this is going to continue the cycle of pain for so many
Americans.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman
from
New
Mexico
(Ms.
STANSBURY).
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, 16
years ago today, the Supreme Court decided in the Citizens United decision to
put our democracy up for sale. I am
here today to say, Mr. Speaker, that
democracy is not for sale, and it is
time to get big money out of politics,

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

to end Citizens United, and to hold this
administration, this Congress, and this
judiciary accountable. That is because
what we have seen is the fundamental
erosion of our democratic system, and
at the rotten root of it all is the influence of big money in politics. That is
because Citizens United opened the
door for corporations and billionaires
to dump untold sums of money on to
our elections anonymously and calling
corporations people.
Mr. Speaker, corporations are not
people. The American people are whom
we represent. It is not the corporations, not the billionaires, not the
wealthy donors, and not the individuals who are trying to buy and sell our
democracy.
We know that right now corruption
and the buying of elections are having
a profound influence on what we are
seeing in this country. We are watching as a United States President is selling the United States out from under
the American people. He is offering
pardons for millions of dollars to his
friends and letting dangerous individuals back on to the streets. These are
individuals who have committed whitecollar crimes all for the very cheap
sum of giving him a few million dollars
or a few billion dollars in his
cryptocurrency.
He is selling our secrets and our national security to foreign adversaries
by allowing them to deposit sums of
money into his cryptocurrency by giving him gifts like multimillion-dollar
jets and, yes, even allowing him to potentially launder money in a foreign
bank account in Qatar from oil he stole
using the American taxpayers’ dollars
and the U.S. military.
President Trump is showing what
happens when you let big money buy
politics. In fact, he told Big Oil just
last year that if they gave him $1 billion in campaign funds, he would deliver. Well, promises made, promised
kept, literally invading a foreign country to take their oil.
Here in this Chamber, just a few days
ago, it was discovered that the husband
of a member of leadership on the opposite side of the aisle had been trading
in stocks, while we are considering a
stock trading ban right now in this
House. This is corruption in action.
We have a judiciary across the street
who is considering undermining the
fundamental voting rights of the American people.
After their wealthy donors took
them on trips and involved them in
this vast scheme over the last several
years to fundamentally remake America, the same donors who donated to
Donald Trump and who donated to our
friends across the aisle are also making
money hand over fist on the stock market right now.
This is what comes from Citizens
United, and that is why, Mr. Speaker, I
am absolutely dedicated to fighting to
make sure that we get big money out
of politics and that we end Citizens
United. When we take back the

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.083

H21JAPT1

H1166

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

House—because, Mr. Speaker, we will
take back the House—I guarantee you
that on day one, our top priority will
be to root this corruption and this rot
out of the Federal Government.
It is time to get big money out of
politics, and I am here for the fight.
b 1810
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker, I
thank my colleague and all the speakers today. This is the 16th anniversary
of Citizens United v. Federal Election
Commission. It was a 5–4 ruling. This
decision
overturned
longstanding
precedent that we had in this country,
where we had clearly established limits
on independent political spending by
corporations and billionaires, and it
was working.
For many years, political spending
had essentially flattened out. Sometimes, it had gone down when it comes
to the contributions of billionaires and
the largest corporations, and we were
able to have an election system where
there was a lot of money in the system,
but not to where we are today, where it
has completely engulfed all of our actions and all of our campaigns.
There has been so much damage
caused by Citizens United, as many of
my colleagues explained today. We are
talking about wealthy donors now dictating election outcomes, potentially,
with the amount of money they can
flood into these elections. Americans
have less information about who is influencing those campaigns and politicians.
A lot of times, it is very easy to hide
your contributions to these PACs and
super-PACs. Because of that, we see a
system now where we don’t even know
where the money is coming from. We
see the names of some of these cleverly
named PACs in the disclosures, but you
can have PACs hiding PACs and chains
of money. That is why I felt the need
to even try to address the influence of
foreign money, because it has become
easier than ever for a foreign entity to
also infiltrate our elections.
These reforms we are talking about
here, campaign finance reform, have
broad support from the American people across both sides of the aisle. In
fact, they have felt that they cannot
trust D.C., they cannot trust this administration, and they can’t even trust
this body, Congress, because of the influence of all this money in our politics
today, in our campaigns today.
The dynamics show up repeatedly in
the issues that we are working on that
directly affect people’s lives. We are
talking about our efforts to lower prescription drug costs and healthcare
costs, and how we see all the money
spent by some of those groups to prevent legislation that will help the
American people.
My colleague from New Mexico
talked about the influence of oil and
gas and that money on trying to address the environment—clean air, clean
water, and climate change. We are
talking about efforts that we are try-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

ing to make to crack down on corporate price gouging and how it has become incredibly difficult, an almost
uphill battle when it comes to some
price gouging efforts, because of the influence of all of this money on our politics.
Then, we talk about strengthening
worker protections, as well. We are becoming a country that is not looking
out for the average worker, and we are
talking about times where workers are
seeing their wages flatten, and lower if
you take into account inflation, and
the increase in income inequality as a
result of it.
People are fed up, and they understand that part of the reason why they
can’t trust the policies coming from
Washington, D.C. is because of the influence of this money on our policymaking and elections, and it needs to
stop. It needs to stop.
Unlimited outside spending gives special interests the ability to threaten
lawmakers with massive advertising
campaigns, well-funded challengers,
and relentless negative messaging. I
have been through it, and I know many
of our colleagues have been through it,
where these super-PACs come in and
change the dynamics of an election
with millions and millions of dollars.
The one bit of good news is that
many of us, like me, are here still. We
fought that uphill battle and won it,
but now we have to look at what is
going to happen in the future, at what
kind of political system our kids will
have to endure. Will they feel like they
have a voice in our politics, or will
they feel like they are seeing a political system that is corrupted by all
this money? It is about which side will
be able to spend the millions of dollars
to win, not which side has the right
policies and right things for the American people and to serve the American
people. This is all about service. This is
not about money and the influence of
the most wealthy corporations and
groups.
We have outlined a lot of different
ways that we can address this. Again, I
go back to the Freedom to Vote Act,
the DISCLOSE Act, the Protecting Our
Democracy Act, and the Ban Corporate
PACs Act. We can work on this right
now. Even if we don’t think we have
the votes to overturn Citizens United,
we should still try. We should still put
it on the floor and put it up for a vote.
In the 16 years that we have had Citizens United go into effect, we see our
airwaves, mailboxes, inboxes, and digital media influenced by all this
money.
One of our country’s core principles
is that every citizen has a vote and
that every citizen has a voice, regardless of how much money they have.
When you allow unlimited money to
come into our campaign system, those
individual voices are drowned out. A
lot of people feel the despair of not
having a voice in our politics today. A
lot of that is because of Citizens
United.

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

We have lost something that has
made our democracy special in some
ways. I think the folks who spoke up
today have really made a lot of good
points about how many of us feel the
anger of what is going on, but we are
committed to getting this dark money
out of politics.
This does not have to be a partisan
issue. It never has to be. I know there
are folks on both sides of the aisle who
want to do this.
Some of my colleagues talked about
the corruption today in our politics
and how there is this perception of corruption and the reality of corruption.
They are talking about what has happened in this administration as well,
and all the corruption that has happened in this administration. It is disheartening to see some of the stories
that we see every week about how foreign governments are influencing our
policies now, and how foreign leaders,
wealthy people, and wealthy corporations can easily buy some of our policymaking. That is the appearance, and
that is the reality in some cases. That
needs to stop. We need to do something
about it. We need to do something now.
Again, we are all committed to making sure that people trust our institutions and our Congress. I thank my colleagues today for speaking up and
being willing to take on this fight. This
is not an easy fight. The easy thing to
do is just to go with the flow and go
along with the system that we have
today. Instead, my colleagues have decided to speak up. My colleagues have
decided that they will not accept the
status quo.
I know many people were not able to
come today. I know we have a few more
still on their way, but the reality is
that my colleagues understand that
the system is not good for our democracy. It is not good for our country. It
is not good for the perception of this
institution or the reality of this institution. So, we have to continue to keep
fighting.
If we look at the cycles, in the 2010
cycle, as I mentioned before, the top
100 individual donors spent 2.1 percent
of all the spending in 2010. By 2024, it
was 15 percent. If you extrapolate that,
by 2038, about half of our spending
could end up being from the top 100 individual donors. I mean, that is sort of
where we are headed right now, where
you are going to have such a concentration of wealth.
There are countries that have that
right now, today, and those democracies are not functioning democracies.
Some of them don’t even call themselves democracies anymore, or don’t
even try to consider themselves democracies, where you have the few governing the rest.
When you see some of the spending
that we have today, again, the 2000
cycle had $18 million in spending, and
the 2004 cycle had $13 million in spending. The 2008 cycle had $16 million. It
kind of leveled off.
Then, you look at the 2012 cycle,
after Citizens United: $231 million in

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.085

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

spending. In the 2016 cycle, there was
$682 million in spending. By the 2020
cycle, we are in the billions now, $1.2
billion.
b 1820
We are at a point now where you
need a billion dollars to run for President at this point.
The 2024-cycle was $2.6 billion. I
think we are at a point now where
some of our elections, the money is
just outrageous. People want to feel
trust in our institutions and our systems, but you want to get to a place
where you can do that. What we are experiencing now is affecting our policymaking. It is affecting every single
part of the way this institution runs
today.
The other thing we, at least, want is
disclosure. That is why I have talked
about some of the bills that we can do
right now, like the DISCLOSE Act, because at least we could have more clear
understandings of where the money is
coming from and a better ability to follow the money so that the American
people can understand who is paying
for that commercial that they keep
seeing on TV, right? Is it actually the
PAC? Who paid for that ad and where is
the money coming from? What do they
want and who received that money,
right? It is very unclear right now to a
lot of people.
There are a lot of issues right now
that we can solve even without overturning Citizens United, although overturning Citizens United is our main
goal. We have an opportunity and we
have to act now. We can’t wait.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Illinois (Mrs. RAMIREZ).
Mrs. RAMIREZ. Mr. Speaker, 16
years ago, the Supreme Court overturned a longstanding precedent that
protected working families’ voices in
our democracy.
By embracing this idea that corporations are entitled to the same speech
rights as people, the Supreme Court
opened the floodgates to unchecked
corporate influence in governance and
billionaire political spending.
The Supreme Court effectively put a
price tag on representation. They put a
price tag on the seats of this Chamber
and they put a price tag on our democracy. But today I will make sure that I
am clear in the House of Representatives: Our democracy is not for sale.
Our democracy is weaker when the
voices of Black, Brown, middle- and
low-income folks are drowned out by
the volumes of ads a million dollars
can buy.
Since the Citizens United decision,
outside spending by super-PACs and
dark money groups has exploded at
every single level of government.
The Trump administration and Republicans in Congress are a clear example. We know that to make Trump and
their billionaire bosses happy, my colleagues, bought by big, corporate
money, will leave working people
unhoused. They will leave them fore-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1167

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

closed. They will leave them detained,
deported, poor, hungry, sick, uninsured, and drowning, literally and figuratively.
It is time we finally prioritize a democracy that works for working people. One where Donald, where Elon,
where Jeff, and all these billionaires
pay their fair share. Their money has
to be out of our elections and out of
the White House, and their hands out
of the working people’s pockets and off
our services, where our rights and our
freedoms mean working people have
every single thing they need to thrive.
We need bold legislative action if we
are going to end corruption and get big
money out of politics and get their corporate influence out of our communities.
That is why last year, I filed the
Campaign Transparency Act and the
Stop the Super PAC-Candidate Coordination Act and supported the Abolishing Super PACs Act. And today, as
we are here during Special Order hour,
I am proud to announce that I will also
be introducing the Lobbyist Loophole
Closure Act with Representatives
MULLIN and WILLIAMS.
That bill addresses the loopholes created by the Lobbyist Disclosure Act.
The bill includes provisions to increase
transparency and accountability by
broadening the definition of lobbying
and by also lowering the time threshold for registration.
Mr. Speaker, I will close by thanking
End Citizens United and its president
Tiffany Muller for all the work that
they are doing to get dark money out
of politics and that we ensure a democracy by the people for the people. It is
time we end this, and I know that collectively we can do it.
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker, I
will definitely look into that bill.
There are more solutions that we can
act on right now while we try to overturn Citizens United. I thank all the
speakers today. I thank Representative
NEGUSE for helping organize this. I
thank my staff, including Matt Fisher,
for helping get everyone together
today.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
STUTZMAN). Members are reminded to
refrain from engaging in personalities
toward the President and to direct
their remarks to the Chair.
f

DEBT, DEFICITS, AND
DEMOGRAPHICS
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. SCHWEIKERT
of Arizona was recognized for 30 minutes.)
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Mr. Speaker,
shall we have some fun with math and
economics? It is something we just
don’t hear a lot of here on the floor of
the House. Remember, this is my therapy because I often sit in the back of
the room and stew when I hear people
say things when it is obvious they
didn’t pull their calculator out.

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

I am going to try two things tonight,
and if you are actually interested in
budgets and economics, have fun with
me. If you are not, go watch Netflix.
We are going to actually try a couple
concepts, where the money is going and
within that, the scale of our debt and
deficits. The fact of the matter is, we
are at what is called interest fragility
that—think about what happened over
the last couple days in the discussions
coming from the White House, from us.
The bond market actually bounced up
about 30 basis points. We were just
playing on the back of napkins, the
math, and if that had held for an entire
year, just those 30 basis points would
have been $33 billion of additional interest.
I will try to actually explain that
and then actually talk about something that is really interesting. The
economy from a GDP calculation
standpoint, and this is just the economists looking at the vitality in the
economy, is remarkably good. We are
running over a 5 percent GDP, which if
you go back and look at the economic
projections, it is double what many of
our smartest economists in the country thought we would be at a year ago,
but our spending—because of interest
and healthcare and the reality that we
are going to have to deal with is debt,
deficits, and demographics.
Once again, remember, we functionally have the same number of 18 year
olds today as we had 20 years ago, but
we have double the number of 65 and
up. It is just what we are. Don’t get
mad. It is not Republican or Democrat.
It is just demographics and understanding when our brothers and sisters
move into their earned benefit years,
what it costs.
The fact of the matter is, this Congress refuses to do the hard things because in 61⁄2 years, the Social Security
trust fund is empty and you get a 24
percent cut in your check and we double senior poverty. We double the number of baby boomers who will live on
the street.
In 61⁄2, 7 years, the Medicare trust
fund is empty and your hospital gets
an 11 percent cut and much of the financing things like Medicare Advantage and those actually just become,
let’s just say, difficult.
Let’s walk through some of this. I
pulled up this chart because I haven’t
used it in a few months and I am realizing there are not enough folks, particularly the staff—remember, I often
do these because I am talking to a
thousand televisions around the campus. The room looks empty, but we are
on televisions. Hopefully, there are
some staffers who are working on policy who will understand how important
these numbers are.
Do you see the blue portion of that
chart, Mr. Speaker? That is discretionary. That is all you and I get to
vote on. As Members of Congress, we
only vote on the discretionary portion,
and this was a 2025 chart. Today, it is

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.087

H21JAPT1

H1168

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

probably only 25 percent, not 26 percent, of the total spending. Every dime
of that is borrowed.
b 1830
Mr. Speaker, the math for last year,
for every dollar we took in, in tax receipts, we spent $1.43.
We were just in the back. I was talking with one of my Joint Economic
economists. We think it is lower this
year but we are still not—because we
are having to make the adjustments on
the student loans and those sorts of
things, it could be down to $1.37 or $1.40
this year. Think about that. Last year,
for every dollar that came in, we spent
$1.43.
Realize all this in the red is on autopilot, and a portion of it is actually on
borrowed money. If you just do the hierarchy, every dime of defense is borrowed. Every dime of nondefense discretionary is borrowed. That is only
about $2 trillion. A wedge of the mandatory also ends up being borrowed.
There is one other thing I want to
point out in the chart. If you actually
take a look at the hierarchy of spending, Social Security is number one. It
is $1.5 trillion.
Guess what is number two if you do
the total interest paid. It is interest.
Here is interest to the public who
bought our bonds, whether it be your
pension plan as an individual or another country, or the interest we have
to pay back to the trust funds when we
reach into the Social Security trust
fund, the Medicare trust fund, the railroad retirement trust fund, and those
things. We borrow the money. We owe
them interest.
Total interest last year was about
$1.2 trillion, making interest the second biggest expenditure in this government. Medicare is number three. Medicaid and healthcare subsidies are number four. Defense is actually number
five.
I always love it—I often have these
conversations back home when I have a
Democrat who says: Well, if you cut defense.
Then they look at me in horror when
I ask them if they realize that in the
hierarchy of spending, defense is actually the fifth biggest expenditure in
Government.
This one is actually good news of
some of what is happening. This is actually one of my favorite charts because it actually demonstrates here is
our tax receipts as a percentage of the
economy.
We were basically getting about 17.1
percent of the economy. We have some
new math right now. It says we are
probably peaking over 18 percent,
maybe even higher, of the economy
coming in, in tax receipts. That is wonderful except for one really yucky
thing.
Remember last year, when we were
up, getting 17.1 percent of the economy
in taxes, we functionally were spending
23.4 percent. That delta is the deficit.
What happens when your tax receipts

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

are going up as a percentage of the size
of the economy and the economy is
growing but healthcare and interest
are going up faster? Are we going to
tell the truth about that?
Here are basic factoids. I did this last
week, but I want to say it again because it doesn’t seem to be sinking in.
In about 33 or 36 months, half of every
dime that the Federal Government
spends, 50 percent of all of our spending
will go to those 65 and up. Moody’s
Analytics has in 2035—what is that—8
or 9 budget years from now—30 percent
of all tax receipts going just to interest.
There was an interesting economic
paper. It was actually an economic
paper demonstrating that Italy actually was more fiscally sound in the
long term than the United States.
When you see that headline, you sit
down and read it, within there was a
factoid. If you use a 6 percent generational discount rate, which is reasonable—it could be slightly high—for a
child born today, you need 104 percent
of their lifetime earnings just to pay
Federal pension obligations. Those are
Social Security, Medicare, military,
and Federal requirement.
Mr. Speaker, think of that. For a
child born today, you need every dime
they will ever make in their entire life,
plus another 4 percent, to pay pension
obligations. Does anyone see the immorality going on? But we can’t talk
about that because that would be hard.
I believe the American people are a
hell of a lot smarter than we are. They
are ready for us to tell them the truth
about math. One of the first things we
as the political class have to do is stop
lying about math.
Let’s actually walk through some of
this, and I will blast through these because I am trying to make a point.
Also, before I go much further, if
someone actually wants to bathe in the
truth in math and what the future
looks like and how we can fix it, go to
the Joint Economic Committee Republicans. We publish some amazing
things.
Every weekday, we do a text message
to a few thousand people we call the
Daily Debt. It shows how much came in
and how much we spent. We give you a
12-month window so it fixes ups and
downs. We will also give you the fiscal
year as it sits.
Mr. Speaker, I just got my Daily
Debt text message. We are borrowing
over $71,000 every second. That is the
12-month calculation. It makes up all
the highs and lows and averages out.
You have got to understand that this
ain’t a game because that $71,000 a second, we need to have buyers of our
bonds. We make our buyers of our
bonds cranky. It gets really expensive.
This chart here is just trying to
make a point of what is going on in our
debt and deficits. Remember that discretionary spending, the blue on the
pie chart I just showed you, is flat. It
is not growing. Yes, there is waste and
fraud in it. We need to eliminate that.

PO 00000

Frm 00044

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

We actually believe technology would
eliminate that, except I can’t believe
how the bureaucracies are terrified of
the technology that can find the waste
and fraud.
Our growth is in the mandatory
spending. It is the promises we have
made that we have got to keep but we
have got to figure out a way to finance
it.
What this chart is showing is we see
this slightly darker color here. That is
the primary deficit. That is actually
programs that we are spending more
money than we have coming in. All of
this lighter purple is the interest we
owe.
The point we are making is this. If
we have a $2 trillion deficit this year
but interest is $1.2 trillion, interest
now is the primary driver. Number two
is healthcare costs. We just have this
problem of telling the truth about
healthcare costs are out of control. In
many States, the government is the
primary—is the majority of money
spent in healthcare.
Let’s have some fun here. I know we
are all interested in bonds and how
they refinance. Remember, if you have
$38.5 trillion of debt out there, over $30
trillion of that is sold. That is what
they call publicly held debt. About onethird of that—and I was going to show
the charts of all the papers and the
notes and the bonds. I realized no one
cares.
About one-third of that—let’s call it
$10 billion—has to be refinanced this
year. Much of that is coming off of
lower bond prices from a couple of
years ago.
On average, we are picking up one
point of interest, 1.5 points, some 2.
There is your problem. The chart
here—I am just trying to show you—is
we have to constantly refinance. We
are refinancing at higher interest rates
because we are making the markets
cranky. We are not telling the bond
markets that we are serious about taking on our debt and deficit.
Mr. Speaker, have you ever heard the
term ‘‘bond vigilantes’’? It happened to
the United States in the 1990s where,
suddenly, we were making the bond
markets cranky. They were starting to
demand premiums. Our debt was a fraction of a fraction of a fraction of what
it is today.
We are on the cusp of putting the
bond market in charge of this country,
not us. It is a really dangerous game
we are playing. One of the ways we
mitigate that is we tell the bond market: We are adults. We are being serious. We understand we have a demographic. We have a healthcare spending
problem. We are going to take it on.
We are going to adopt technologies. We
are going to adopt other ways to make
our brothers and sisters healthy. We
are going to telegraph to the markets
we are stable. We are America. We are
the incredible investment.
If you think I am engaging in hyperbole, look at the price of gold. If the

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.089

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

price of gold isn’t telegraphing something to you, go back to your basic economics class. There is something really wrong out there. We are making
markets nervous.
b 1840
It is estimated that, from fiscal year
2025 to fiscal year 2026, we are going to
have to borrow—this is what we call
virgin borrowing; it is new issuances—
about $470 billion a quarter. That is
less than $2 trillion, but it is pretty
darn close.
That is on top of what we have to refinance. When you start to get a sense
of what we are bringing to the bond
markets, it is more than just the borrowing. It is the refinance. We are subject to the interest rates.
We need to be understanding. Convince the people who are loaning us
money, whether it be your personal
pension, your savings account, Japan,
whoever is buying our debt, that we are
stable, that we are adults, and that we
understand. We have a demographic
problem, but we are going to engage in
adult-like technology and borrowing
policy, things to manage our debt, and
minimize it.
Mr. Speaker, this chart is substantially unreadable, but I wanted to actually just show it for the fun of it. This
is one of the things that we use in our
economic shop, where we try to actually say: Okay, here is 1 year. If it went
up 1⁄2 percent, that 1 year costs $206 billion over 10 years. It is basically a
table that says that if interest rates
pop up this much, and it only lasts for
1 year or 2 years, here is what it will
cost us over the 10-year window.
The whole point of this chart is to
start to demonstrate so many of the
things we talked about here. We are
going to save $1 billion. That is a lot of
money. We believe, annualized, we are
going to borrow over $6 billion a day.
In the first quarter of the fiscal year,
we are borrowing over $8 billion a day.
The arguments here and the debates
we will have here, often to save money,
which are wonderful, we will have borrowed more money during the debate
than whatever the item being debated
would have ever saved, because: How do
you talk about the drivers of debt?
The other thing we also have to deal
with is when we get our policies wrong,
when we make the bond markets nervous, when they don’t see that we are
fixated on debt management, fiscal reality, and interest rates go up on U.S.
sovereigns. They raise everything. It is
more than just the money we spend.
Mr. Speaker, we had months last
year when we had to borrow money to
pay for our borrowing. That is partially because the tax collection cycle
goes up and down, but we raise your
credit card. We raise your car. We raise
everything. When we screw up U.S.
sovereigns, we make bond markets
nervous. They go up 30 basis points.
You have to understand that just
raised every cost for borrowing up and
down through the economy.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1169

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

It is more than just when I sit here
and spout about saying that we are
going to pay this much in interest.
Think about what we did to the American families, businesses, small businesses, and farmers. We somehow seem
detached from the reality of the math.
Let’s actually talk about where some
of the money is going and why we have
to do such borrowing. CBO, 2025, Medicare accuracy, they actually did okay,
but okay when talking $1 trillion is,
hey, they only missed it by around 7
percent. That turns out to be around
$70 billion of spending.
Medicare, 2025 outlays increased by
$77 billion, 8 percent. CBO was projecting only $51 billion. From this scale
of accounting, it is pretty accurate,
but you have to understand that we are
looking at an environment right now
where we expect Medicare spending to
double, to go from $1 trillion to $2 trillion over the next 7 years.
So far, every healthcare chart I have
where we are looking at what the closing numbers for the 2025 fiscal year,
they are all in excess of what we projected. If you start to have a world
where you are sitting at 7 percent medical inflation, even if you have tax receipts going up 3 percent or 4 percent,
we are borrowing more money.
Let’s actually take another look at
one of these. Major healthcare programs were up $150 billion over the previous year, and the major healthcare
programs came in at a 9-percent increase from the previous years.
Does anyone see a math problem?
You have an economy right now that is
growing at 5 percent. It is amazing.
Yet, our spending, when you tack in
the interest rates, the healthcare
spending—if healthcare spending is
over 9 percent, you have a math problem.
Then, the argument we have from
our Democrats is: But we need to subsidize more.
We have turned healthcare into financial engineering instead of helping
our brothers and sisters be healthier.
Legalize the technology. Legalize the
processes.
Do you realize that so many things
where you could crash the price of
healthcare, this body actually keeps illegal?
We are going to do a number of
healthcare bills. Every single one of
them is wonderful, except for one small
problem: There are rounding errors.
I love, love, love price transparency.
I don’t believe you can have functioning markets without price transparency. Every academic paper I have
in my office says it is only about 1⁄2
percent of price improvement. Yet,
major healthcare programs, there is a
9-percent increase in spending. You get
1⁄2 percent, and in a single year, I have
9-percent growth in spending.
Does anyone see a mismatch? Great
policy, great rhetoric, sounds great on
the campaign trail, and it doesn’t save
us.
Now, for those folks who know—how
do I say this nicely? I like Medicare

PO 00000

Frm 00045

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Advantage. It is called Medicare part C
if you are geeky. The majority of our
brothers and sisters on Medicare actually are on Medicare Advantage. It is
functionally supposed to be a managed
care optionality for your healthcare.
So, you get a network. You know what
your benefits are.
We have a problem. We have these
things called MedPAC reports. I have a
stack of them on my desk. On my desk,
if you open them up, which I am sure
every Member of Congress opens them
up and goes through them, it will tell
you that Medicare Advantage right
now is costing 120 percent of fee-forservice.
Medicare Advantage, which came
into effect in 2005, is supposed to come
in at 95 percent of fee-for-service. That
is a 25 percent delta. We have been
looking at charts and data and trying
to say: Hey, we want to protect Medicare Advantage. That is what seniors
have chosen. They like it. Can we actually get rid of the risk scoring and
some of the games being played with
the star ratings, where they are milking the system, because think of that?
MedPAC reports basically say that
there is almost $2 trillion of misalignment and fraud over 10 years. That is
actually the biggest in government. I
know some people have problems with
the difference between millions, billions, and trillions. A trillion is really
big.
Look at this chart here: Overpayment Per MA Beneficiary. This is done
by the MedPAC report, so this wasn’t
even done by my economists. This is
done by a room full of people who just
specialize in Medicare Advantage.
Mr. Speaker, in 2025, 14—actually, I
think that comes out to $1.25 trillion,
but this also comes to $200 billion, I believe, of misspending. Am I reading
that correctly? Yes.
When you see $1.4 trillion, and over
$200 billion is in the MedPAC report as
being bad payments, misalignments,
abuse, taking advantage of the system,
waste and fraud, Mr. Speaker, if we are
going to do a second reconciliation, I
would propose that one of the most
moral and rational economic things
that we can do is let’s just fix Medicare
Advantage and put it back to how it is
supposed to work.
I know we have armies of lobbyists in
our hallways here trying to stop us.
Can you imagine why? If there is a couple of hundred billion dollars in play,
they are going to absolutely knife us to
stop us from doing the reforms.
b 1850
Are we tough enough to do what is
right for the American people for the
next generation?
Think of this, Mr. Speaker: I have a
3-year-old. Yes, my wife is my age. We
adopted a little boy—same birth mom
as our little girl. When my 3-year-old is
about 23 years old, every tax in the
United States has to be doubled just to
maintain baseline spending.
Is that moral? Mr. Speaker, you have
kids. Is this the America where the

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.091

H21JAPT1

H1170

next generation always gets to prosper
more? That is not the model now. The
next generation is going to be poorer,
and it doesn’t have to be.
We are on the cusp of amazing technologies—synthetic biology, cures for
diseases, things we can do that can
make this another American century.
We just need to tell the truth about the
math and policy instead of the theatrics that go on in this place.
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the six or
seven people who have been willing to
listen to me.
There is a way to make this work. It
just turns out that it is really hard.
Are we ready to do hard things for the
country and then go home to try to explain it to our voters that we are doing
the right thing for them?
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

ADJOURNMENT
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Mr. Speaker, I
move that the House do now adjourn.
The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 6 o’clock and 51 minutes
p.m.), under its previous order, the
House adjourned until tomorrow,
Thursday, January 22, 2026, at 9 a.m.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS,
ETC.
Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive
communications were taken from the
Speaker’s table and referred as follows:
EC–2731. A letter from the Chairman of the
Council, Council of the District of Columbia,
transmitting D.C. Act 26-241, ‘‘Streatery Program Temporary Amendment Act of 2025’’,
pursuant to Public Law 93-198, Sec. 602(c)(1);
(87 Stat. 813); to the Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform.
EC–2732. A letter from the Chairman of the
Council, Council of the District of Columbia,
transmitting D.C. Act 26-242, ‘‘District of Columbia Boards and Commissions Financial
Reporting Temporary Amendment Act of
2025’’, pursuant to Public Law 93-198, Sec.
602(c)(1); (87 Stat. 813); to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2733. A letter from the Chairman of the
Council, Council of the District of Columbia,
transmitting D.C. Act 26-243, ‘‘Porchfest Permitting Temporary Amendment Act of 2025’’,
pursuant to Public Law 93-198, Sec. 602(c)(1);
(87 Stat. 813); to the Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform.
EC–2734. A letter from the Chairman of the
Council, Council of the District of Columbia,
transmitting D.C. Act 26-240, ‘‘Streatery Program Endorsements and Protest Process
Amendment Act of 2025’’, pursuant to Public
Law 93-198, Sec. 602(c)(1); (87 Stat. 813); to the
Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform.
EC–2735. A letter from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health
and Human Services, transmitting the Department’s Office of Inspector General Semiannual Report to Congress, for the period
ending September 30, 2025, pursuant to the
Inspector General Act of 1978; to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2736. A letter from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health
and Human Services, transmitting the Department’s Agency Financial Report for FY

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

2025, pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3515(a)(1); Public
Law 101-576, Sec. 303(a)(1) (as amended by
Public Law 107-289, Sec. 2(a)); (116 Stat. 2049);
to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2737. A letter from the General Counsel, Federal Retirement Thrift Investment
Board, transmitting the Board’s final rule —
Roth In-Plan Conversions (RIN: 3222-AA00)
received January 16, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2738. A letter from the Chairwoman,
National Transportation Safety Board,
transmitting the Board’s report on competitive sourcing actions for FY 2025, pursuant
to 31 U.S.C. 501 note; Public Law 108-199, Sec.
647(b); (118 Stat. 361); to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2739. A letter from the Commissioner,
Social Security Administration, transmitting the Administration’s Agency Financial
Report for FY 2025, pursuant to 31 U.S.C.
3515(a)(1); Public Law 101-576, Sec. 303(a)(1)
(as amended by Public Law 107-289, Sec. 2(a));
(116 Stat. 2049); to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2740. A letter from the Acting Assistant
Director, Office of Conservation Investment,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department
of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Administrative Requirements; Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration and Dingell-Johnson Sport Fish Restoration Acts [Docket No.: FWS-QH-WSFR2023-0125; FVWF51100900000-XXX-FF09W11000;
FVWF94100900000-XXX-FF09W11000]
(RIN:
1018-BB84) received January 20, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee
on Natural Resources.
EC–2741. A letter from the Paralegal, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, Department of Transportation,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Hazardous Materials: Eliminating Unnecessary Regulatory Burdens on Fuel Transportation [Docket No.: PHMSA-2018-0080 (HM265)] (RIN: 2137-AF41) received January 16,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2742. A letter from the Section Chief,
Internal Revenue Service, transmitting the
Service’s IRB only rule — Bonds described in
internal revenue code section 149(c)(2)(C)(ii)
received January 20, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Ways and Means.
EC–2743. A letter from the Section Chief,
Internal Revenue Service, transmitting the
Service’s IRB only rule — Safe Harbor Explanations — Eligible Rollover Distributions
(Notice 2026-13) received January 20, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Ways and Means.
EC–2744. A letter from the Section Chief,
Internal Revenue Service, transmitting the
Service’s notice providing interim guidance
— Interim Guidance on Additional First
Year Depreciation Deduction under Sec.
168(k) (Notice 2026-11) received January 20,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Ways and Means.
EC–2745. A letter from the Section Chief,
Internal Revenue Service, transmitting the
Service’s IRB only rule — Updated procedures for IRS group exemption letter program (Rev. Proc. 2026-8) received January 20,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Ways and Means.
EC–2746. A letter from the Section Chief,
Internal Revenue Service, transmitting the

PO 00000

Frm 00046

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Service’s IRB only rule — Notice of Issuance
of Revenue Procedure 2026-8 Regarding
Group Exemption Letter Program (Notice
2026-8) received January 20, 2026, pursuant to
5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Ways and Means.
EC–2747. A letter from the Director, Regulations and Disclosure Law Division, U.S.
Customs and Border Protection, Department
of Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s interim final rule — Electronic
Refunds [USCBP-2025-1076] (RIN: 1685-AA36)
received January 18, 20025, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Ways and Means.
EC–2748. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting a report titled ‘‘2024 Interagency Group Report to Congress’’, pursuant to 48 U.S.C. 1987(d)(6); Public Law 118-42, Sec. 208(d)(6); (138 Stat. 434);
jointly to the Committees on Foreign Affairs
and Natural Resources.
EC–2749. A letter from the United States
Trade Representative, Executive Office of
the President, transmitting a periodic report
on the total expenditures incurred by the
U.S. Government that are directly attributable to the national emergency declared in
Executive Order 14257 of April 2, 2025, pursuant to 50 U.S.C. 1641(c); Public Law 94-412,
Sec. 401(c); (90 Stat. 1257); jointly to the
Committees on Foreign Affairs and Ways and
Means.
EC–2750. A letter from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health
and Human Services, transmitting a report
titled ‘‘The Administration, Cost, and Impact of the Quality Improvement Organization Program for Medicare Beneficiaries for
Fiscal Year 2024’’, pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
1320c-10; Aug. 14, 1935, ch. 531, title XI, Sec.
1161 (as amended by Public Law 97-248, Sec.
143); (96 Stat. 392); jointly to the Committees
on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce.
f

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES ON
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XIII, reports of
committees were delivered to the Clerk
for printing and reference to the proper
calendar, as follows:
Mr. WALBERG: Committee on Education
and Workforce. H.R. 6502. A bill to amend the
Higher Education Act of 1965 to require the
Secretary of Education to develop requirements for institutions of higher education on
formatting financial aid offer forms, and for
other purposes; with an amendment (Rept.
119–460). Referred to the Committee of the
Whole House on the state of the Union.
Mr. WALBERG: Committee on Education
and Workforce. H.R. 6498. A bill to amend the
Higher Education Act of 1965 to increase
transparency in college tuition for consumers, and for other purposes, with an
amendment (Rept. 119–461). Referred to the
Committee of the Whole House on the state
of the Union.
f

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following
titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:
By Mr. BARRETT:
H.R. 7167. A bill to require a citizenship
question on the decennial census, to require
reporting on certain census statistics, to
modify apportionment of Representatives to

E:\CR\FM\K21JA7.094

H21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 21, 2026

be based on United States citizens instead of
all persons, to prohibit States from carrying
out more than one Congressional redistricting after a decennial census and apportionment, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform, and in addition to the Committee on
the Judiciary, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Mr. KEAN (for himself and Mr.
GOTTHEIMER):
H.R. 7168. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Education to develop standards for fire suppression systems in dormitories and other
residential facilities for students on the
campuses of institutions of higher education
that receive Federal education funding, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Education and Workforce.
By Mr. BRECHEEN (for himself, Mr.
MOORE of Alabama, Mr. FINE, and Mr.
SMITH of New Jersey):
H.R. 7169. A bill to require English proficiency as a prerequisite for eligibility for
ride share contracts, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
By Ms. CHU (for herself, Ms. NORTON,
Ms. TOKUDA, Mr. LYNCH, Mr. JOHNSON
of Georgia, Mr. MULLIN, Ms. SCHAMrs.
FOUSHEE,
Mr.
KOWSKY,
MOSKOWITZ, Mr. DAVID SCOTT of Georgia, Mr. FROST, Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania, Ms. SCHOLTEN, and Mr.
GOLDMAN of New York):
H.R. 7170. A bill to remove linguistic barriers to participation in Gun Violence Prevention Strategies; to the Committee on the
Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Ms. CHU (for herself, Mr. GOLDMAN
of New York, Ms. NORTON, Mr. LYNCH,
Mr. FROST, Mr. MOSKOWITZ, Mr.
JOHNSON of Georgia, Mrs. MCBATH,
and Ms. SCHAKOWSKY):
H.R. 7171. A bill to amend the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to
award grants for providing legal resources
for petitioners seeking extreme risk protection orders, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on the Judiciary.
By Ms. CROCKETT (for herself and Mr.
GOLDMAN of New York):
H.R. 7172. A bill to amend title 49, United
States Code, to limit eligibility of certain
aviation privacy programs for immigration
aircraft operations, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, and in addition to the Committee on the Judiciary, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Ms. DEGETTE (for herself, Ms. NORTON, Ms. MCCLELLAN, Mrs. DINGELL,
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Mr. CARTER of
Louisiana, Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia,
Ms. TLAIB, Ms. JOHNSON of Texas, Ms.
OCASIO-CORTEZ, Mr. MULLIN, Mr.
AMO, Ms. CASTOR of Florida, Mr. CARSON, Ms. KELLY of Illinois, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN, Ms. VELÁZQUEZ, Mr.
LANDSMAN, Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY,
Ms. MORRISON, Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania, Ms. ELFRETH, Mr. HARDER of
California, Mr. COHEN, Ms. MCCOLLUM, Ms. DELBENE, Ms. MATSUI, Mr.
Ms.
DEXTER,
Mrs.
THANEDAR,
TRAHAN, Ms. SCHRIER, Ms. CLARKE of
Ms.
New
York,
Mr.
CASTEN,
PETTERSEN, and Ms. SIMON):

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:09 Jan 22, 2026

H1171

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

H.R. 7173. A bill to amend the Public
Health Service Act to ensure scientific integrity in the activities of the National Institutes of Health and prevent the diversion
of funds to politically driven activities, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. DELUZIO (for himself and Mr.
LIEU):
H.R. 7174. A bill to require the inclusion of
an authorization of appropriations for the
Department of Veterans Affairs in any authorization for use of military force or declaration of war; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. DUNN of Florida (for himself,
Mr. FLEISCHMANN, Mr. CARTER of
Georgia, Mr. BACON, Mr. MEUSER, Mr.
EDWARDS, Ms. SALAZAR, and Mr.
RUTHERFORD):
H.R. 7175. A bill to award a Congressional
Gold Medal to Frank Siller, in recognition of
his contributions to memorialize all who lost
their lives in the tragic events of 9/11, his efforts to support affected loved ones, and his
enduring advocacy to serve those who serve
their country; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. EDWARDS (for himself and Ms.
BUDZINSKI):
H.R. 7176. A bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to establish a secure database
and messaging platform to enable veterans
to reconnect with other veterans with whom
they served, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. FEENSTRA (for himself, Mrs.
MILLER of Illinois, Mrs. MILLERMr.
GOSAR,
and
Mr.
MEEKS,
NEWHOUSE):
H.R. 7177. A bill to amend title 18, United
States Code, to prohibit discrimination by
abortion against an unborn child on the
basis of Turner syndrome; to the Committee
on the Judiciary.
By Mr. GOTTHEIMER (for himself, Mr.
GARBARINO, Mr. LIEU, Mr. BACON, Mr.
VALADAO, Mr. SHERMAN, Mr. DAVIS of
North Carolina, Mr. CISCOMANI, Ms.
SCHULTZ,
Mr.
WASSERMAN
MOSKOWITZ, Mr. SUOZZI, Mr. JOYCE of
Ohio, and Mr. LALOTA):
H.R. 7178. A bill to amend the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,
to make improvements relating to cooperation between the United States and Israel to
counter
unmanned
systems
across
warfighting domains, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Armed Services, and in
addition to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within
the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. HERNÁNDEZ (for himself and
Mr. SOTO):
H.R. 7179. A bill to amend chapter 3029 of
title 54, United States Code, to establish the
Historic Preservation Workforce Development Program; to the Committee on Natural
Resources.
By Mr. HILL of Arkansas (for himself
and Mr. MOSKOWITZ):
H.R. 7180. A bill to amend the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023
to modify the interagency strategy to disrupt and dismantle narcotics production and
trafficking and affiliated networks in the
Middle East, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. HUDSON (for himself and Mr.
BALDERSON):
H.R. 7181. A bill to amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to clarify the exemption
for replacement parts, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.

PO 00000

Frm 00047

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

By Ms. JOHNSON of Texas (for herself,
Mr. MORELLE, Ms. NORTON, Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia, and Mr. CASTEN):
H.R. 7182. A bill to amend the Help America Vote Act of 2002 to establish minimum
notification requirements for voters affected
by polling place changes; to the Committee
on House Administration.
By Mr. LYNCH (for himself, Mr. BOYLE
of Pennsylvania, Mr. CARSON, Mr.
CASE, Ms. CLARKE of New York, Ms.
TITUS, Mr. FIELDS, Ms. STRICKLAND,
Ms. NORTON, and Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania):
H.R. 7183. A bill to improve the financial
literacy of secondary school students; to the
Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Mr. MCDOWELL (for himself, Mrs.
BICE, Mr. WEBER of Texas, Mr. JACK,
Ms. TENNEY, Mr. YAKYM, Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas, Mr. HARRIGAN, Mr.
NEHLS, Mr. EDWARDS, Mr. STUTZMAN,
and Mr. CAREY):
H.R. 7184. A bill to amend the Controlled
Substances Act to prevent the importation
of illicit pill press machines with the intent
to counterfeit substances, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on
the Judiciary, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Mr. MCGUIRE:
H.R. 7185. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to exclude from gross income certain retirement plan distributions
used for a down payment or closing costs for
a principal residence, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mrs. MILLER of Illinois (for herself
and Ms. BOEBERT):
H.R. 7186. A bill to amend the Investment
Company Act of 1940 to prohibit certain
large-scale companies from purchasing single family residences; to the Committee on
Financial Services.
By Mr. NUNN of Iowa (for himself and
Mr. MEEKS):
H.R. 7187. A bill to amend the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 to provide an exemption from the definition of a broker for certain registered representative-owned personal services entity, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. PANETTA (for himself, Mr.
MOYLAN, and Mr. BILIRAKIS):
H.R. 7188. A bill to improve housing and environmental health and safety protections
for members of the Armed Forces and their
families residing in military family housing,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Armed Services.
By Mr. POCAN (for himself, Mrs.
BEATTY, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania,
Mr. GARCIA of California, Ms. GARCIA
of Texas, Mr. GOTTHEIMER, Ms. NORTON, Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia, Mrs.
RAMIREZ, Ms. ROSS, Mr. TORRES of
New York, and Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN):
H.R. 7189. A bill to amend title XVIII of the
Social Security Act to provide coverage for
certain HIV prevention services furnished by
pharmacists under the Medicare program; to
the Committee on Energy and Commerce,
and in addition to the Committee on Ways
and Means, for a period to be subsequently
determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mrs. RAMIREZ (for herself, Ms.
CLARKE of New York, Ms. VELÁZQUEZ,
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Ms. LEE of
Pennsylvania, and Ms. TLAIB):
H.R. 7190. A bill to end detention and electronic monitoring, and redirect funding to

E:\CR\FM\L21JA7.100

H21JAPT1

H1172

community-based wrap around services; to
the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee on Homeland Security, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within
the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Ms. SCHOLTEN (for herself and Mr.
BRESNAHAN):
H.R. 7191. A bill to direct the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration to update regulations relating to the application of certain flight and duty limitations and rest requirements, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
By Mr. SHERMAN (for himself and Ms.
NORTON):
H.R. 7192. A bill to prohibit the United
States from deploying or otherwise assigning
any troops for duty to Greenland except at
the invitation of the Kingdom of Denmark,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Foreign Affairs, and in addition to the Committee on Armed Services, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. SUBRAMANYAM (for himself
and Mr. BILIRAKIS):
H.R. 7193. A bill to amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to prohibit providing assistance to foreign nationals in
making contributions or donations in connection with elections, and for other purposes; to the Committee on House Administration.
By Mr. BARRETT:
H.J. Res. 141. A joint resolution proposing
an amendment to the Constitution of the
United States to require the concurrence of
two-thirds of both Houses of Congress for the
admission of new States into the Union; to
the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. CASTRO of Texas (for himself
and Ms. DELAURO):
H. Res. 1012. A resolution recognizing and
honoring Cristina M. Rodrı́guez for her historic appointment as dean of Yale Law
School; to the Committee on Education and
Workforce.
By Mr. MAGAZINER (for himself and
Ms. SALAZAR):
H. Res. 1013. A resolution amending the
Rules of the House of Representatives to establish a Permanent Select Committee on
Aging; to the Committee on Rules.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

MEMORIALS
Under clause 3 of rule XII, memorials
were presented and referred as follows:
ML-47. The SPEAKER presented a memorial of the General Assembly of the State of
South Carolina, relative to Concurrent Resolution H. 3008, requesting the Congress of the
United States call a convention of the states
to propose amendments to the Constitution
of the United States; to the Committee on
the Judiciary.
ML-48. Also, a memorial of the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, relative
to Substitute House Joint Resolution No. 49,
Resolution Act No. 25-1, rescinding previous
applications of the General Assembly requesting the Congress of the United States
call a convention of the states to propose
amendments to the Constitution of the
United States; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
f

PRIVATE BILLS AND
RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 3 of rule XII,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:33 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. BAIRD introduced a bill (H.R. 7194) to
authorize the President to award the Medal
of Honor to Kareem N. Dockery for acts of
valor as a member of the Army while serving
in Afghanistan; which was referred to the
Committee on Armed Services.
f

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers
granted to Congress in the Constitution to enact the accompanying bill or
joint resolution.
By Mr. BARRETT:
H.R. 7167.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
By Mr. KEAN:
H.R. 7168.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18:
By Mr. BRECHEEN:
H.R. 7169.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. CHU:
H.R. 7170.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Clause 1 of Article 1, Section 8 of the
United States Constitution
By Ms. CHU:
H.R. 7171.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Clause 1 of Article 1, Section 8 of the
United States Constitution
By Ms. CROCKETT:
H.R. 7172.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8
By Ms. DEGETTE:
H.R. 7173.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, section 8
By Mr. DELUZIO:
H.R. 7174.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 18
By Mr. DUNN of Florida:
H.R. 7175.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 3
By Mr. EDWARDS:
H.R. 7176.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
The constitutional authority on which this
bill rests is the Necessary and Proper Clause,
Article I, Section 8, clause 18.
By Mr. FEENSTRA:
H.R. 7177.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. GOTTHEIMER:
H.R. 7178.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. HERNÁNDEZ:
H.R. 7179.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8.

PO 00000

Frm 00048

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

By Mr. HILL of Arkansas:
H.R. 7180.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to Article I, Section 8 of the
U.S. Constitution.
By Mr. HUDSON:
H.R. 7181.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 3
By Ms. JOHNSON of Texas:
H.R. 7182.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Necessary and Proper Clause (Article I,
Section 8, Clause 18)
By Mr. LYNCH:
H.R. 7183.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 18, Clause 18
By Mr. MCDOWELL:
H.R. 7184.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution
By Mr. MCGUIRE:
H.R. 7185.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mrs. MILLER of Illinois:
H.R. 7186.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 of the Constitution.
By Mr. NUNN of Iowa:
H.R. 7187.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
To make all Laws which shall be necessary
and proper for carrying into Execution the
foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of
the United States, or in any Department or
Officer thereof.
By Mr. PANETTA:
H.R. 7188.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Clause 8, Section 18
By Mr. POCAN:
H.R. 7189.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mrs. RAMIREZ:
H.R. 7190.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution of
the United States
By Ms. SCHOLTEN:
H.R. 7191.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. SHERMAN:
H.R. 7192.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mr. SUBRAMANYAM:
H.R. 7193.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. BAIRD:
H.R. 7194.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 14

E:\CR\FM\L21JA7.100

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

By Mr. BARRETT:
H.J. Res. 141.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H.R. 143: Mr. BARRETT.
H.R. 210: Mr. DELUZIO.
H.R. 347: Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia and Mr.
HARIDOPOLOS.
H.R. 498: Mrs. LUNA.
H.R. 645: Mr. DOWNING and Mr. PALMER.
H.R. 793: Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE.
H.R. 846: Mrs. BEATTY.
H.R. 925: Mr. HARRIGAN.
H.R. 1065: Ms. HOULAHAN.
H.R. 1077: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 1132: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 1163: Mr. VALADAO.
H.R. 1181: Mr. OWENS.
H.R. 1189: Ms. BROWNLEY.
H.R. 1423: Mr. KEAN and Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 1477: Mr. GARBARINO.
H.R. 1521: Mr. WESTERMAN.
H.R. 1522: Mr. WALKINSHAW.
H.R. 1538: Ms. SCHRIER and Mr. DAVIS of
North Carolina.
H.R. 1628: Mr. LATTA, Mr. STEIL, Mr. GUTHRIE, Mr. FRY, Mr. RILEY of New York, Mr.
VARGAS, Mr. SOTO, Ms. GOODLANDER, Mrs.
DINGELL, Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE, and Ms.
PELOSI.
H.R. 1732: Mr. VINDMAN and Mr. VASQUEZ.
H.R. 1776: Mr. ALLEN.
H.R. 1810: Ms. RANDALL.
H.R. 1826: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 1893: Mrs. TRAHAN.
H.R. 1958: Mr. PFLUGER.
H.R. 1992: Ms. LOFGREN.
H.R. 1993: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM and Mr. IVEY.
H.R. 2094: Mr. SCOTT FRANKLIN of Florida.
H.R. 2199: Mr. CRAWFORD.
H.R. 2315: Mr. MOORE of West Virginia.
H.R. 2368: Mr. RUIZ.
H.R. 2385: Ms. GILLEN.
H.R. 2442: Ms. FEDORCHAK.
H.R. 2672: Ms. MALOY.
H.R. 2705: Mr. MOORE of West Virginia.
H.R. 2711: Mr. PETERS.
H.R. 2784: Ms. MATSUI.
H.R. 3006: Ms. MCBRIDE.
H.R. 3011: Mr. HORSFORD.
H.R. 3045: Ms. CLARK of Massachusetts.
H.R. 3184: Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi.
H.R. 3226: Mr. GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 3307: Mr. SHERMAN.
H.R. 3497: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 3514: Mrs. MCBATH and Mr. FIGURES.
H.R. 3562: Mr. MORAN, Mr. MOSKOWITZ, Mrs.
HOUCHIN, Mr. LANDSMAN, Mr. BOST, and Ms.
NORTON.
H.R. 3694: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 3810: Mr. SHREVE.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:33 Jan 22, 2026

H1173

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

H.R. 3830: Ms. MCDONALD RIVET.
H.R. 4076: Ms. ESCOBAR.
H.R. 4133: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 4146: Mr. SCOTT FRANKLIN of Florida.
H.R. 4176: Mr. RILEY of New York.
H.R. 4194: Mr. HARIDOPOLOS.
H.R. 4206: Ms. STEFANIK.
H.R. 4235: Mr. MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 4317: Mr. VAN ORDEN.
H.R. 4382: Mr. CARBAJAL and Mr. KILEY of
California.
H.R. 4393: Mr. LALOTA, Mr. CUELLAR, Mr.
DUNN of Florida, and Ms. HOULAHAN.
H.R. 4398: Mrs. RADEWAGEN.
H.R. 4456: Ms. STRICKLAND.
H.R. 4525: Ms. ELFRETH and Mrs. BEATTY.
H.R. 4532: Mr. SHERMAN.
H.R. 4588: Mrs. FISCHBACH and Mrs.
KIGGANS of Virginia.
H.R. 4611: Mrs. MCIVER.
H.R. 4624: Ms. TITUS.
H.R. 4669: Mr. BRESNAHAN and Mr. STEUBE.
H.R. 4709: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 4751: Ms. CRAIG.
H.R. 4782: Mr. MEUSER.
H.R. 4876: Mrs. BEATTY.
H.R. 4889: Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia.
H.R. 5309: Mr. HUFFMAN.
H.R. 5351: Mr. BEGICH.
H.R. 5408: Mr. VAN ORDEN and Mrs.
MCBATH.
H.R. 5434: Mr. PAPPAS and Mr. MCGARVEY.
H.R. 5438: Mr. LOUDERMILK.
H.R. 5446: Mr. PAPPAS.
H.R. 5461: Mr. LANDSMAN.
H.R. 5543: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 5557: Mr. LYNCH.
H.R. 5582: Mr. WEBER of Texas.
H.R. 5653: Mrs. SYKES and Mr. KEATING.
H.R. 5699: Mr. MCDOWELL.
H.R. 5710: Mr. TONY GONZALES of Texas.
H.R. 5753: Mr. THOMPSON of California and
Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 5862: Mr. RASKIN.
H.R. 5973: Mr. MIN, Mrs. FLETCHER, and Mr.
DESAULNIER.
H.R. 5993: Mr. CARTER of Texas.
H.R. 6022: Mr. VAN DREW.
H.R. 6086: Mr. OWENS and Ms. DELBENE.
H.R. 6088: Mr. BERA.
H.R. 6121: Mr. PFLUGER and Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 6137: Ms. STEFANIK and Mr. CISCOMANI.
H.R. 6151: Mr. CROW.
H.R. 6166: Ms. FRIEDMAN.
H.R. 6177: Mr. MAGAZINER.
H.R. 6181: Mr. HERNÁNDEZ and Mr.
MCGARVEY.
H.R. 6213: Mr. DESJARLAIS.
H.R. 6241: Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ of Texas.
H.R. 6268: Ms. LOFGREN.
H.R. 6275: Mr. SHERMAN.
H.R. 6277: Ms. HAGEMAN and Mr. RILEY of
New York.
H.R. 6373: Ms. FEDORCHAK, Mr. ALLEN, and
Mr. CARTER of Georgia.
H.R. 6390: Ms. CLARKE of New York.
H.R. 6425: Mr. MAGAZINER.
H.R. 6466: Mr. MOORE of West Virginia.
H.R. 6490: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 6511: Mr. ALFORD.

PO 00000

Frm 00049

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

H.R. 6567: Ms. LOFGREN.
H.R. 6601: Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN.
H.R. 6635: Mr. BRESNAHAN and Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 6730: Mr. BERGMAN.
H.R. 6731: Ms. MCCOLLUM.
H.R. 6818: Mr. DESAULNIER.
H.R. 6832: Mr. GRAY.
H.R. 6854: Mr. MOORE of West Virginia and
Mr. ROY.
H.R. 6867: Mr. CROW.
H.R. 6875: Mr. MEEKS.
H.R. 6945: Mrs. CAMMACK.
H.R. 6949: Mr. MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 6972: Mr. LAHOOD.
H.R. 6985: Mr. VAN DREW.
H.R. 7008: Mr. BENTZ, Mr. MCCORMICK, and
Mr. HARIDOPOLOS.
H.R. 7016: Mr. MIN, Mrs. FLETCHER, Mrs.
DINGELL, Mr. GOLDMAN of New York, Mr.
CARBAJAL, Mr. MRVAN, and Mr. SMITH of
Washington.
H.R. 7024: Mr. LANDSMAN, Mr. VAN ORDEN,
Ms. ADAMS, and Mr. FONG.
H.R. 7025: Mr. MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 7034: Mr. BIGGS of Arizona.
H.R. 7038: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 7040: Ms. HAGEMAN.
H.R. 7046: Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois and Ms.
KELLY of Illinois.
H.R. 7051: Mr. HURD of Colorado.
H.R. 7052: Mr. SHERMAN.
H.R. 7058: Mr. RUTHERFORD.
H.R. 7086: Mr. KILEY of California.
H.R. 7100: Mr. SWALWELL, Mr. FITZPATRICK,
and Mr. PALLONE.
H.R. 7103: Mr. VAN ORDEN.
H.R. 7116: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 7118: Mr. AUCHINCLOSS and Mr.
FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 7122: Mr. HARRIGAN.
H.R. 7153: Ms. STEFANIK and Mrs. MCCLAIN
DELANEY.
H.R. 7159: Mr. SOTO.
H.R. 7161: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 7166: Mr. MFUME and Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.J. Res. 140: Mr. FINSTAD, Ms. MALOY, Mr.
BEGICH, and Mrs. LUNA.
H. Con. Res. 68: Mr. DELUZIO, Ms. LOFGREN,
and Mr. TAKANO.
H. Res. 70: Mr. WALKINSHAW.
H. Res. 229: Mr. ALFORD.
H. Res. 238: Mrs. BEATTY.
H. Res. 493: Ms. FRIEDMAN.
H. Res. 515: Mr. SHERMAN.
H. Res. 578: Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE.
H. Res. 735: Mr. ALLEN.
H. Res. 858: Mr. ALFORD.
H. Res. 931: Mr. CLINE.
H. Res. 984: Mr. BAIRD.
H. Res. 987: Mr. PFLUGER.
H. Res. 993: Mrs. FLETCHER and Ms. MALOY.
H. Res. 996: Mr. CARBAJAL, Ms. LOIS
FRANKEL of Florida, Mr. NORCROSS, Ms. DEAN
of Pennsylvania, Ms. SEWELL, and Mr. CARSON.
H. Res. 1001: Mr. MIN and Ms. JAYAPAL.
H. Res. 1007: Mr. LICCARDO and Mr. DOWNING.

E:\CR\FM\A21JA7.028

H21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

E61

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mrs. RAMIREZ. Mr. Speaker, had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call
No. 32, and YEA on Roll Call No. 33.

dred Long Bridge project; the Memorial Bridge
Project; and many other projects that have
and will continue to improve transportation in
New Hampshire. Bill’s service extends beyond
his commissioner title, with him actively involved on committees for the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) and the Northeast Association of State Transportation Officials
(NASTO), bringing him to Washington, D.C.
annually to advocate for nationwide transportation policy and solutions.
Bill is known as a leader who is an avid listener, a bipartisan solution finder, patient, diplomatic, and an individual from whom you
could learn countless leadership skills.
Through Bill’s leadership and decades of service, New Hampshire’s transportation system
has greatly improved and has a clear plan for
future success.
On behalf of my constituents in New Hampshire’s 1st Congressional District, I thank Bill
Cass for his commitment and dedication to
helping improve New Hampshire’s transportation for the past 35 years and his 40 years
of public service dedicated to New Hampshire.
I would also like to thank Bill for his selfless
service and for his leadership in the state. I
wish him and his wife, Colleen, all the best in
his retirement and future endeavors.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. GREG CASAR
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. CASAR. Mr. Speaker, had I been
present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call
No. 19, H.R. 2262, Flexibility for Workers Education Act; NAY on Roll Call No. 23, H.R.
4593, SHOWER Act; NAY on Roll Call No. 28,
H.R. 7006, Financial Services and General
Government and National Security, Department of State, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2026; and NAY on Roll Call No.
31, H.R. 2988, Protecting Prudent Investment
of Retirement Savings Act.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. DELIA C. RAMIREZ
OF ILLINOIS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

f

f

RECOGNIZING
WILLIAM
‘‘BILL’’
CASS, COMMISSIONER OF NEW
HAMPSHIRE
DEPARTMENT
OF
TRANSPORTATION

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. CHRIS PAPPAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. PAPPAS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today in
recognition of William ‘‘Bill’’ Cass, Commissioner of the New Hampshire Department of
Transportation (NHDOT), and his retirement
after 40 years of service to our state. As Commissioner of NHDOT, Bill has fostered a supportive work environment and spearheaded
multiple major transportation projects to help
improve Granite State roads, bridges, and infrastructure.
A lifelong Granite Stater, Bill grew up in
Rollinsford, New Hampshire, and went on to
earn a Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering from the University of New Hampshire. He
began working at NHDOT early in his career
in 1986 and has risen through the ranks of the
department throughout his tenure. Before his
role as NHDOT Commissioner, he served as
the Final Design Supervisor, Preliminary Design Section Head, Chief Project Manager, Assistant Director of Project Development, and
Director of Project Development at NHDOT.
As a distinguished leader, Bill has implemented large-scale transportation projects that
have made a lasting impact in New Hampshire. Projects include: the Interstate 93 expansion from Salem to Manchester, the largest undertaken by the NHDOT; the Sarah Mil-

HON. ANN WAGNER
OF MISSOURI

ball history. Even in the face of such an arduous stretch, A.D. Johnston gymnasium remained packed on Friday nights as the people
of Bessemer cheered on their beloved high
school basketball team. Their loyalty and perseverance serve as a true testament to the
never-give-up spirit of this U.P. town. Mr.
Pelissero’s story reminds us of how hard work,
determination, and dedication can shape a
community.
Much like the sense of community shown by
the people of Bessemer during the days of the
Speedboys losing streak, Mr. Pelissero’s book
was released in front of a standing room only
crowd at the Bessemer City Hall, helping raise
over $5,000 dollars for the Bessemer Public
Library to support literacy in the community.
Even 60 years after the Speedboys triumphant
victory, the spirit of fellowship is still vibrant
throughout Bessemer and communities across
the Upper Peninsula.
Since the release of his book on November
1, 2025, Bring One Home has received positive reviews from New York Times Best Sellers authors such as Seth Wickersham, been
added to the Library of Congress, and recently
won the North American Book Awards Bronze
Medal for 2025. Despite such success, it has
been the overwhelming support from the people of Bessemer that Mr. Pelissero finds most
meaningful.
Mr. Speaker, it is my honor to recognize Mr.
Thomas L. Pelissero for authoring Bring One
Home, which captures the outstanding character of his hometown of Bessemer, Michigan,
its people, its high school team, and their unwavering dedication to one another.
f

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mrs. WAGNER. Mr. Speaker, I regret that I
was not present for Roll Call votes on January
20, 2026. Had I been present, I would have
voted YEA on Roll Call No. 32, and YEA on
Roll Call No. 33.
f

RECOGNIZING
MR.
PELISSERO
FOR
BRING ONE HOME

THOMAS
L.
AUTHORING

HON. JACK BERGMAN

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. PRAMILA JAYAPAL
OF WASHINGTON

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Ms. JAYAPAL. Mr. Speaker, I missed Roll
Call vote No. 32 on January 20, 2026. Had I
been present, my vote would have been Yea
on Roll Call No. 32.
f

OF MICHIGAN

HONORING NANCY WHELAN

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. BERGMAN. Mr. Speaker, it is my honor
to recognize Mr. Thomas L. Pelissero for his
heartfelt tribute to his hometown of Bessemer,
Michigan in his new book: Bring One Home: A
Memoir of Boyhood, Basketball, and Hometown Spirit. His memoir serves as a salute to
the town of Bessemer and speaks to the character of communities across Michigan’s Upper
Peninsula when facing profound economic
hardship from the decline of iron and copper
mining industries throughout the 1960s.
On January 21, 1966, the Bessemer
Speedboys basketball team ended a 42-game
losing streak, at that time, the longest ever recorded in Upper Peninsula high school basket-

HON. JARED HUFFMAN
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today in
recognition of more than 45 years of extraordinary public transportation service by Nancy
Whelan.
A lifelong public servant, Nancy has dedicated her career to innovating transportation
infrastructure. Before landing in Marin, she
served in roles with the Los Angeles County
Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the
San Francisco Municipal Railway as well as
provided technical and managerial services to

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:51 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

E:\CR\FM\A21JA8.001

E21JAPT1

E62

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

agencies throughout the Bay Area, including
Marin, as the founder of Nancy Whelan Consulting. She was unanimously appointed to the
position of General Manager for Marin Transit
by the Board of Supervisors in 2014.
Strategic and steadfast, Nancy skillfully
navigated Marin Transit through a challenging
11 years, supporting community members
through the pandemic and pushing the agency
towards a greener future. Under Nancy’s leadership, Marin Transit is well on its way to
meeting its goal to transition to zero emission
by 2040, with the introduction of battery-electric buses and its recent property acquisition in
San Rafael for fleet maintenance and operations. Nancy always prioritized accessibility
for all Marin residents, including expanding
mobility services for people with disabilities
and older adults through the Marin Access
Mobility Management Center. Her many notable achievements include increasing ridership
by 10 percent from pre-pandemic levels, securing and improving the Rush Landing Bus
Operations Hub in Novato, and developing the
Marin Access Operations Facility in San
Rafael.
Nancy is known for her critical thinking and
professional style, developing strong partnerships with community stakeholders and applying informed decision making. She has been a
terrific mentor to the next generation of transit
professionals and other local women leaders.
A tireless champion for affordable, inclusive
transit, her work has influenced strategic planning and projects beyond Marin County and
the Bay Area. For her commitment to sustainable and equitable transit, Nancy was awarded the WTS Lifetime Achievement Award.
It was my privilege and honor to work with
Nancy. She does not shy away from complicated projects, confidently rising to the occasion and embracing complex challenges. I
appreciate her collaborative leadership style
and strong work ethic.
Mr. Speaker, Nancy Whelan is a visionary
transit leader, and her legacy cannot be overstated. I respectfully ask that you join me in
expressing my sincere gratitude for her decades of good work and in sending her best
wishes on her next endeavors.
f

HONORING UNITED STATES NAVY
VETERAN JIM SHELTON

HON. TONY GONZALES
OF TEXAS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. TONY GONZALES of Texas. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to Jim
Shelton, a true American hero whose courage,
service, and devotion to duty continue to inspire generations.
Jim Shelton was born on November 21,
1926, in San Antonio, Texas. At just 15 years
old, he left school to work at Kelly Field in the
Reclaiming Department, contributing to the
war effort at an early age. Determined to
serve his country, he returned to school and
graduated early, enabling him to enlist in the
United States Navy at the age of 17 at Fort
Sam Houston.
Mr. Shelton graduated in January 1944 and
was assigned to the 96th Company. Drawing
on his experience working with mechanical
parts, he was stationed aboard the USS

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:51 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

Endymion, a Navy repair ship. His role was
critical—keeping damaged vessels operational
in the midst of war.
Mr. Speaker, Jim Shelton’s naval career
was defined by service to his fellow sailors
and unwavering resolve. As a Coxswain and
later a Boatswain’s Mate, he and his shipmates repaired countless vessels and supported the fleet during the invasion of Okinawa. The Endymion itself came under enemy
attack and was torpedoed off the island of
Truk. Despite the danger and damage sustained, Mr. Shelton remained with the ship
until the end of World War II.
Later in life, Mr. Shelton was honored with
an Honor Flight to Washington, D.C., where
he and his fellow crew members were formally
recognized for their service. He received a letter from President Clinton honoring the crew
of the Endymion for their dedication—repairing
other ships even after their own vessel had
been attacked and damaged.
Mr. Speaker, Jim Shelton’s life is a testament to the strength, humility, and resilience
of the Greatest Generation. His service to our
Nation and his steadfast sense of duty stands
as an enduring example of what it means to
be an American.
f

HONORING THE SERVICE OF
ISAIAH DAVIS

HON. ZACHARY NUNN
OF IOWA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. NUNN of Iowa. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize and thank Isaiah Davis for his
outstanding service as a Staff Assistant in my
office. As he concludes his time with Team
Nunn, I cannot speak higher of the dedication,
professionalism, and patriotism he brought to
serving the people of Iowa’s 3rd Congressional District every day.
Over the past year, Isaiah was the first-person Iowans met walking in the office and was
the man who welcomed me to Washington
and sent me off to Iowa at the end of the legislative week. Whether navigating the fast
pace of Capitol Hill or keeping us on schedule
between meetings, events, and flights, Isaiah
handled every responsibility with urgency, reliability, and good humor. His steady presence
and positive attitude made even the longest
weeks run smoothly.
Beyond the front desk, Isaiah played a vital
role in the daily operations of the office. He
supported logistics, prepared materials, assisted with research, and helped coordinate
events, always approaching his work with
focus and a team-first mindset. His dependability and attention to detail made him a valued and trusted member of our team.
Isaiah’s strong sense of service is rooted in
his upbringing as a military child. That experience taught him adaptability, discipline, and a
deep respect for those who serve. This foundation is reflected not only in his work ethic,
but also in his academic pursuits. While serving full-time in our office, Isaiah has been
earning his master’s degree at night at American University, with a focus on Cybersecurity
and Foreign Affairs. His commitment to continuing public service at the highest level is
clear.
Isaiah—referred to in the office as ‘‘Mr.
Olympia’’ for his 400-pound weightlifting capa-

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 21, 2026

bilities and ‘‘Mario Andretti’’ for his speed navigating the perpetual obstacle course that is
District of Columbia driving—delivered with
skill, strength, and a champion’s heart in the
race to serve others well.
Mr. Speaker, Isaiah Davis strengthened our
office, our team, and our ability to serve
lowans. I am deeply grateful for his contributions, and as he begins his next chapter, I am
confident he will continue to lead with the
same integrity, discipline, and purpose that defined his time with Team Nunn.
I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking
Isaiah for his service to Iowa’s 3rd Congressional District and in wishing him continued
success in the years ahead.
f

TRIBUTE TO JAMES MCAURTHUR
ALSOBROOKS

HON. STENY H. HOYER
OF MARYLAND

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Speaker, Mac Alsobrooks
is one of this region’s most legendary pool
players and hand dancers. As talented as he
has proven to be there, he has had even more
of an impact as a mentor to generations of
young men and women.
As one of the founders of the Alliance of
Concerned Men, and a dedicated participant
in the Beyond the Walls Ministry at Ebenezer
AME Church in Fort Washington, Maryland,
Mac has reached many lives and instilled wisdom in so many the way that only he can.
In fact, ‘‘beyond the walls’’ describes how
he sees education, as he’s been known to use
any possible environment and platform to
teach. So many lessons were learned at Dog’s
Pool Hall over the years, where he would regularly take his elementary school-aged daughters, Angela and Kim, to play pinball while he
honed his skills at the pool table. It was at that
pool hall that he taught them a lot about people, and a lot more about life.
He showed them and many others what it
means to be politically active, to be civically
engaged, and to be spiritually connected—lessons that still resonate to this day, even on
the floor of the United States Senate, where
his daughter Angela represents the great
State of Maryland. And even today, he’s an
example of how to be an uplifting part of the
community, and how to have fun while doing
it. The hundreds that have been blessed by
his mentorship over the years will agree.
I ask that you join me, and the residents of
Maryland, in offering well wishes and a happy
78th
birthday
to
James
McAurthur
Alsobrooks—a billiards legend, a renowned
hand dancer, and a devoted husband, father,
and grandfather. We’re grateful for all he’s
done for Maryland and for the Capital region.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. MARK POCAN
OF WISCONSIN

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. POCAN. Mr. Speaker, I was not present
for two Roll Call votes on Tuesday, January
20, 2026. Had I been present, I would have

E:\CR\FM\A21JA8.007

E21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

voted: YEA on Roll Call No. 32, On Motion to
Suspend the Rules and Agree to H.R. 5763;
and YEA on Roll Call No. 33, On Motion to
Suspend the Rules and Agree to H.R. 5764.
f

RECOGNIZING THE HONORABLE M.
WILLIAM BOLLER

HON. NICHOLAS A. LANGWORTHY
OF NEW YORK

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. LANGWORTHY. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize the exceptional public service of the Honorable M. William Boller, who is
retiring after more than four decades of legal
and judicial service in Western New York.
Since beginning his public career in 1981,
Judge Boller has demonstrated an unwavering
commitment to justice, professionalism, and
fair administration of the law.
Judge Boller began his career with the Erie
County Department of Social Services, handling hundreds of Family Court cases, and
later served for two decades with the Erie
County Child Support Unit. In 1984, he was
selected as Elma Town Justice, becoming at
age 28 the youngest Town Justice in Erie
County, and went on to serve the Town of
Elma for more than twenty-two years.
In 2006, Judge Boller was nominated to the
New York State Court of Claims and later re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:51 Jan 22, 2026

E63

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

ceived full appointments in 2010 and 2019. He
also served as an Acting Justice of the New
York State Supreme Court, Supervising Judge
of Town and Village Courts across four counties, and Erie County Firearms Licensing Officer. His integrity, sound judgment, and dedication have left a lasting impact on the judicial
system in our region.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that the United States
House of Representatives join me in honoring
Judge M. William Boller for his many years of
devoted service and in wishing him the very
best in his retirement.
f

HONORING JED BOWER AND SCOTT
METZGER

HON. MIKE CAREY

founding, and to have two great Ohioans in
such important positions of leadership is both
a rare occurrence as well as a testament to
our state and our people.
Together, these two men represent the interests of tens of thousands of farmers across
our country whose crops reach markets
across the globe. They are truly the best of
the best, and I am proud to share a home
state with them.
Their leadership speaks for itself as they
have volunteered to advocate for our Ohio
farmers and those across our Nation, and I
wish to congratulate them on their accomplishments.
Without farmers and leaders to advocate on
their behalf, our Nation could not feed the
world. These men make it happen.

OF OHIO

f

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. CAREY. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor two Ohioans who have been leaders
representing our state at the national level as
leaders in agriculture: Jed Bower and Scott
Metzger.
Jed currently serves as the President of the
National Corn Growers Association and Scott
serves as President of the American Soybean
Association.
America’s farmers and ranchers have been
the backbone of our Nation since its very

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. J. FRENCH HILL
OF ARKANSAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 21, 2026
Mr. HILL of Arkansas. Mr. Speaker, I was
unable to vote because I was in a legislative
meeting that ran over. Had I been present, I
would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 32.

E:\CR\FM\A21JA8.011

E21JAPT1

Wednesday, January 21, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate
Chamber Action

Committee Meetings

The Senate was not in session and stands in recess
until 11 a.m. on Thursday, January 22, 2026.

No committee meetings were held.

h

House of Representatives

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Chamber Action
Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 27 public bills, H.R. 7167–7193; 1 private bill, H.R.
7194; and 3 resolutions, H.J. Res. 141; and H. Res.
1012–1013 were introduced.
Pages H1170–72
Additional Cosponsors:
Page H1173
Reports Filed: Reports were filed today as follows:
H.R. 6502, to amend the Higher Education Act
of 1965 to require the Secretary of Education to develop requirements for institutions of higher education on formatting financial aid offer forms, and
for other purposes, with an amendment (H. Rept.
119–460); and
H.R. 6498, to amend the Higher Education Act
of 1965 to increase transparency in college tuition
for consumers, and for other purposes, with an
amendment (H. Rept. 119–461).
Page H1170
Speaker: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he
appointed Representative Newhouse to act as Speaker pro tempore for today.
Page H1125
Recess: The House recessed at 10:38 a.m. and reconvened at 12 p.m.
Page H1130
Recess: The House recessed at 1:09 p.m. and reconvened at 1:30 p.m.
Page H1138
Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and
Families Act: The House passed H.R. 6945, to
amend part A of title IV of the Social Security Act
to clarify the authority of States to use funds for
pregnancy centers, by a yea-and-nay vote of 215 yeas
to 209 nays, Roll No. 37.
Pages H1139–47, H1155–56

Rejected the Moore (WI) motion to recommit the
bill to the Committee on Ways and Means by a yeaand-nay vote of 209 yeas to 213 nays, Roll No. 36.
Pages H1147, H1155–56

Pursuant to the Rule, an amendment in the nature of a substitute consisting of the text of Rules
Committee Print 119–17 shall be considered as
Page H1139
adopted.
H. Res. 1009, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 6945), (H.R. 6359) and the joint
resolution (H.J. Res. 140) was agreed to by a recorded vote of 213 ayes to 210 noes, Roll No. 35,
after the previous question was ordered by a yea-andnay vote of 212 yeas to 210 nays, Roll No. 34.
Pages H1131–39

Providing for congressional disapproval under
chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, of the
rule submitted by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order No. 7917 for
Withdrawal of Federal Lands; Cook, Lake, and
Saint Louis Counties, MN: The House passed H.J.
Res. 140, providing for congressional disapproval
under chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, of
the rule submitted by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order No. 7917 for
Withdrawal of Federal Lands; Cook, Lake, and Saint
Louis Counties, MN, by a yea-and-nay vote of 214
yeas to 208 nays, Roll No. 38.
Pages H1147–55, H1156–57

H. Res. 1009, the rule providing for consideration
of (H.R. 6945), (H.R. 6359) and the joint resolution
(H.J. Res. 140) was agreed to by a recorded vote of
213 ayes to 210 noes, Roll No. 35, after the previous question was ordered by a yea-and-nay vote of
212 yeas to 210 nays, Roll No. 34.
Pages H1131–39
D99

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:00 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D21JA6.REC

D21JAPT1

D100

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Meeting Hour: Agreed by unanimous consent that
when the House adjourns today, it adjourn to meet
at 9 a.m. tomorrow, January 22nd.
Page H1157
Order of Business: Agreed by unanimous consent
that it be in order at any time to consider H. Con.
Res. 68 in the House if called up by the chair of
the Committee on Foreign Affairs or his designee;
that the concurrent resolution be considered as read;
and that the previous question be considered as ordered on the concurrent resolution to adoption without intervening motion except for one hour of debate
equally divided among and controlled by Representative Mast, Representative Meeks, and Representative McGovern, or their respective designees.
Page H1157

Discharge Petition: Representative Morelle presented to the clerk a motion to discharge the Committee on Rules from the consideration of the resolution (H. Res. 982) entitled, a resolution providing
for consideration of the bill (H.R. 6039) to advance
commonsense priorities (Discharge Petition No. 14).
Quorum Calls—Votes: Four yea-and-nay votes and
one recorded vote developed during the proceedings
of today and appear on pages H1138, H1139,
H1155–56, H1156, and H1156–57.
Adjournment: The House met at 10 a.m. and adjourned at 6:51 p.m.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Committee Meetings
REVERSE THE CURSE: SKYROCKETING
HEALTH CARE COSTS AND AMERICA’S
FISCAL FUTURE
Committee on the Budget: Full Committee held a hearing entitled ‘‘Reverse the Curse: Skyrocketing Health
Care Costs and America’s Fiscal Future’’. Testimony
was heard from public witnesses.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Education and Workforce: Full Committee
held a markup on H.R. 7082, the ‘‘Fostering Learning and Excellence in Charter Schools Act’’; H.R.
7086, the ‘‘Equitable Access to School Facilities
Act’’; and H.R. 4624, the ‘‘Muhammad Ali American Boxing Revival Act’’. H.R. 7082, H.R. 7086,
and H.R. 4624 were ordered reported, as amended.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Full Committee
held a markup on H.R. 6409, the ‘‘FENCES Act’’;
H.R. 4218, the ‘‘CLEAR Act’’; H.R. 6387, the
‘‘FIRE Act’’; H.R. 4214, the ‘‘Clean Air and Building Infrastructure Improvement Act’’; H.R. 161, the
‘‘New Source Review Permitting Improvement Act’’;
H.R. 6373, the ‘‘Air Permitting Improvements to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:00 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

January 21, 2026

Protect National Security Act’’; H.R. 6398, the ‘‘Reducing and Eliminating Duplicative Environmental
Regulations Act’’; H.R. 2072, to require the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission to extend the time
period during which licensees are required to commence construction of certain hydropower projects;
H.R. 5200, the ‘‘Emergency Reporting Act’’; H.R.
5201, the ‘‘Kari’s Law Reporting Act’’; and H.R.
2076, the ‘‘LuLu’s Law’’. H.R. 6409, H.R. 4218,
H.R. 6387, H.R. 4214, H.R. 6373, H.R. 6398,
H.R. 2072, H.R. 5200, H.R. 5201, and H.R. 2076
were ordered reported, without amendment. H.R.
161 was ordered reported, as amended.
OVERSIGHT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
AND THE FEDERAL HOUSING
ADMINISTRATION
Committee on Financial Services: Full Committee held
a hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development and the Federal
Housing Administration’’. Testimony was heard
from Scott Turner, Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Foreign Affairs: Full Committee held a
markup on H.R. 7036, to increase collaboration
within the Department of State between the Office
of Opinion Research of the Bureau of Intelligence
and Research and the Bureau of Global Public Affairs; H.R. 7028, to require the Secretary of State to
submit a notification to Congress prior to obligating
funds for certain art-related purchases, and for other
purposes; H.R. 6411, to direct the Secretary of State
to prepare a report on the treatment of ethnic minorities in Serbia; H.R. 7054, to require the Secretary of State to submit to Congress a notification
of certain construction projects using nonstandard
designs; H.R. 4532, to direct the Secretary of State
to develop a strategy on efforts to strengthen subnational cooperation between the United States and
Mexico, and for other purposes; H. Res. 515, commemorating the 90th birthday of His Holiness the
Dalai Lama on July 6, 2025, as ‘‘A Day of Compassion’’, and expressing support for the human rights,
religious freedom, and cultural and linguistic protection of the Tibetan people; H.R. 4368, to authorize
the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative, to enhance
the United States-Caribbean security partnership, to
prioritize natural disaster resilience, and for other
purposes; H.R. 3307, to increase cooperation with
countries in the Eastern Mediterranean region in
order to strengthen energy security and defense capabilities, and for other purposes; H.R. 7052, to establish a Center for Conflict Analysis, Planning, and
Prevention in the Department of State, and for other

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D21JA6.REC

D21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

purposes; H.R. 6275, to require the Secretary of
Commerce to submit a report annually on the advanced artificial intelligence capabilities of the People’s Republic of China, and for other purposes; and
H.R. 6875, to require the Under Secretary of Commerce for Industry and Security to require a license
for the export, reexport, or in-country transfer of certain integrated circuits, and for other purposes. H.R.
7036, H.R. 7028, H.R. 6411, H.R. 7054, H.R.
3307, and H.R. 7052 were ordered reported, without amendment. H.R. 4532, H. Res. 515, H.R.
4368, H.R. 6275, and H.R. 6875 were ordered reported, as amended.
OVERSIGHT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY: CYBERSECURITY
AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
AGENCY, TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION, SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY DIRECTORATE
Committee on Homeland Security: Full Committee held
a hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Department of
Homeland Security: CISA, TSA, S&T’’. Testimony
was heard from the following Department of Homeland Security officials: Pedro Allende, Under Secretary, Science and Technology Directorate; Madhu
Gottumukkala, Acting Director, Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency; and Ha Nguyen
McNeill, Senior Official Performing the Duties of
the Administrator, Transportation Security Administration.
WHEN PUBLIC FUNDS ARE ABUSED:
ADDRESSING FRAUD AND THE THEFT OF
TAXPAYER DOLLARS
Committee on the Judiciary: Subcommittee on Crime
and Federal Government Surveillance held a hearing
entitled ‘‘When Public Funds Are Abused: Addressing Fraud and the Theft of Taxpayer Dollars’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
EMBEDDED THREATS: FOREIGN
OWNERSHIP, HIDDEN HARDWARE, AND
LICENSING FAILURES IN AMERICA’S
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
Committee on the Judiciary: Subcommittee on Oversight held a hearing entitled ‘‘Embedded Threats:
Foreign Ownership, Hidden Hardware, and Licensing Failures in America’s Transportation Systems’’.
Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
EXPLORE AMERICA250: CELEBRATING ONE
YEAR OF THE EXPANDING PUBLIC LANDS
OUTDOOR RECREATION EXPERIENCES ACT
Committee on Natural Resources: Subcommittee on Federal Lands held a hearing entitled ‘‘EXPLORE
America250: Celebrating One Year of the Expanding

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:00 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

D101

Public Lands Outdoor Recreation Experiences Act’’.
Testimony was heard from Gordon Blum, Associate
Deputy Chief, National Forest System, U.S. Forest
Service, Department Of Agriculture; Jason Curry,
Director, Division of Outdoor Recreation, Department of Natural Resources, Utah; Thomas Heinlein,
Acting Utah State Director, Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior; and public witnesses.
AMERICA FIRST: U.S. LEADERSHIP AND
NATIONAL SECURITY IN INTERNATIONAL
CONSERVATION
Committee on Natural Resources: Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations held a hearing entitled
‘‘America First: U.S. Leadership and National Security in International Conservation’’. Testimony was
heard from public witnesses.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform: Full
Committee held a markup on legislation on recommending that the House of Representatives find
William J. Clinton in Contempt of Congress for refusal to comply with a subpoena duly issued by the
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform;
and legislation on recommending that the House of
Representatives find Hillary R. Clinton in Contempt
of Congress for refusal to comply with a subpoena
duly issued by the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform. Legislation on recommending
that the House of Representatives find William J.
Clinton in Contempt of Congress for refusal to comply with a subpoena duly issued by the Committee
on Oversight and Government Reform; and legislation on recommending that the House of Representatives find Hillary R. Clinton in Contempt of Congress for refusal to comply with a subpoena duly
issued by the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform were ordered reported, as amended.
CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026; DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Committee on Rules: Full Committee began a hearing
on H.R. 7148, the ‘‘Consolidated Appropriations
Act, 2026’’; and H.R. 7147, the ‘‘Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
EMPOWERING RURAL AMERICA THROUGH
INVESTMENT IN INNOVATION
Committee on Small Business: Subcommittee on Rural
Development, Energy, and Supply Chains held a
hearing entitled ‘‘Empowering Rural America
Through Investment in Innovation’’. Testimony was
heard from public witnesses.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D21JA6.REC

D21JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

D102

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure: Full
Committee held a markup on H.R. 7084, the ‘‘Defending American Property Abroad Act of 2026’’;
H.R. 6744, the ‘‘Military Air Traffic Control Transition Act’’; H.R. 6618, the ‘‘Wildfire Aerial Response Safety Act’’; H.R. 2247, the ‘‘Pilot Certificate
Accessibility Act’’; and H.R. 2474, the ‘‘Expanding
Appalachia’s Broadband Access Act’’. H.R. 6744,
H.R. 6618, H.R. 2247, H.R. 2474, and H.R. 7084
were ordered reported, as amended.
LEGISLATIVE MEASURES
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs: Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity held a hearing on H.R. 982, the
‘‘Warriors to Workforce Act’’; H.R. 2878, the ‘‘Daniel J. Harvey, Jr. and Adam Lambert Improving
Servicemember Transition to Reduce Veteran Suicide
Act’’; H.R. 4105, the ‘‘VET Act of 2025’’; H.R.
5634, the ‘‘Veterans Flight Training Responsibility
Act of 2025’’; legislation on the CRUISE Act; legislation on the Improving Mental Health Care and
Coordination for Homeless Veterans Act; legislation
on the Improving Emerging Tech Opportunities for
Veterans Act; legislation on the Affordable Housing
Guarantee Act; H.R. 3159, the ‘‘Improving SCRA
Benefit Utilization Act’’; H.R. 5436, to amend title
38, United States Code, to prohibit an educational
institution from withholding a transcript from an individual who pursued a course or program of education at such institution using Post-9/11 educational assistance; legislation to amend title 38,
United States Code, to require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to submit to Congress a quarterly report on housing loans insured, guaranteed, or under
laws administered by the Secretary, and for other
purposes; and legislation on the Veteran Housing
Promise Act. Testimony was heard from Kenneth
Smith, Assistant Deputy Undersecretary, Veterans
Benefits Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs; Jeremiah Workman, Assistant Secretary, Veterans’ Employment and Training Service, Department of Labor; and public witnesses.
STRENGTHENING THE CHILD SUPPORT
ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM: STATUS,
CHALLENGES, AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR
MODERNIZATION
Committee on Ways and Means: Subcommittee on
Work and Welfare held a hearing entitled
‘‘Strengthening the Child Support Enforcement Program: Status, Challenges, and Opportunities for
Modernization’’. Testimony was heard from Jessica
Tollestrup, Specialist in Social Policy, Domestic Social Policy Division, Congressional Research Service,
Library of Congress; Connie Chesnik, Administrator,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:00 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0627

January 21, 2026

Division of Family and Economic Security, Department of Children and Families, Wisconsin; Ruth
Anne Thornton, Director, Child Support Division,
Texas Office of the Attorney General; and a public
witness.

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR THURSDAY,
JANUARY 22, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
No meetings/hearings scheduled.

House
Committee on Education and Workforce, Subcommittee on
Workforce Protections, hearing entitled ‘‘Examining the
Policies and Priorities of the Mine Safety and Health Administration’’, 10:15 a.m., 2175 Rayburn.
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Subcommittee on
Health, hearing entitled ‘‘Lowering Health Care Costs for
All Americans: An Examination of Health Insurance Affordability’’, 9:45 a.m., 2123 Rayburn.
Subcommittee on Environment, hearing entitled
‘‘Chemicals in Commerce: Legislative Proposal to Modernize America’s Chemical Safety Law, Strengthen Critical
Supply Chains, and Grow Domestic Manufacturing’’, 2
p.m., 2123 Rayburn.
Committee on Financial Services, Full Committee, markup
on H. Res. 1007, expressing the sense of the House of
Representatives with respect to the use of artificial intelligence in the financial services and housing industries;
H.R. 1799, the ‘‘Financial Reporting Threshold Modernization Act’’; H.R. 4171, the ‘‘Small Entrepreneurs
Empowerment and Development Act of 2025’’; H.R.
5877, the ‘‘Combating Money Laundering in Cyber
Crime Act of 2025’’; H.R. 6967, the ‘‘Public Company
Advisory Committee Act of 2026’’; H.R. 7056, the
‘‘Community Bank Regulatory Tailoring Act’’; H.R.
7085, a bill to amend the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 to repeal certain disclosure requirements related to
conflict minerals; H.R. 7127, the ‘‘Restoring the Secondary Trading Market Act’’; and H.R. 7128, the ‘‘TRIA
Program Reauthorization Act of 2026k’’, 10 a.m., 2128
Rayburn.
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Africa Subcommittee, hearing entitled ‘‘Advancing Peace in DRC and Rwanda
through President Trump’s Washington Accords’’, 2
p.m., 2172 Rayburn.
Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Border Security and Enforcement, hearing entitled ‘‘Smarter
Borders, Safer Nation: Expanding the Use of Non-Intrusive Inspection Technology’’, 10 a.m., 310 Cannon.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D21JA6.REC

D21JAPT1

January 21, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Committee on House Administration, Full Committee,
hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Government Publishing Office in a Digital-First Era’’, 2 p.m., 1310 Longworth.
Committee on the Judiciary, Full Committee, hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Office of Special Counsel Jack
Smith’’, 10 a.m., 2141 Rayburn.
Committee on Natural Resources, Full Committee, markup
on H.R. 2130, the ‘‘Tribal Trust Land Homeownership
Act of 2025’’; H.R. 3073, the ‘‘Shivwits Band of Paiutes
Jurisdictional Clarity Act’’; H.R. 3340, the ‘‘Modernizing
Access to Our Public Oceans Act’’; H.R. 4255, the ‘‘Enhancing Safety for Animals Act of 2025’’; H.R. 4294, the
‘‘MAWS Act of 2025’’; H.R. 5254, the ‘‘Gateway Partnership Act of 2025’’; H.R. 5729, the ‘‘North Rim Restoration Act of 2025’’; and H.R. 6365, the ‘‘Wintergreen
Emergency Egress Act’’, 10 a.m., 1324 Longworth.
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources, hearing entitled ‘‘Deep Dive: Examining the Regulatory and
Statutory Barriers to Deep Sea Mining’’, 2 p.m., 1334
Longworth.
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, Task Force
on the Declassification of Federal Secrets, hearing entitled
‘‘Declassified MLK Records: What They Reveal and Why
They Matter’’, 10 a.m., HVC–210.
Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Energy Policy,
and Regulatory Affairs, hearing entitled ‘‘Housing Affordability: Saving the American Dream’’, 2 p.m., 2247
Rayburn.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:00 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0627

D103

Committee on Rules, Full Committee, continue hearing
on H.R. 7148, the ‘‘Consolidated Appropriations Act,
2026’’; and H.R. 7147, the ‘‘Department of Homeland
Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’, 7:30 a.m., H–313
Capitol.
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Full Committee, hearing entitled ‘‘Assessing U.S. Leadership in
Quantum Science and Technology’’, 10 a.m., 2318 Rayburn.
Committee on Small Business, Full Committee, hearing
entitled ‘‘Local Ownership, National Brands: How Franchising is a Pathway to Entrepreneurship’’, 2 p.m., 2360
Rayburn.
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public Buildings,
and Emergency Management, hearing entitled ‘‘Smarter
Spending, Stronger Results: Reducing Duplication and
Ensuring Effectiveness Through Economic Development
Reforms’’, 10 a.m., 2167 Rayburn.
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, Full Committee, hearing
entitled ‘‘Community Care Network Next Generation:
One Trillion of Oversight’’, 10:15 a.m., 360 Cannon.
Committee on Ways and Means, Full Committee, hearing
entitled ‘‘Hearing with Health Insurance CEOs’’, 2:30
p.m., 1100 Longworth.
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subcommittee
on DIOA, hearing entitled ‘‘Cover Enhancement Authorities’’, 12 p.m., HVC–304 Hearing Room. This hearing
is closed.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D21JA6.REC

D21JAPT1

D104

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 21, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

11 a.m., Thursday, January 22

9 a.m., Thursday, January 22

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Thursday: Senate will meet in a pro forma
session.

Program for Thursday: Consideration H.R. 6359—
Pregnant Students’ Rights Act.

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE

Hill, J. French, Ark., E63
Hoyer, Steny H., Md., E62
Huffman, Jared, Calif., E61
Jayapal, Pramila, Wash., E61
Langworthy, Nicholas A., N.Y., E63
Nunn, Zachary, Iowa, E62

Bergman, Jack, Mich., E61
Carey, Mike, Ohio, E63
Casar, Greg, Tex., E61
Gonzales, Tony, Tex., E62

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Pappas, Chris, N.H., E61
Pocan, Mark, Wisc., E62
Ramirez, Delia C., Ill., E61
Wagner, Ann, Mo., E61

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:00 Jan 22, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D21JA6.REC

D21JAPT1

