UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, TUESDAY, JANUARY 13, 2026

No. 9

House of Representatives
The House met at 10 a.m. and was
called to order by the Speaker pro tempore (Mr. CLYDE).
f

DESIGNATION OF SPEAKER PRO
TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Speaker:
WASHINGTON, DC,
January 13, 2026.
I hereby appoint the Honorable ANDREW S.
CLYDE, to act as Speaker pro tempore on this
day.
MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
f

MORNING-HOUR DEBATE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of January 6, 2026, the Chair will now recognize
Members from lists submitted by the
majority and minority leaders for
morning-hour debate.
The Chair will alternate recognition
between the parties, with time equally
allocated between the parties and each
Member other than the majority and
minority leaders and the minority
whip limited to 5 minutes, but in no
event shall debate continue beyond
11:50 a.m.

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

f

RECOGNIZING A’SHELLARIEN
ADDISON
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from
Delaware,
Representative
MCBRIDE, for 5 minutes.
Ms. MCBRIDE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate Lieutenant Colonel Chaplain Reverend Dr. A’Shellarien
Addison on her recent promotion at the
Delaware Army National Guard.
Earlier this month, I was honored to
attend her promotion ceremony and
celebrate her historic role as the first
woman to hold this rank at the Delaware National Guard, and I was moved
hearing about her commitment to her
fellow National Guardsmen.

Before her time at the Delaware National Guard, she served as the first
woman chaplain at the National Guard
Bureau in Arlington, Virginia. Her devotion to spiritual empowerment and
trauma-informed healing has made her
an indispensable leader to Delaware’s
Army National Guard.
I look forward to seeing the work
that she will continue to do in shaping
the spiritual lives of those around her.
Well
done,
Lieutenant
Colonel
Addison.
CLOSING OF GRASSROOTS

Ms. MCBRIDE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in recognition of the closing of
GrassRoots, a gift shop in Newark,
Delaware, after 50 years in business.
What started as a small shop on Newark’s Main Street grew into a Delaware
institution, with locations across our
State from Wilmington to Hockessin to
Rehoboth Beach, but its heart always
stayed in Newark.
GrassRoots
weathered
changing
times. It survived recessions, and it
adapted as retail shifted online.
Through it all, it remained a constant
presence, helping to define the character of downtown Newark for a generation.
Marilyn Dickey, who cofounded
GrassRoots in 1975, poured more than
half of her life into the store. GrassRoots wasn’t just a business. It was
part of the rhythm of Newark, a reminder that local businesses create
connections and build community.
As GrassRoots closes this chapter
and Marilyn begins a well-earned retirement, Delaware wishes her all the
best and thanks her for her years of
community service and creativity.
RECOGNIZING DREAMS OF FAITH

Ms. MCBRIDE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to highlight the voices of my
Delaware constituents, Dwain and
Karen Johnson, who turned the unimaginable loss of their daughter,
Faith Deanna Johnson, into lifesaving
advocacy through their organization,
Dreams of Faith.
Faith was just 26 years old when she
died from ovarian cancer. For years,

her symptoms were dismissed or
misdiagnosed until it was too late.
Faith’s ovarian cancer cut her life far
too short. Before she passed, Faith
made one request of her parents: Make
sure this doesn’t happen to someone
else.
In Delaware, we listened. When I
served in the State Senate, I was proud
to help pass House Bill 15, the Faith
Deanna Johnson Act, which requires
individual health insurance plans to
cover annual ovarian cancer screenings
for women at risk and expand monitoring for survivors.
That law is already saving lives because it treats women’s medical needs
seriously and acts before it is too late.
Here is why this matters: Ovarian cancer is often caught too late, but when
detected early, survival rates dramatically increase. Early detection isn’t
just good medical practice; it is the difference between life and death.
Today, I carry the Johnsons’ story
with me to Congress. Their advocacy
reminds us that policy is personal and
that too often families are failed not
just by delayed diagnosis but by the
very system tasked with caring for our
health. It is one that too often puts
barriers between people and the care
that they need.
We owe it to Faith and families
across this country to keep pushing for
early detection, meaningful insurance
coverage, and a healthcare system that
truly puts patients first.
f

RECOGNIZING RIVERVIEW HOTEL’S
110TH ANNIVERSARY
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Georgia, Mr. CARTER, for 5 minutes.
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to celebrate the 110th

b This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
CORRECTION

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:41 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\H13JA6.REC

H13JA6

H663

CORRECTION

H664

anniversary of the Riverview Hotel in
St. Marys, Georgia, one of our State’s
most cherished historic landmarks.
Built in 1916, the Riverview Hotel
rests on the banks of the St. Marys
River and has welcomed travelers and
locals for more than a century. For
generations, this hotel has offered hospitality and a sense of belonging to
visitors from near and far. It has welcomed notable guests over the decades
and stood as a testament to seaside
Georgia’s heritage.
The spirit of Riverview reflects the
heart of St. Marys. Its veranda overlooking the river and its proximity to
the ferry for Cumberland Island connects visitors with the history and natural beauty of our coastal region.
Today, we honor the Riverview Hotel
for preserving tradition, welcoming
families and travelers, and contributing to the vibrant life of southeast
Georgia for 110 years.
RECOGNIZING THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF
GALLERY 209 IN SAVANNAH

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize and congratulate Gallery 209, located at 209
East River Street in Savannah, on celebrating 50 years at its historic location.
Founded in February 1975 by a group
of Savannah artists, Gallery 209 has remained a member-driven space where
artists come together to sell their
work, share resources, and support one
another.
For five decades, it has been a cornerstone of Savannah’s artistic community and a vital part of River
Street’s identity. The gallery has
showcased the work of countless local
artists, offering visitors ceramics, fiber
art, jewelry, paintings, photography,
woodworking, and other handcrafted
pieces that reflect the creative spirit of
our region.
Artists like Randee Powell and Sharon Saseen speak to the sense of family
and shared purpose that defines Gallery 209.
As Savannah continues to grow, Gallery 209 stands as a reminder that local
art and culture remain essential to our
community. I commend its artists for
sustaining this tradition and wish
them continued success for generations
to come.

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

RECOGNIZING SWANN SEILER

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Swann
Seiler, named the 2026 Woman of the
Year by the United Way of the Coastal
Empire at the annual Women Who Rule
event in Savannah, Georgia.
Ms. Seiler’s leadership, service, and
commitment to community reflect the
very best of civic engagement and personal dedication. A graduate of the
University of Georgia’s Henry W.
Grady School of Journalism, Ms. Seiler
built a distinguished career in corporate communications and public affairs before retiring.
Ms. Seiler served Georgia Power and
contributed her talents to community
boards and nonprofit organizations
throughout the region. Ms. Seiler’s
service includes leadership roles with

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:37 Jan 21, 2026

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

cultural institutions, historic preservation efforts, education foundations, and
civic organizations that strengthen
families and neighborhoods across the
Coastal Empire. She has lifted up
countless causes and encouraged others
to give back in meaningful ways.
The Women Who Rule campaign supports
reliable
transportation
for
women and caregivers, helping them to
get to work, school, and medical appointments. Ms. Seiler’s example inspires us to build stronger communities through service. I congratulate
Swann.
RECOGNIZING SPECIAL AGENT JOE CEPHUS

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Special
Agent Joe Cephus of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, who was honored
by the Evans County Sheriff’s Office
with the 2025 Support Officer of the
Year Award.
Special Agent Cephus has served his
community and State with integrity
and courage. His work alongside local
law enforcement in Evans County demonstrated steadfast support during
critical investigations and helped to
strengthen the bond between State and
local public safety partners. His commitment to protecting families and upholding the rule of law reflects a deep
sense of duty to his neighbors and fellow Georgians.
The Support Officer of the Year
Award is given to individuals whose actions have gone above and beyond their
normal responsibilities to help keep
the community safe.
By stepping forward in challenging
circumstances and offering assistance
without hesitation, Special Agent
Cephus embodies what it means to
serve with professionalism and care.
Today, we thank Special Agent Joe
Cephus for his service, partnership, and
example of servant leadership in law
enforcement.
f

RECOGNIZING FRANK CHAPMAN
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman
from Illinois, Mrs. RAMIREZ, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. RAMIREZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
to honor the legacy of the Reverend Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr., by commending a liberation leader, Frank
Chapman.
Frank’s political education began in
St. Louis, where he experienced the violence of racism and repression and
was wrongfully convicted and sentenced to 50 years in prison during his
twenties. Yet Frank has always been
an organizer and educator.
Frank taught himself law and
launched a movement to desegregate
the prison, where Black prisoners had
faced brutal and inhumane treatment.
The bars in prison didn’t break him or
limit his spirit. On the contrary, it propelled him to fight for the liberation of
those imprisoned and all people.
After his release, Frank established
himself as a fixture in the struggle for
liberation in Chicago and beyond.
Whether through his leadership in the

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Chicago Alliance Against Racist and
Political Repression, his successful
campaigns for community control of
the police, or his solidarity with immigrant communities in the fight to protect our neighbors from ICE, Frank has
consistently fought to defend the most
fundamental of our collective human
rights and our shared liberation.
Mr. Speaker, this week carries profound significance for Frank. It marks
the 50th anniversary of his release from
prison.
I am honored on behalf of Illinois’
Third Congressional District to commend Frank Chapman for his lifelong
commitment to building the beloved
community, championing civil and
human rights, and practicing solidarity
across our intersections, our identities,
and our issues.
I thank and congratulate Frank for
all of his efforts, and all power to the
people.
RECOGNIZING JULIET DE JESUS ALEJANDRE

Mrs. RAMIREZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
to honor my constituent, Juliet De
Jesus Alejandre.
Juliet is a triracial Latina who honors her African and indigenous ancestry with roots in Ecuador and Puerto
Rico. She is a healer, organizer, poet,
visionary, and she is the current executive director of Palenque LSNA.
Juliet’s love for Black, Brown, indigenous, and immigrant communities
and her bold vision of collective liberation is deeply rooted in healing, joy,
and solidarity, especially among young
Latinos and ‘‘madres immigrantes’’;
‘‘immigrant mothers.’’
To fight erasure, she connects young
leaders to their history and genealogy.
To fight displacement, she builds collective ownership. To fight dehumanization, she offers mutual support and
collective care.
Through her artistry and creativity,
she invokes our ancestral histories as
she casts visions that help us to imagine new ways forward that leave all of
our communities better and stronger.
On behalf of Illinois’ Third Congressional District, it is my honor to commend Juliet De Jesus Alejandre for her
bold, loving, and creative leadership
that builds people power to shape our
future because we know ‘‘el pueblo
unido jamas sera vencido’’; ‘‘the people
united shall never be defeated.’’
Mr. Speaker, I thank and congratulate Juliet for all of her work.
f

RECOGNIZING MAYOR DAVID
BLACK
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Nebraska, Mr. FLOOD, for 5 minutes.
Mr. FLOOD. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Papillion, Nebraska’s, Mayor David Black, as a paragon
of public service and remarkable stewardship.
Through more than two decades of
service to the people of Papillion,

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\H13JA6.REC

H13JA6

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Mayor Black helped to guide the city
into the thriving economic hub that it
is today. This month, he announced
that he will not seek reelection, which
will conclude 171⁄2 years as mayor and
nearly 5 additional years of serving the
city in other roles.
Mayor Black leaves behind a strong
foundation built on partnership with
an exceptional professional staff and
the business community.
Decades of engagement and community outreach have produced clear results, attracting firms like Google and
Facebook to expand to Papillion.
b 1015
He will be deeply missed by the people of Papillion, and I am hopeful he
will continue public service down the
road. Mayor Black has more than
earned the opportunity to spend additional time with his family once his
final term in office concludes.
Papillion, Mr. Speaker, is a special
place, with Mayor Black’s legacy being
built yet another example of that
truth. I thank Mayor Black for his outstanding public service.
BEN SASSE NEVER STOPS FIGHTING

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

Mr. FLOOD. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize former U.S. Senator
Ben Sasse.
Ben is a Nebraskan, a native, and a
Fremonter. He lives in the First Congressional District. Early in his career,
he served as chief of staff for a previous
member of the same district.
Last month, Ben announced that he
had been diagnosed with stage IV pancreatic cancer. This news stunned me,
and, quite frankly, it stunned the
world.
Ever since Ben has stepped back from
public life following his time in the
Senate and at the University of Florida, his intellect and voice have continued to influence conversation across
the country.
From education to healthcare and beyond, he has shaped debates in higher
ed, politics, journalism, and more
through the years. Ben did this all at a
young age. Even though he has a very
public profile, he and his wife, Melissa,
have built a vibrant family. All of this
made the cancer diagnosis seem almost
unthinkable.
While this is hard news for all of us
to hear, we know this isn’t the end of
the story. Ben has a lot of fight left in
him, and as he has joked himself: ‘‘He
is not dead yet.’’
From the people of the First District
and across Nebraska, Mr. Speaker, may
Ben know that we are praying for him.
We are with him, with Melissa, and his
kids. I know he won’t back down from
this fight.
f

GREENLAND
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Thank
you. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. LATIMER,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, in the
Holy Bible’s Book of Exodus, a book
which is sacred to both Christians and
Jews, it is written that Almighty God
hands down, through Moses, Ten Com-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:38 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

mandments that represent the bedrock
of ethical behavior and rules that govern human conduct.
My colleagues in Texas and Louisiana have State laws that post them
inside public facilities. In one form or
another, secular laws are written with
these commandments in mind to provide civil sanctions against those who
would commit murder or lie in a court
proceeding under oath. Such laws govern against stealing what others legitimately own, their property and possessions.
We now face one of the most important tests of our democracy in over 150
years: Whether the Federal Government will blatantly steal the assets of
an independent sovereign nation, who
is our ally, for no legitimate reason
other than lust for land.
In the rhetoric of coveting thy neighbor’s goods, the President of the United
States is fixed on coveting the sovereign land of the kingdom of Denmark, the island of Greenland. The
President has spoken about it in his
frequent public ruminations, and we
have learned he has tasked our military to plan how he might take Greenland by force without the consent of
Denmark.
This would open a shameful chapter,
as we celebrate the 250th year of our
own independence, that we would turn
our backs on the principles established
by the Founding Fathers and act as if
we are one of the thug nations of the
world ourselves.
Saddam Hussein’s Iraq seized Kuwait.
Vladimir Putin’s Russia launched war
to take over Ukraine. Adolf Hitler
grabbed Poland and Czechoslovakia
and, for a while, all of continental Europe. Mussolini took Ethiopia, and
Chairman Xi has long coveted Taiwan.
Each presented their flimsy reasons for
their actions, justifications that fooled
no one.
Is this who America wants to emulate? Putin, Hitler, Hussein?
The flimsy reason offered by the
President and his minions, notably
Stephen Miller, references our ability
to protect America from an Arctic region threat.
With that very thought in mind, in
1951, we signed an agreement with Denmark that allows us to place military
assets in Greenland that we feel we
need with the support and agreement
of Denmark. They have not reneged on
that deal or thrown up roadblocks to
American defense needs. We are trying
to burst into a room by force when the
door is set wide open and the welcome
mat is displayed.
Denmark, a NATO ally, owns Greenland legally. If it doesn’t choose to sell
it, it remains legally theirs. Thy neighbor’s ox and house, not ours.
Any U.S. military action against
Greenland breaks the NATO rule and
puts us at odds with our allies, allies
that in the post-World War II era have
helped us restrain Russian aggression
for nearly a century. Denmark, as an
ally, responded to our action in Afghanistan. They lost 43 men there simply because they honored their NATO

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

CORRECTION

H665

commitment and stood by their friend,
the United States of America.
Perhaps this President hates NATO
so much that he has rallied against elements of it before, and in that he supports the wishes of Vladimir Putin that
sees NATO as an impediment to his
empire building, the desire for retaking
Latvia,
Estonia,
Lithuania,
and
Ukraine.
We have, as of late, decided that it is
okay to insult European leaders at the
U.N., threaten the countries of Latin
America, disrespect our closest friend,
Canada, and generally act with an arrogant swagger. We have the world’s
greatest military, but it is not a toy to
be used to glorify any one man’s lust
for an expanded control of land. It is
not the Department of War. It is the
Department of Defense. That is how
Americans view our role in the world,
to defend ourselves and to defend freedom in a world with dictators and
thugs who would subjugate us all if
they could.
God stop us if we become the thug, if
we become the dictatorship that uses
our economic and military strength to
bully this world.
The power of any President is not
about what one man thinks is moral. It
is guided by constitutional limitations,
including three branches of government, not a dominant dictator and a
subservient politburo and judiciary.
Harry Truman understood this.
Dwight Eisenhower understood this.
John F. Kennedy understood this, and
so did Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon,
Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, Ronald
Reagan, George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, Barack Obama,
and Joe Biden. These men, whether you
deem their Presidencies good or bad,
understood what it is to have allies
across the globe and how to keep
America as the shining light to guide
this planet.
Attacking Greenland for no strategic
benefit that they don’t already have
puts us in a league with Russia and
China. We will regret such a decision
every day that we live thereafter.
Let this Congress make a strong, unambiguous statement that America
does not take land for some trumped
up reason.
We stand for the rule of law and for
freedom and respect for others. That is
what sets our Nation apart. If we
snatch Greenland as a show of power,
we give no reason for the people of the
world to side with us when some other
nation confronts us in a future year.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
f

HUMAN TRAFFICKING AWARENESS
MONTH
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from—the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. LUTTRELL,
for 5 minutes.

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\H13JA6.REC

H13JA6

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

H666

CORRECTION

Mr. LUTTRELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Human Trafficking
Awareness Month and to speak about
the serious threat human trafficking
represents here and globally.
Human trafficking is the second largest criminal enterprise in the world,
second to only that of drug trafficking.
Human trafficking generates an estimated $150 billion a year and enslaves
nearly 50 million people. The most vulnerable are our children and young
adults. They are being targeted and exploited through their phones, through
their computer systems, through gaming systems, and through social media.
Every 30 seconds a child is sold into
slavery. Every 30 seconds another child
is sold into slavery.
Human trafficking is not just a distant overseas problem. The issue is
here. It is in our communities. It is in
our small towns. It is in our big cities.
I am from Texas and Texas being a
border State, we are a hot spot for
human trafficking. We lead the country in that issue. I asked our elected
officials and I asked our law enforcement officials: How do we combat this?
How do we defeat this mechanism?
These cartels and these gangs move
these people every day.
It starts with community awareness.
You have to be willing to recognize the
problem. You have to be willing to
watch. We have the FIFA World Cup
and we have the Super Bowl coming up.
This will swarm our country even more
so than now with this issue.
I have talked to school board members. I have talked to parents. I have
spoken to young men and women who
have been trafficked, and it is hard to
speak about. A lot of the young ladies
like to keep that to themselves, but we
have to look past that.
We in Congress have to legislate
forcefully. We have to go after these
bastards who are taking advantage of
our babies every single day. If we don’t,
this problem will continue to exist. I
asked law enforcement: What do you
need? They need technology. They need
us to listen. They need funding. They
need our help.
This is an American problem. It will
not go away. With the advancements of
technology that we are seeing today,
they will reach out and touch every
single person they possibly can because
it makes them money.
This is like cancer, unfortunately. If
cancer does not touch you or your family, you don’t want to recognize it. You
will not address it until it lands on the
house. Mr. Speaker, this issue is here.
These babies cannot protect themselves. It is our responsibility to watch
over them. We have to do that. Enough
is enough.
In 2021, the estimated report again
was 50 million people are sold into slavery, 50 million people. This is a problem the United States and the globe
should not have. This is not a red or
blue issue. This is a red, white, and
blue issue.
I talk to my colleagues in Texas on a
daily basis. They are just as engaged as
we are, but I talk to the American people and I say to you: We need your
help. We have to Facebook this thing.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:42 Jan 21, 2026

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

It has to spread like a wave. Do not be
shy about this issue, Mr. Speaker. Our
babies depend on us to watch over
them.
I have two beautiful sons, and I give
them the latitude they need, but I
watch over them every single day because I am one county away from the
worst county in the country when it
comes to human trafficking. Honestly,
Mr. Speaker, I am embarrassed to have
to say that, but we have to fix that
here. We have to fix that in every single State in the country, and we can do
that if we just activate and show the
bad actors that we will tolerate this no
more.
f

IMPEACH SECRETARY NOEM
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Thank
you. The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. KELLY, for
5 minutes.
Ms. KELLY of Illinois. Mr. Speaker,
before my colleague from Texas walks
out, I will do whatever I can do to help
him because the Chicagoland area is
number three.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to announce I will be impeaching Homeland
Security Secretary Kristi Noem. Secretary Noem has violated the Constitution, and she needs to be held accountable for terrorizing our communities.
Operation Midway Blitz has torn
apart the Chicagoland area. President
Trump declared war on Chicago, and
then he brought violence and destruction to our city and our suburbs in the
form of immigration enforcement.
In my district, Federal agents
rapelled down from Black Hawk helicopters and burst into an apartment
building in the South Shore area. They
dragged U.S. citizens and noncitizens
alike out of their beds in the middle of
the night. They claimed the apartment
was infiltrated by members of a Venezuelan gang. I don’t understand this
President’s obsession with Venezuela,
but they did not arrest a single member from that gang.
I visited that apartment building and
saw firsthand the destruction those
agents left. Doors to people’s homes or
apartments were kicked down. Belongings, including little kids’ toys, were
strewn about in the hallway. That raid
and so many others shook our community, not just immigrants, but everyone.
Now, Secretary Noem has brought
her reign of terror to Minneapolis after
she left Charlotte and Raleigh. We have
all seen what happened. An ICE officer
shot and killed Renee Nicole Good in
cold blood.
Without knowing any of the facts or
an investigation, Secretary Noem lied
about what happened. She called a beloved 37-year-old mom a domestic terrorist.
Secretary Noem and her rogue agents
are the ones terrorizing our communities, and she is breaking the law to
do so. I will hold her accountable, and
I am filing three Articles of Impeachment against Secretary Noem.
Number one, obstruction of Congress.
Secretary Noem has denied me and

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

other Members of Congress oversight of
ICE detention facilities. It is our constitutional duty to find out what is
happening in these centers where people are reportedly being treated like
less than animals.
Two, violation of public trust. Secretary Noem directed ICE agents to arrest people without warrants, used tear
gas against citizens, and ignored due
process. She claims she is taking murderers and rapists off our streets, but
none of the 614 people arrested during
Operation Midway Blitz has been
charged or convicted of murder or rape.
Three, self-dealing. Secretary Noem
has abused her power for personal benefit. She steered a Federal contract to
a new firm run by a friend, her friend.
Her propaganda campaign to recruit
ICE agents cost taxpayers $200 million.
b 1030
She made a video that turned the
South Shore raid into something that
looked more like a movie trailer. Make
no mistake, this is not a movie. This is
real life, and real people are being hurt
and killed.
I really have to wonder who the people are behind the mask. These DHS
agents have no identifying factor.
From all their botched raids and officer-involved shootings, I have to ask:
What is their training like? What is the
vetting? Is Secretary Noem recruiting
January 6 insurrectionists?
I was one of the last Members of Congress to escape the House gallery on
January 6. I remember hiding on my
hands and knees and running through
the hallways to a safe room. Insurrectionists are not fit to serve as law enforcement.
I realize that the impeachment of
Secretary Noem does not bring Renee
back. True justice would be Renee
alive today, at home with her family.
Impeachment doesn’t bring back the
four other people killed by immigration officers this year, including a man
in Chicago. We cannot bring them back
to their loved ones. What we can do,
though, is impeach Secretary Noem,
hold her accountable, and let her know
the public is watching.
In this country, we do not kill people
in cold blood without consequences.
These are not policy disagreements.
These are violations of her oath of office, and she must answer for her impeachable actions.
f

RECOGNIZING JAMES ‘‘JIM’’ P.
CITRANO
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Florida, Mr. RUTHERFORD, for 5
minutes.
Mr. RUTHERFORD. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to honor the memory of
James ‘‘Jim’’ P. Citrano, who passed
away this last August at the age of 83.
Jim was born on January 2, 1942, in
Newark, New Jersey. After graduating

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\H13JA6.REC

H13JA6

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

from Colgate University, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the
U.S. Marine Corps.
In 1967, Jim was deployed to Vietnam
as an H–34 helicopter pilot with the
HMM–363, also known as the Lucky
Red Lions. They were flying assault
support missions, earning Jim the Distinguished Flying Cross.
After the war, Mr. Speaker, this
American hero relocated to Jacksonville, Florida, with his wife and four
children. There, he built a successful
40-year career in commercial real estate property management, development, and brokerage.
Always a community servant, Mr.
Citrano generously dedicated his time,
serving on numerous boards, including
St. Vincent’s Hospital and the University of North Florida.
As a law-and-order man, Jim was
also a faithful supporter of the Jacksonville Sheriff’s Office. As sheriff, I
was very proud to call him my friend.
Jim was a valued member of our
northeast Florida community and will
be greatly missed by all. I pray for Mr.
Citrano’s beloved family and friends as
they mourn this great loss.

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

f

CHINA IS NOT SCAMMING EUROPE
AND UNITED STATES ON WIND
POWER
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Thank
you. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Connecticut, Mr. COURTNEY, for 5 minutes.
Mr. COURTNEY. Mr. Speaker, last
Friday, President Trump hosted a
meeting at the White House with all
the major oil company executives and
members of his Cabinet to talk about
Venezuelan oil.
During the televised gathering, he
veered off topic and rambled on one of
his pet peeves, wind power. In addition
to his usual complaints about how aesthetically ugly wind turbines are, he
added another new, startling criticism
to his repertoire, mainly that Europe
and the U.S. are suckers for allowing
China to sell us wind turbine parts
while at the same time China doesn’t
even use wind power in its own country.
Here is exactly what he said: ‘‘All
you have to do is say to China, how
many windmill areas do you have in
China? So far, they are not able to find
any. They use coal, and they use oil
and gas and some nuclear, not much.
But they don’t have windmills. They
make them and sell them to suckers
like Europe and suckers like the
United States.’’
Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter
is, as this headline yesterday from
Forbes magazine states: ‘‘China Does
In Fact Have Wind Turbines, A Lot Of
Them.’’ Forbes, of course, is hardly a
leftwing, anti-Trump media outlet. As
its article accurately reports, not only
does China’s wind industry exist, but it
is huge.
According to the International Energy Agency, which has been tracking

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:38 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

energy production by country for decades, China not only manufactures
wind equipment but also enjoys the
largest wind production in the world
and today has twice as much new wind
power under construction as the rest of
the world combined. The wind turbines
are sited both onshore and offshore.
Ironically, one of the oil executives
who was in the room on Friday, from
Conoco, is an investor and partner in a
wind project in Bohai Bay, China.
Mr. Speaker, on a scale of 1 to 10, 10
being accurate and 1 being false, President Trump’s comments deserve a
score of minus 10. China is not
scamming Europe and the U.S. on wind
power. It is, in fact, the most aggressive domestic user and builder of wind
power in the world.
I raise this point, Mr. Speaker, not to
play gotcha—although this is a pretty
embarrassing gotcha—but rather to remind the House that, right now, in real
life, the Trump bogus attack on wind
power, for no good reason, is destroying good American jobs and cutting off
an abundant supply of new energy,
which our economy and American electricity ratepayers desperately need.
For example, a couple of weeks ago,
for the second time, the administration
issued a decree terminating five offshore wind projects, many of which are
close to completion and which were
supported by billions of dollars of private investment and years of permitting approval.
Together, these projects will bring in
thousands of new megawatts of power
to consumers in New England, New
York, and Virginia. Trump’s halt work
order cited vague, nonspecific national
security concerns as justification for
this antiworker, anti-ratepayer, and
antigrowth decree.
Luckily, Mr. Speaker, we have a government of laws. Yesterday, U.S. District Court Judge Royce Lamberth
here in Washington struck down this
frivolous decree so that crane operators, laborers, and electricians can get
back to work this morning to create a
modern and robust energy grid for the
21st century.
Judge Lamberth, a Reagan appointee, thoroughly reviewed the
record of the New England-based Revolution Wind offshore project and correctly determined that the Department, in fact, did not find a national
security problem but instead specifically issued a written finding a year
ago that Revolution’s turbines ‘‘would
not have adverse impacts to DOD missions.’’
Mr. Speaker, you may recall, last
September, the House debated an
amendment to the 2026 National Defense Authorization Act, where there
was an attempt to create a statutory
bar to offshore wind based on national
security reasons. The House voted to
reject such a straitjacket on wind
power and instead rely on the experts
at DOD to judge each project on the
facts and science.
By the way, Mr. Speaker, just for the
record, the turbine blades and compo-

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

CORRECTION

H667

nents in the Revolution Wind project
are not made in China. Up in New England, we pride ourselves on not, in fact,
being suckers.
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the administration’s unfounded, irrational attack against wind power to stop. Contrary to what the President said, the
rest of the world, including China, is
aggressively pursuing this abundant
source of power. For the United States
to intentionally deprive American
building trade workers of good-paying
jobs and deprive our national grid of
much-needed energy supply makes no
sense.
The best way to cut electricity rates
for consumers is to expand the energy
supply. As the rest of the world recognizes, wind has to be part of that solution.
Mr. Speaker, the only suckers in this
area are policymakers in Washington
who are spouting off blatantly false
narratives about the value of wind energy.
f

RECOGNIZING
EASTERN
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY’S ADAPTIVE ATHLETICS PROGRAM
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Washington, Mr. BAUMGARTNER,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker,
there are many things that make eastern Washington the greatest place to
live in these wonderful United States
of America. Today, I rise to recognize
one of those wonderful things, the
Eastern Washington University Adaptive Athletics Program, home of the
first collegiate National Wheelchair
Basketball Association team in the
Western United States.
Founded in 2019, this program embodies the values of leadership, teamwork, positivity, and integrity, helping
student athletes build confidence, discipline, and independence both on and
off the court. These athletes balance
the same rigorous demands as all EWU
varsity
players—classes,
practices,
study sessions, travel, and competition—all while setting a powerful example of determination and excellence.
They continue to raise the bar for
what collegiate athletics can be, showing that true greatness is defined by
heart and perseverance.
I know, on a personal level, each and
every time I see these wonderful student athletes in person, I am inspired.
I have seen the team traveling to and
from games on my own trips to D.C.,
and I couldn’t be prouder of their dedication and the way they represent
Eastern Washington University. Go
Eags.
HONORING OFFICER KELLSEY TORRES

Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker,
last week was National Law Enforcement Day, and I rise to recognize wonderful Officer Kellsey Torres of the
Spokane Police Department, who was
named officer of the quarter, and to
shine the eastern Washington spotlight
on her outstanding service.

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\H13JA6.REC

H13JA6

H668

CORRECTION

This recognition is not just about
one moment or one case. It reflects a
pattern of service, compassion, and integrity that defines Officer Torres’
work every single day. She embodies
the values that make eastern Washington so special: hard work, humility,
and a deep commitment to helping
neighbors in need. Her dedication reminds us that public service is about
people and showing up, lending a hand,
and treating every person with dignity
and respect while protecting us.
It is officers like Kellsey Torres who
strengthen the trust between law enforcement and our communities and
give us pride in the place we call home.
Today, we honor her not only for her
outstanding service but for embodying
the very best of the eastern Washington spirit. We honor all of our Nation’s law enforcement officers, and
may this body back the blue.
CELEBRATING NORTH COUNTY FOOD PANTRY

Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker,
today, I rise to celebrate the North
County Food Pantry in rural Elk,
Washington.
Nestled between the pristine forests
and recovering farmland, this small
1982 mobile home has nourished hundreds of families in body and soul for
decades.
The pantry does far more than provide food. It offers connection, dignity,
and a true sense of community.
At the heart of the community is the
director, Lora Benzinger, who has led
the pantry for a little over a year after
years and years of service. Drawing on
her background in social services, she
has made it her mission to ensure the
pantry nourishes not only families’ tables but also a sense of belonging.
Families come not just for groceries
but for fellowship, encouragement, and
a place to be seen and valued.
The pantry brings in volunteers from
every walk of life. The North County
Food Pantry stands as a powerful reminder that fighting hunger is about
more than filling plates. It is about
nurturing the human spirit. It reflects
the compassion and resilience that define eastern Washington.

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

f

CELEBRATING 2025 WINS FOR
CALIFORNIA–21
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. COSTA, for 5 minutes.
Mr. COSTA. Mr. Speaker, today, I
recognize the dedicated work of my
team, our efforts, and the results of the
work we have done for the people of the
21st Congressional District of California,
encompassing
Fresno
and
Tulare Counties.
We call it the breadbasket of not
only California but our Nation. The incredible cornucopia of over 400 commodities we grow is put on America’s
dinner table every night.
Though last year brought significant
challenges to our country and to our
valley, which I represent, my commitment and the commitment of my office

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:39 Jan 21, 2026

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

never wavered to serve the people of
Fresno and Tulare Counties with focus,
urgency, and results.
Throughout 2025, I listened closely to
the priorities of my constituents. Valley families told me the relief they
needed from rising costs and affordability. Farmers and farmworkers
called for a stronger agricultural economy and better labor conditions, dealing with comprehensive immigration
reform.
Communities demanded access to
healthcare, safe infrastructure, reliable
water, and the resources necessary to
thrive. In 2025, our office secured $831
million in Federal funding for communities across the San Joaquin Valley.
b 1045
Throughout our constituent casework, which I think is the meat and
potatoes of any congressional office, we
returned $74 million directly to residents of the 21st Congressional District. We helped more than 1,200 constituent cases and responded to over
11,000 calls, letters, and requests for assistance from the people whom we
serve. That is our job, to serve the people and to get things done.
We invested in our children and
working families. That is critical. My
team helped secure $35 million for Head
Start programs in Fresno and Tulare
Counties. We strengthened critical infrastructure, which is necessary not
only in our valley but throughout the
country.
We secured $31 million for Fresno Yosemite International Airport to improve infrastructure upgrades, and also
deal with the growing demands for the
valley and regional economic growth,
and expanding the international terminal.
We secured $3.5 million for the
Kaweah River Siphon Project to improve water reliability while supporting valley agriculture and local
jobs. As we know, where water flows,
food grows. That is critical to our valley’s economy.
In addition to that, we provided $1
million to the city of Kingsburg to establish a new city hall; another $1 million to relocate the Orange Cove Police
Department to make a more functional
facility; and another $1 million dollars
for the Parlier Police Department.
Thanks to the bipartisan infrastructure law, we secured $254 million in
Federal investments to strengthen our
water supply for the long term. That
includes $125 million to advance the
B.F. Sisk Dam Raise and Reservoir Expansion Project. We provided another
130,000 acre-feet of new water storage
to the people of our valley, and $129
million to support the construction of
Sites Reservoir, which will provide 1.5
million acre-feet of additional water
for the people of California, which is
critically important to our long-term
water supply.
Mr. Speaker, the San Joaquin Valley
is the breadbasket of our Nation, supporting farmers, farmworkers, ranch-

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ers, dairymen and -women. It remains,
obviously, as their Representative, my
highest priority to advocate on their
behalf.
When the avian influenza swept the
valley and the country, it threatened
the livelihoods of those who put food
on America’s dinner tables. I introduced the Healthy Poultry Assistance
and Indemnification Act to ensure
growers are fairly compensated and our
food supply remains strong and safe.
That is what Americans want.
We also honored, separately, those
who have served our country and their
families. We recognized 20 men and
women from the Fresno Veterans Home
who served our Nation during World
War II and the Korean war to ensure
their contributions are never forgotten, they are remembered, and they are
celebrated. We should never forget
those men and women currently in
harm’s way serving our country or
those and their families who have
served.
Beyond our district, we have worked
to support the United States’ leadership abroad by advocating for humanitarian assistance, accountability, and
diplomacy in global conflicts, while upholding America’s values on the world
stage, that beacon of life that President Reagan used to speak of and that
other countries look for.
In closing, I will continue to work
with my Democratic and Republican
colleagues to deliver results and
strengthen our communities for a better future. More work needs to be done.
f

RECOGNIZING INDIANA
UNIVERSITY FOOTBALL TEAM
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from
Indiana, Ms. HOUCHIN, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, today I
rise in recognition of the 15–0 Indiana
University football team for their historic season, winning the Rose Bowl,
then the Peach Bowl, and now advancing to the College Football Playoff National Championship.
This team rose to the occasion when
few expected it. Without a roster full of
five-star recruits, they were often underestimated, but they responded again
and again with discipline and toughness. Week after week, they proved
that hard work and preparation still
matter.
Under the leadership of Coach Curt
Cignetti, this team has put Indiana
football on the map. A perfect regular
season, a Big Ten Championship victory over Ohio State for the program’s
first conference title since 1967, and Indiana’s first Heisman Trophy reflect
what can be accomplished when a team
fully commits to the standard set before them.
On behalf of Indiana’s Ninth District,
the home of our Indiana University
Hoosiers, I commend Coach Cignetti,
quarterback Fernando Mendoza, and
players on the team like Charlie Becker, D’Angelo Ponds, Pat Coogan, Elijah

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\H13JA6.REC

H13JA6

January 13, 2026

Sarratt, and the entire Indiana football
program for the achievement that has
made our State so proud.
I am rooting for the Indiana Hoosiers
in the national championship this
weekend. I hope they bring it home
from Miami, and I have no doubt they
will.
As Coach Cignetti has said himself:
This would make one heck of a movie.
Good luck to the Hoosiers on Monday.
CONGRATULATING INDIANA STATE FAIR QUEEN
PRESLEY HAMPTON

Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate Presley Hampton of Jackson County on being named
the Indiana State Fair Queen.
Presley represents the very best of
Indiana. She has shown dedication to
agriculture, leadership in her community, and a strong work ethic that reflects the values so many young people
across our State are raised with.
The Indiana State Fair is more than
a tradition. It is a celebration of farming, youth leadership, and the families
who work every day to feed our country. Presley’s achievements highlight
the importance of programs like 4–H
and FFA that prepare young leaders
for the future.
I know Presley will represent Indiana
with integrity and pride. I congratulate her family, mentors, and everyone
who helped support her along the way.
Southern Indiana is immensely proud
of Presley, and we wish her all the best
as she takes on this role.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

RECOGNIZING STARLIGHT DISTILLERY

Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Starlight Distillery,
an outstanding family-owned business
in southern Indiana.
Operated by the seventh generation
of the Huber family, Starlight earned
global recognition when its Japanese
Mizunara Reserve finished bourbon was
named the best overall bourbon at the
San Francisco World Spirits Competition.
That is right, Kentucky, Indiana’s
bourbon is the world’s best.
This prestigious award reflects the
family’s dedication to hard work and a
commitment to quality that has guided
their business for generations.
Starlight is more than just a distillery. It has put southern Indiana on
the map. The Huber family has built a
business that supports local agriculture, creates jobs, and showcases
what family-run enterprises in rural
Indiana can achieve on the world stage.
I am proud to represent the Huber
family and the many hardworking people behind Starlight Distillery. Their
success is a testament to the strength
of family businesses and the communities that support them.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess until noon
today.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H669

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Accordingly (at 10 o’clock and 52
minutes a.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1200
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. BOST) at noon.
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret
Grun Kibben, offered the following
prayer:
By Your grace, O Lord, and the example of those who have gone before us
as paragons of faith and righteousness,
You have shown us what is true, what
is noble, what is right, what is pure and
lovely, what is worth admiration, what
is excellent and praiseworthy.
You set a high bar for how we are to
live, and we are tempted to assume
that the paradigms from the past did
not face the same challenges we face
today. Maybe their situations were different, maybe less complex; but if we
are honest with ourselves, we must
admit that our predecessors faced their
own trials and yet held fast to their
faith in You.
Lord, be near us this day in the midst
of the adversities and the asperities
unique to our present circumstances.
Show us again how to be gentle so that
in us Your gentleness is evident to all.
Assure us that You hear our prayers
and petitions, our Thanksgivings and
our requests, that we would have no
need to be anxious, but could be a
source of reassurance for those in need.
Guard our hearts and minds in all we
do, that even when we do not understand why things are the way they are,
we may experience Your peace which
transcends our comprehension.
This day, may we put our faith in
You and in the peace we have received
from You into practice.
Lord, be with us, we pray.
Amen.

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair will entertain up to 15 requests
for 1-minute speeches on each side of
the aisle.
f

REPUBLICANS SAVE FAMILIES
MONEY
(Mr. WILSON of South Carolina
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, to cancel tax increases, President Donald Trump signed the Working
Families Tax Cuts law into effect on
July 4, coordinating with Speaker
MIKE JOHNSON.
The law limits government, expands
freedom, and provides progrowth policies, creating jobs. As the April tax
deadline approaches, the law allows
Americans to keep more money, led by
Secretary of the Treasury Scott
Bessent of Charleston, South Carolina.
‘‘ . . . people are going to get massive
refund checks,’’ said White House National
Economic
Director
Kevin
Hassett.
Chief of the IRS, Frank Bisignano,
said: ‘‘ . . . 94 percent-plus of middleclass Americans. . . . ’’ benefit.
Working Families Tax Cuts boost refunds, providing permanency to lower
tax rates from the 2017 tax cuts, no tax
on tips, no tax on overtime, no tax on
Social Security.
In conclusion, God bless our troops as
the global war on terrorism continues.
Trump is reinstituting peace through
strength, revealing war criminal Putin
lies, insulting Trump and mocking
Trump, as Putin supports Khomeini
murdering innocent protestors calling
for freedom for Iran, courageously encouraged by President Donald Trump.
f

MESSAGES FROM THE PRESIDENT
Messages in writing from the President of the United States were communicated to the House by Ms. Randall
Holstead, one of his secretaries.
f

f

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair has examined the Journal of the
last day’s proceedings and announces
to the House the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Will the
gentlewoman from New York (Ms.
GILLEN) come forward and lead the
House in the Pledge of Allegiance.
Ms. GILLEN led the Pledge of Allegiance as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to condemn Secretary Kennedy’s
recent assault on children’s health.
Last week, against universally recommended guidelines, the Department
of Health and Human Services slashed
the childhood immunization schedule
from 17 vaccines to 11. Among those removed are vaccines to protect against
RSV, COVID–19, and hepatitis B.
Americans deserve accurate information that is based on established
science to make decisions about our
children’s health. I am perplexed by
this latest ambush on the lives and future of our children. What is the crisis

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.011

H13JAPT1

H670

that requires us to challenge settled
science?
The universally recommended vaccine schedule that families have relied
on and trusted for years to protect
their children has saved countless
lives. I shudder to think about the children who could die from preventable
diseases at the hands of this administration’s so-called guidance. We are
simply pandering to skeptics who want
to impose ideology in place of intelligent research.
Since taking office, this administration has made every effort to dismantle
public health. These unacceptable and
baseless challenges only deepen the
growing cracks in our health system.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

RECOGNIZING RELIGIOUS
TOLERANCE WEEK
(Ms. PLASKETT asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. PLASKETT. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Religious Tolerance
Week and celebrate the beautiful tapestry of faith that defines the Virgin
Islands of the United States.
In our homes, Christians, Hindus,
Jews, Muslims, Rastafarians, and practitioners of ancestral African tradition
don’t just coexist. We celebrate one another. The support of Ramadan, Yom
Kippur, and Good Friday are solemn
occasions shared by all. We celebrate
brothers and sisters as they enjoy
Diwali and hold sacred spaces where
African traditionalist religion is practiced. Our festivals blend the sacred
traditions of multiple faiths.
This is not tolerance. It is love and
an embodiment of what America promises: that our differences make us
stronger, our faiths can flourish side by
side, and unity does not require unanimity.
As we face growing division in our
Nation, let the Virgin Islands be a
model. We prove every day that respecting each other’s belief enriches us
all. I ask for strength in that for all of
us.

He didn’t stop there, though. Michael
was a tireless advocate for medical research, particularly in the fight
against Crohn’s Disease, liver disease,
and organ transplantation. He supported groundbreaking research at institutions, including Mount Sinai, Cornell, Lenox Hill, and Columbia University.
Above all, Michael was devoted to his
family; his wife, Susan; and his sons,
Joshua and Zachary.
Michael Kerr leaves behind a legacy
of leadership, generosity, and profound
humanity. May his memory be a blessing and enduring inspiration to all of
us.

b 1210
PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 2988, PROTECTING PRUDENT INVESTMENT OF RETIREMENT SAVINGS ACT; PROVIDING
FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R.
2262, FLEXIBILITY FOR WORKERS
EDUCATION
ACT;
PROVIDING
FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R.
2270, EMPOWERING EMPLOYER
CHILD AND ELDER CARE SOLUTIONS ACT; PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 2312, TIPPED
EMPLOYEE
PROTECTION
ACT;
AND PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 4366, SAVE LOCAL
BUSINESS ACT
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, by
direction of the Committee on Rules, I
call up House Resolution 988 and ask
for its immediate consideration.
The Clerk read the resolution, as follows:

f

HONORING ROBERTO MONDRAGON
(Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend her remarks.)
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to honor the
memory of Roberto Mondragon, a Lieutenant Governor and musician.
Roberto Mondragon was a beloved
cultural figure in New Mexico whose
voice, music, and lifelong work helped
keep our traditions alive. He brought
his resonant tenor to the cultural renaissance that made sure Nuevo Mexico
did not lose its culture, its songs, its
language, or its poetry. At a time when
the Spanish language, music, and tradition were being pushed aside, he lifted them up, insisting that they belong
not only in memory, but in classrooms,

Jkt 069060

f

BREAKFAST IN THE CLASSROOM
(Mr. MCGOVERN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, at the
end of last year, a Massachusetts-based
foundation committed to ending hunger, the Eos Foundation, and released
its annual school breakfast report card.
We have all heard the old adage that
breakfast is the most important meal
of the day. For kids experiencing hunger, it is especially true.
The Eos Foundation has put its
money where its mouth is literally, by
providing funding and technical assistance to schools to establish robust
breakfast-in-the-classroom programs.
Springfield Public Schools is a shining example of what is possible. With
support from the Eos breakfast-in-theclassroom model, 84 percent of students
are now getting breakfast up from 44
percent a few years ago.
Mr. Speaker, we can and we should
do more to close the breakfast gap, the
difference between the number of students receiving school breakfast versus
lunches. I am committed to doing my
part. I have a bill that would increase
the Federal meal reimbursement rates
for school breakfasts and lunches.
Mr. Speaker, thanks to the incredible
partners at the Eos Foundation, we are
making progress one school at a time.

f

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

on the radio, and in the halls of power.
He showed generations of young people,
including my own high school choir
that I sang in, the West Side Singers,
that tradition is not behind us, but
within us.
Roberto will be remembered every
time we sing ‘‘That’s New Mexico’’;
‘‘Asi Es Nuevo Mexico,’’ our State
song.
‘‘That is New Mexico, the Black, the
Hispanic, the Anglo, the indigenous, all
your children, all equal’’; ‘‘Asi es
Nuevo Mexico. El negro, el hispano, el
anglo, el indio. Todos son tus hijos,
todos por igual.’’

f

HONORING MICHAEL KERR
(Ms. GILLEN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. GILLEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life and legacy of
Michael Howard Kerr, a beloved husband, father, grandfather, and extraordinary
community
leader
from
Woodmere, New York.
Michael dedicated his life to serving
his community. He served as fire commissioner in the village of Woodsburgh
and later as police commissioner. He
also devoted time to serve on the
boards of various charitable organizations, including the Jewish Community
Center of the Greater Five Towns and
the UJA-Federation of Greater New
York.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

H. RES. 988
Resolved, That upon adoption of this resolution it shall be in order to consider in the
House the bill (H.R. 2988) to amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 to specify requirements concerning the
consideration of pecuniary and non-pecuniary factors, and for other purposes. All
points of order against consideration of the
bill are waived. The amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the
Committee on Education and Workforce now
printed in the bill shall be considered as
adopted. The bill, as amended, shall be considered as read. All points of order against
provisions in the bill, as amended, are
waived. The previous question shall be considered as ordered on the bill, as amended,
and on any further amendment thereto, to
final passage without intervening motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally divided
and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Education and Workforce or their respective designees; (2) the further amendment printed in
part A of the report of the Committee on
Rules accompanying this resolution, if offered by the Member designated in the report, which shall be in order without intervention of any point of order, shall be considered as read, shall be separately debatable
for the time specified in the report equally
divided and controlled by the proponent and
an opponent, and shall not be subject to a demand for division of the question; and (3) one
motion to recommit.
SEC. 2. Upon adoption of this resolution it
shall be in order to consider in the House the
bill (H.R. 2262) to amend the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938 to exclude certain activities from hours worked, and for other

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.015

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

purposes. All points of order against consideration of the bill are waived. The amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee on Education
and Workforce now printed in the bill, modified by the amendment printed in part B of
the report of the Committee on Rules accompanying this resolution, shall be considered
as adopted. The bill, as amended, shall be
considered as read. All points of order
against provisions in the bill, as amended,
are waived. The previous question shall be
considered as ordered on the bill, as amended, and on any further amendment thereto,
to final passage without intervening motion
except: (1) one hour of debate equally divided
and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Education and Workforce or their respective designees; and (2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 3. Upon adoption of this resolution it
shall be in order to consider in the House
any bill specified in section 4 of this resolution. All points of order against consideration of each such bill are waived. The respective amendments in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee on
Education and Workforce now printed in
each such bill shall be considered as adopted.
Each such bill, as amended, shall be considered as read. All points of order against provisions in each such bill, as amended, are
waived. The previous question shall be considered as ordered on each such bill, as
amended, and on any further amendment
thereto, to final passage without intervening
motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally
divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on
Education and Workforce or their respective
designees; and (2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 4. The bills referred to in section 3 of
this resolution are as follows:
(a) The bill (H.R. 2270) to amend the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 to exclude child
and dependent care services and payments
from the rate used to compute overtime
compensation.
(b) The bill (H.R. 2312) to amend the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 to revise the definition of the term ‘‘tipped employee’’, and
for other purposes.
(c) The bill (H.R. 4366) to clarify the treatment of 2 or more employers as joint employers under the National Labor Relations
Act and the Fair Labor Standards Act of
1938.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentlewoman from Minnesota is recognized for 1 hour.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, for
the purpose of debate only, I yield the
customary 30 minutes to the gentlewoman from New Mexico (Ms. LEGER
FERNANDEZ), pending which I yield myself such time as I may consume. During consideration of this resolution, all
time yielded is for the purpose of debate only.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL LEAVE

Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days to revise
and extend their remarks.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Minnesota?
There was no objection.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, we
are here today to debate the rule providing for consideration of H.R. 2262,
the Flexibility for Workers Education
Act; H.R. 2270, the Empowering Employer Child and Elder Care Solutions

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H671

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Act; H.R. 2312, the Tipped Employee
Protection Act; H.R. 4366, the Save
Local Business Act, under a closed
rule; and H.R. 2988, the Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings
Act, under a structured rule.
One hour of debate each for H.R. 2262,
H.R. 2270, H.R. 2312, H.R. 2988, and H.R.
4366 shall be equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking member of the Committee on Education and
Workforce, or their designees. The rule
provides for a motion to recommit for
all five bills.
Mr. Speaker, the bills before us today
are about one thing: getting the Federal Government out of the way of the
American worker.
For too long, outdated definitions
and woke regulatory overreach have
stifled opportunities and created a paperwork trap for the job creators on
our Main Streets. Today, we take a
stand for common sense and economic
growth.
We begin with H.R. 2262, the Flexibility for Workers Education Act.
Under current law, many nonexempt
workers, the very people who could
benefit most from upskilling, are often
excluded from voluntary training because the Fair Labor Standards Act
treats those sessions as hours worked.
This creates massive inconvenience for
employers, who ultimately choose not
to offer the training at all.
This bill levels the playing field, allowing workers to pursue voluntary
professional development outside of
regular hours without triggering burdensome overtime costs for their employers.
In the same spirit of support, H.R.
2270, the Empowering Employer Child
and Elder Care Solutions Act, addresses the childcare crunch facing so many
families. By excluding childcare and
eldercare benefits from the regular
rate calculation for overtime, we remove a major financial barrier for
some small business owners who want
to help their employees balance work
and family life. This is a pro-family,
pro-worker solution that requires no
new Federal spending.
We must also protect the flexibility
that makes the service industry so
vital. H.R. 2312, the Tipped Employee
Protection Act, clears the regulatory
fog that has long surrounded tipped
workers.
The Biden administration attempted
to micromanage every minute of a
server’s day through the unworkable
80/20 rule, a standard that is virtually
impossible to monitor or enforce. This
bill provides a clear and simple definition for tipped employees, an employee
who receives tips plus other cash wages
that meet or exceed the Federal minimum wage for a work period.
This provides stability for restaurant
owners and protects the hiring potential of our servers and bartenders.
Similarly, H.R. 4366, the Save Local
Business Act, restores the joint employer standard that served our economy for decades.

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The Obama and Biden administrations weaponized the National Labor
Relations Board to target the franchise
model, creating a scheme that cost the
franchising sector an estimated $33 billion annually. By codifying that an employer must exercise direct, actual, and
immediate control over workers, we restore the certainty that small business
owners, contractors, and franchisees
need to grow and hire more.
Finally, we must protect the hardearned savings of the American people.
b 1220
H.R. 2988, the Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act,
ensures that Employee Retirement Income Security Act, or ERISA, fiduciaries are focused on one thing, the financial bottom line.
We cannot allow woke fiduciaries to
gamble with a worker’s pension to satisfy a political agenda. This bill reinforces the duties of loyalty and ensures
that investment decisions are based
solely on maximizing returns for the
benefit of the retiree and not a social
experiment.
Mr. Speaker, the American people
are tired of the regulatory noise coming out of Washington. They want a
government that works for them, not
against them. These five bills deliver
on our promise to cut red tape, empower families, and protect the American Dream.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this rule and the underlying
legislation, and I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Mr. Speaker, America is suffering.
Americans don’t recognize the country
we live in. Trump’s tariffs have caused
prices to soar. We have the highest unemployment rate in 4 years so fewer
people have jobs. Those out of work
can’t even afford those expensive groceries, housing, and appliances.
Republicans refused to extend the
health insurance tax cuts in time, so
now millions of Americans have health
insurance premiums that are double
and sometimes even triple what they
were 1 year ago. In their big, beautiful
bill, Republicans took a sledgehammer
to our fragile healthcare system to
give permanent tax breaks to their political donors, the billionaires, and the
biggest corporations.
Our President bombed boats and then
the capital of a foreign country for oil,
and now he says he is acting President
of that country.
He wants our military to invade a
NATO ally. Remember, Mr. Speaker,
America and our NATO allies fought
fascism together in World War II. Republicans claim we don’t have money
to keep healthcare costs down, yet
they are going to keep spending billions of taxpayer dollars for Trump’s
reckless military action in Venezuela
and everywhere else he decides to invade or bomb.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.002

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H672

Trump and Kristi Noem have militarized our streets. Masked men in full
military gear roam the streets of our
cities. These masked men invade
church properties and schools, knock
down doors without warrants, ram
cars, and assault pastors and people of
faith. These masked, armed men have
arrested hundreds of citizens just for
looking Latino.
Last week, they killed a citizen.
They shot a mother of three in the face
three times. Her last words were: I am
not mad at you. His words, after shooting her to death, are too obscene to say
on this floor.
Kristi Noem and the President have
now demonized this dead mother.
Trump wants Americans to deny what
we can see with our own eyes: the killing of a mother, Renee Nicole Good.
In the face of all this pain, chaos, and
economic hardship, the American people expect Congress to do something, to
ask hard questions of the administration, to be the check and balance that
we were taught about in school, conduct oversight, lower prices, and protect our healthcare.
So what are Republicans doing?
Last week, following the invasion of
Venezuela and the expiration of the
healthcare tax credits, their priority
was a bill about showerheads. This
week it is worse. They are actively putting their thumb on the scale in favor
of big corporations and against workers, lowering what parents get paid in
overtime, reclassifying workers so they
can pay them less, or make it easy for
corporations,
like
those
big
meatpacking plants, to get away with
hiring child labor or wage theft. They
want to block financial managers from
even considering environmental risks
like flooding and wildfires.
Yes, Americans want Congress to do
something. The problem is that Republicans control the House and the bills
we consider in the Rules Committee
and vote on.
However, Democrats can force votes,
like we did on the healthcare tax credits and like we will soon do on the War
Powers Resolution. On the floor of the
people’s House, we will call out Republicans who always seem to stand with
the biggest corporations and against
workers.
Despite what the titles of their bills
say, they do the opposite.
Mr. Speaker, we will force Republicans to face the consequences of ignoring the economic struggles of everyday Americans.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify a few
things, one in particular about the One
Big Beautiful Bill Act.
The narrative that the One Big Beautiful Bill Act only gives tax cuts to billionaires is just false. The bill cuts
taxes for working-class families who
need it most. As a result of the One Big

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

Beautiful Bill Act, the top 1 percent
will pay more in Federal taxes than
they did before the Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act of 2017.
It ends $500 billion in Biden-era tax
breaks and special interest giveaways
to wealthy individuals and large corporations. It stops a Biden-era $1,700
tax increase.
Working families making between
$15,000 and $30,000 will have their taxes
cut by 21 percent under the One Big
Beautiful Bill Act. Mr. Speaker, 66 percent of the One Big Beautiful Bill Act’s
tax cuts benefit families making less
than $500,000. Just because they keep
saying it doesn’t make it true. The One
Big Beautiful Bill Act does help working families.
Mr. Speaker, I do have to address, because my colleague has decided to
bring ICE into this debate, or this discussion, regarding small businesses and
help that we may be able to give small
businesses. I just want to give a few examples of what ICE is actually doing in
Minnesota, because I am someone who
is here from Minnesota.
They have arrested a registered sex
offender from Somalia with 17 prior
convictions, including domestic violence and threatening terroristic acts.
They have arrested an illegal El Salvadoran alien convicted of sexual assault on a child.
They have arrested an illegal alien
from Mexico convicted of selling cocaine and methamphetamine and multiple illegal aliens from Laos convicted
of rape, assault, kidnapping, and sodomy of children under the age of 13 and
domestic violence.
They have arrested convicted murderers from Mexico, Sudan, Burma,
Laos, Sierra Leone, Guatemala, Somalia, and El Salvador.
That is what ICE is doing in Minnesota. They are making it safer for
everyday people.
I ask my colleague to simply allow
the investigation to take place over
what happened last week and to stop
the inflammatory rhetoric that is unnecessary at this point.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Mr. Speaker, what is amazing is that
on the floor of this House we heard my
colleague talk about the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, and I guess they are
going back to calling it that. They
were trying to change its name because
they know that the American people
know it is not beautiful. It is only
beautiful, Mr. Speaker, if you are a billionaire and you have benefited from
those tax cuts for the millionaires, the
billionaires, and the biggest corporations.
Remember, Mr. Speaker, that Democrats wanted to make permanent, and
offered amendments, so that we could
continue tax cuts for middle-class
Americans. We wanted to do something
more than what they did on tipped
workers.

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Are you kidding me, Mr. Speaker?
Republicans made tipped worker tax
credits temporary but gave permanent
tax cuts to the billionaires. The predominant benefit of that big, beautiful
bill went to the richest Americans, and
there is no denying that.
There is no denying that $1.4 trillion
went to the wealthiest Americans.
There is no denying the fact that they
keep talking about deficits, $4 trillion,
that they are forcing our children and
grandchildren to pay because they
wanted to give those tax credits to the
biggest corporations and millionaires.
b 1230
Now, the other thing that is interesting that got raised is Minnesota.
She talked about a couple of immigrants who have been arrested. We
don’t have any problem about enforcement and arresting people who commit
crimes. In fact, we have had Democratic Presidents do that. Obama deported more people than Trump has,
but he went after people with criminal
records.
Mr. Speaker, 80 percent of the people
in ICE custody have committed no
crime. Hundreds of citizens have been
arrested for no crime by ICE, which has
no jurisdiction. Why were they arrested? Is it just because they look
Latino? Is it just because they speak
Spanish? That is not okay.
Let’s talk about criminal activity.
Trump pardoned the January 6 insurrectionists who beat law enforcement
right outside these doors, violently
beat the law enforcement officers who
were protecting us.
What has happened since then? Do
you want to talk about people who
have been arrested? Talk about all of
those violent offenders who were arrested, and what did they get? They got
a pardon from this President. We have
dozens who have gone on to reoffend,
who have gone on to assault, who have
been engaged in child pornography, in
egregious crimes because this President pardoned them. When you want to
talk about going after criminals, let’s
look at what this President has failed
to do.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, not to belabor the
point, but I feel like I need to repeat
myself and remind others about what
ICE is actually doing in Minnesota.
They have arrested a registered sex offender from Somalia with 17 prior convictions, including domestic violence
and threatening terrorist acts, and
convicted murderers from Mexico,
Sudan, Burma, Laos, Guatemala, and
Somalia. I wish I didn’t have to continue to repeat myself about what ICE
is really doing. What ICE is about is
making sure that our streets are safer.
As for the claim about the One Big
Beautiful Bill Act not doing what it is
supposed to and only giving tax cuts to

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.019

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

billionaires, I had mentioned, I had explained what actually happened in the
One Big Beautiful Bill Act, and I would
ask the other side, I would just ponder
or wonder out loud why they didn’t do
it in their Inflation Reduction Act. If it
was that important, when they were in
control and they passed the Inflation
Reduction Act, why didn’t they do all
of these things that they talk about
being so important right now?
It is a little confusing when they continue to repeat. They believe that if
they just continue to say the same
thing over and over and over and over,
it makes it true, and it does not, if you
take a look at the One Big Beautiful
Bill Act and what ICE is doing in Minnesota.
I reserve the balance of my time, Mr.
Speaker.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting
that in response to this litany and this
long list of criminal activity and the
criminals who were pardoned by
Trump, we heard the same thing, there
was a sex offender. What about all
those sex offenders that have now been
pardoned?
What about all of the egregious actions that ICE is conducting in Mrs.
FISCHBACH’s very own State? She won’t
stand up for the law enforcement officers who she walks by every day and
the attacks that they faced, but she
will stand up in favor of ICE activity
that has killed one of Minnesota’s own
citizens?
Let me read one of the President’s
latest posts: ‘‘Do the people of Minnesota really want to live in a community . . . ’’ His last sentence: ‘‘Fear
not, great people of Minnesota, the day
of reckoning and retribution is coming.’’
Retribution? We should not live in a
society where we have a President who
goes after cities and States because
they have Democratic leadership.
There are Republicans who live in that
city. There are Democrats who live in
that city, Independents. It should not
matter.
However, this President and Republicans who support him and refuse to
condemn him seem to think it is okay
to beat up law enforcement officers in
our own Capitol, but it is not okay to
question excessive, egregious abuses by
ICE not only in Minnesota, but across
this country.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentlewoman from Oregon (Ms. HOYLE).
Ms. HOYLE of Oregon. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today in opposition to the rule and
H.R. 2312, the Tipped Employee Protection Act.
When I was a waitress in 1983, the
tipped wage was exactly the same as it
is now. It is $2.13 an hour. Your ability
to budget, to cover rent, to buy groceries, and to pay for gas depends on
how much strangers leave on the table.
What makes me angry is what little
has changed since the tipped wage was

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H673

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

frozen. Rent, food, gas, and childcare
have all exploded, but tipped workers
are still stuck with a base wage from
decades ago. That is wrong.
However, the bigger problem is the
system was never built to work. The
law says that your employer has to
make up the difference if your tips
don’t reach minimum wage, but in
most States there is no real enforcement unless you catch it, document it,
and risk retaliation by demanding the
pay that you have earned. To put it another way, the law puts the burden of
enforcement on the people with the
least power.
H.R. 2312 makes this even worse. It
would massively expand employers’
power to treat far more workers and
far more hours as tipped wages.
Oregon does this differently. Tipped
workers’ wages are higher. Poverty
rates are lower, and the restaurant industry still thrives. For workers, that
means a slow night doesn’t mean that
you can’t pay your rent.
My colleagues on the other side of
the aisle rejected my amendment to
ensure these workers have the bare
minimum wage protections. Again, I
will remind people that the minimum
wage in this country has not changed
in decades.
I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘no’’ on
this rule. Protect workers and vote
‘‘no’’ on this bill.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, if we defeat the previous question, I will offer an amendment to the
rule to bring up H.R. 20, the Richard L.
Trumka Protecting the Right to Organize Act of 2025, a bipartisan bill that
would expand workers’ rights to organize and collectively bargain in the
workplace, hold employers accountable
for violating workers’ rights, and allow
for free, fair, and safe union elections.
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the slate
of partisan bills that Republicans want
us to vote on this week, which lower
overtime pay for workers, cut workers’
wages, give corporations more loopholes to mistreat workers without consequence, and mess with workers’ retirement savings plan to combat supposed wokeness, whatever that is,
Democrats simply want to add another
bill for consideration, one that actually helps workers and is cosponsored
by 214 Members of Congress, including
several Republicans.
The PRO Act was one of the first
bills I got to cosponsor in committee
and in Congress when I joined in 2021.
That was back when the committee
was called the Education and Labor
Committee because Democrats are not
afraid of saying ‘‘labor,’’ and we will
always protect workers’ rights. That is
why when we held the majority, we
passed the PRO Act to support workers.
b 1240
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of my amend-

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ment into the RECORD, along with any
extraneous
material,
immediately
prior to the vote on the previous question.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from New Mexico?
There was no objection.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, to discuss our proposal, I
yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from
Virginia (Mr. SCOTT), the ranking
member of the Committee on Education and Workforce.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
as we stand here, workers’ rights are
under attack, and working families are
struggling to decide between paying
rent and paying for groceries. Instead
of lowering costs, this week, the Republicans are considering proposals
that will reduce workers’ wages, adversely affect their retirement savings,
and give corporations and bosses loopholes to take money out of their pockets. This is untenable, and these are
the proposals that Americans can least
afford.
That is why we must defeat the previous question, so we can bring up and
pass H.R. 20, the Protecting the Right
to Organize Act, the PRO Act, to help
workers organize. We know that when
they organize, they will have higher
pay, better benefits, and safer workplaces.
The PRO Act will be the most significant upgrade in U.S. labor law in over
80 years. For too long, workers have
suffered from antiunion attacks and
toothless labor laws that have undermined their right to work safely and be
paid fairly.
The PRO Act will help hold
lawbreaking employers accountable by
imposing meaningful penalties for violating workers’ rights. It will secure
free, fair, and safe union elections by
preventing employer interference. It
will crack down on corporations that
misclassify employees to stymie their
right to organize.
This is a critical moment for working
families. We cannot abandon our workers, the backbone of the American
economy, when they are under attack
from
antiworker
politicians
and
lawbreaking corporations.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle to join me in defeating the previous question so that,
instead of reducing workers’ wages, we
can support this bicameral, bipartisan
legislation to ensure that workers can
earn the pay and benefits they are
owed for their hard work.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I will address something in
one of the bills that is about childcare
and the care economy.
We all know the care economy is
what makes all other work possible.
Women can go to work when they
know their babies will be well taken
care of. When a parent or grandparent
gets ill, we know that it is women who

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.021

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H674

step in to fill the gap. In fact, because
it is so expensive to get care, we have
seen a record number of women fall out
of the workforce. It is up to about
350,000 women, I think, who have left.
This is a problem because we need
women to be able to participate in our
workforce, to be able to contribute to
their own household’s income. We
know that this is something that can
be fixed with governmental action.
In New Mexico, we now have universal childcare. It is something we can
get done, and the reason why we do
this is because it is important to allow
women and parents to work. It is often
men who stay home as the father. It is
also important for the child because
when you get good early childcare, you
grow up to have more opportunities in
life.
On average, though, parents spend
between $6,500 and $15,000 per child for
1 year of childcare. That is eating up
more and more of families’ budgets.
People can’t afford this.
What we know that people have done
is negotiate. They talk to their employers, and those employers have
often provided childcare as one of the
elements of compensation. This is why
unions are important. They have negotiated this and fought for this as part
of compensation.
For decades, when you get paid overtime, you include all of your compensation, including if you were getting assistance for care expenses.
Now, they have named their bill and
added ‘‘childcare’’ to it, and they say
this is to increase the availability of
childcare. What it actually will do is
that it is going to decrease people’s
overtime pay. You are no longer going
to get paid overtime based on your full
compensation. This is overturning decades of precedence.
Once again, they are acting in a way
that makes life more expensive, that
makes sure that parents who receive
this benefit will get paid less if they
are forced to work overtime. Guess
what. If you are forced to work overtime and have to keep your kids in
childcare, it is going to cost you more.
Their spiral of increased costs for
American families is always looking
out for the big guy, always looking out
for those big corporations. That is why
Democrats oppose this bill.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I will
clear up some of the rhetoric on H.R.
2270. It is called the Empowering Employer Child and Elder Care Solutions
Act, but just to make it clear, this bill
makes it easier for employers to provide childcare benefits for their employees.
It excludes childcare and eldercare
benefits from the regular rate calculation for overtime, so we remove a
major financial barrier for some small
business owners who want to help their
employees actually balance work and
family life. It would be a helpful thing
for those employers and employees to
help provide childcare.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself the balance of
my time.
Mr. Speaker, I will point out that
Americans know that Trump has been
horrible on the handling of their economy because he has done nothing to
lower the cost of living. In fact, everything he has done is the opposite.
His tariffs have increased prices.
Their failure to address the healthcare
crisis and extend tax credits for health
insurance premiums has increased the
cost of healthcare for Americans. In
fact, Americans know this.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to include in the RECORD an article titled ‘‘Americans are more dissatisfied with Trump’s handling of the
economy than ever, polls show,’’ from
Politics, dated December 17, 2025.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from New Mexico?
There was no objection.
[From Politics, Dec 17, 2025]
AMERICANS ARE MORE DISSATISFIED WITH
TRUMP’S HANDLING OF THE ECONOMY THAN
EVER, POLL SHOWS
Americans give President Donald Trump
his worst approval ratings ever for his handling of the economy, as they also express
concerns about the cost of living, healthcare
prices, and personal finances, a new PBS
News/NPR/Marist poll finds.
Fifty-seven percent of Americans disapprove of how Trump is handling the economy, once viewed as one of the president’s
strengths. Thirty-six percent say the president is doing a good job, the lowest this poll
has found across both of his terms in office.
Sagging support Trump on the economy is
likely a major factor dragging down his overall approval rating—38% of Americans think
Trump is doing a good job as president, the
lowest percentage since the end of his first
term.
‘‘This is a major problem for him,’’ said
Lee Miringoff, director of the Marist Institute for Public Opinion. ‘‘When affordability
is so front and center in people’s minds,
that’s going to be laid at the doorstep of a
chief executive.’’
Seven in 10 Americans say the cost of living in their area is unaffordable, including
nearly half of Republicans and three-quarters of independents, according to the latest
poll. Three in 10 Americans say the cost of
living is affordable, falling 25 percentage
points since June.
‘‘The longer this goes on, the harder it is
to get those numbers back,’’ said Amy Walter, editor of The Cook Political Report. ‘‘It
becomes sort of a self-fulfilling situation.
People don’t feel confident in you, and they
think prices just continue to go up.’’
Public frustration with the economy also
plagued Trump’s predecessor, Joe Biden, during his presidency. When inflation began to
peak in early 2022, Biden’s approval on the
economy also dipped to 36% before improving slightly by the end of his term.
Trump capitalized on voters’ economic dissatisfaction during the 2024 presidential election to win back the Oval Office. Now, those
same feelings could be potentially perilous
for Republicans in next year’s midterm elections.
On the economy, registered voters were
more likely to say the Democratic partly
would do a better job compared to the Republican party, 40% to 35%. Independent vot-

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ers gave Democrats an 11-point edge in this
poll (though the margin of error for that
group was 6.2).
It’s a dramatic reversal from September
2022, months before the last midterm elections, when Republicans held a 15-point advantage on the economy with voters overall
and a 23-point advantage with independents.
Since the Republican Party now controls
the White House and both chambers of Congress, ‘‘it’s tough to point a finger at the
Biden economy and say that’s what’s driving
this situation,’’ Miringoff said.
While Democrats are positioned well for
the midterms right now, their support on
this issue has not fully hardened, Miringoff
added. Democrats made issues of affordability their top concern in off-year elections and will likely continue to do so. ‘‘This
may be where you throw a few punches, step
back and hope the other side collapses,’’
Miringoff said.
Americans don’t see brighter days in 2026.
Economic concerns are fueling an overall
sense of pessimism as 2025 comes to an end.
More than half of Americans (57%) described
themselves as having a more negative view
of what’s to come in the year ahead, while
43% say they are more optimistic. It’s a reversal from a year ago when the majority
felt hopeful about what would come to pass
in 2025.
A year ago, people felt like 2025 might offer
some relief with prices of goods stabilizing,
Walter said. That didn’t happen, and now
people are less inclined to believe it will happen next year.
Instead, the price of goods remains the biggest economic concern for Americans in this
latest poll, with 45% listing the issue as the
most pressing issue for them—more than
double the number who named any of the
other options, including housing costs, tariffs, job security or interest rates.
Even as the president has begun to acknowledge issues of affordability and promised to bring prices under control, he has
also dismissed concerns as a ‘‘con job’’ perpetrated by Democrats.
Some Republicans in Congress have broken
publicly with the president over his repeated
claims. ‘‘Affordability or the lack of ability
of Americans to afford the cost of living is
not a Democrat hoax,’’ Rep. Marjorie Taylor
Greene, R–Ga., told PBS News Hour co-anchor Amna Nawaz last week. Greene, who
will resign her seat in Congress next month,
pointed to record credit card debt as one factor in an continuingly unstable economy.
Americans are experiencing it firsthand,
Miringoff said, and Trump’s continued denials about how Americans are feeling about
the cost of living ‘‘creates even a bigger
issue’’ for him and could risk turning gentle
wind ‘‘into a hurricane.’’
HOW TRUMP VOTERS SEE THE ECONOMY RIGHT
NOW

Those worries about the economy have
bubbled up even among people like Roger
Chester, 48, an Illinois independent who
voted for the president last year. He said
Trump’s governing philosophy is best described as shifting winds.
‘‘He’s not conservative. He’s not liberal. He
is none of the above,’’ Chester said. ‘‘He literally blows with the wind to what his base
wants and that is it. Which is fine. That’s all
I want my politicians to do.’’
Chester said he’s had a ‘‘love-hate’’ relationship with Trump since the president first
ran for office a decade ago. He now says the
president is a ‘‘populist puppet.’’
While Chester said prices of goods are
‘‘horrendous’’ and ‘‘unbearable,’’ he doesn’t
solely blame Trump.
‘‘He’s the only one that’s actually made an
effort to actually keep any of the promises

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.023

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

that he’s made, and he definitely hasn’t been
perfect,’’ he said.
To stay afloat, Chester, who lost his job in
a casino several years ago, says he works
seven days a week to support his family. He
also believes the United States has to go
through some tough times to emerge in a
better economic place, with more jobs and
better pay.
‘‘I’m willing to suffer. I’m never going to
retire. That’s how it is,’’ he said. ‘‘I’m doing
pretty much anything to have a better life
for my son.’’
Hundreds of miles away in North Carolina,
independent Justine Hawkins is also playing
the economic long game. The health care
worker and mother of three was a reluctant
Trump voter last year.
She said the economy is mostly working
fine for her upper middle-class family, but
she disagrees with the president’s assertion
that affordability is a hoax.
‘‘If you walk into any grocery store, you
know everything costs more money,’’ she
said.
Hawkins said while everyone is feeling discomfort right now—especially in the height
of holiday shopping—she is trying to
prioritize essential needs over things she
may want. She hopes Trump’s policies like
tariffs on imported goods will pay off eventually.
‘‘If I looked at it today, I’d say, ‘Oh, I’m
very unhappy,’ ’’ Hawkins said. ‘‘I think in
the long run we will, as a nation, be better
off because of it.’’
Others strongly disagree with that prediction, including some Republican voters.
In this poll, the president’s support from his
own party dropped five points since last
month.
Sherry Kamphaus, 61, is one Republican
who has grown disillusioned with Trump.
She lives in Illinois, a solidly Democratic
state, and voted for Trump last year. She
likes how the president is handling some
issues, such as immigration. But that approval is outweighed by economic concerns,
the major area where she said the president
has failed to meet her expectations.
‘‘He was supposed to help with food prices.
That was the main reason that I voted for
him,’’ she said. ‘‘Food prices just keep going
up.’’
Her frustration has spilled over to the Republican Party.
‘‘They promised they’d do better, but they
didn’t follow through,’’ she said. ‘‘They’re
not doing what they promised to do, especially with the economy and inflation.’’

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

MAJORITY SAY THEY ARE WORRIED ABOUT COST
OF HEALTH CARE

For millions of others. the cost of health
care remains a serious concern as enhanced
subsidies for the Affordable Care Act are all
but certain to expire at the end of the year.
Average monthly premiums are likely to
double on average, and millions of Americans are expected to drop coverage altogether.
More than half of Americans are concerned
that they will be unable to pay for needed
health care services next year. Another 46%
say they are not worried.
But perspective is sharply divided along income, race and age:
67% of people who make under $50,000 are
concerned while 47% of those who make
above $50,000 say the same.
47% of white respondents expressed worry
compared to 69% of Black voters and 65% of
Latino voters.
63% of people under 30 years old are concerned. 40% of those over 60 years old say the
same.
While the poll paints a concerning picture
about the overall state of the economy, there

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H675

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

are some potential signs of hope for the
Trump administration.
Two-thirds of Americans are concerned
about the effect of tariffs the president is implementing, but as he has reversed course on
some of them and scaled back the announcement of many, the percentage of those who
are worried has dropped 14 points since June.
Additionally, half of Americans think the
U.S. economy is currently in a recession, the
lowest number who believe that since 2010.
The poll also found:
39% say the economy is working well for
them personally.
21% say their family finances have improved in the last year; 35% say they’ve gotten worse; and 44% say things have mostly
stayed the same.
33% expect their financial finances to improve next year—down 15 percentage points
since June. Another 29% believe things will
get worse, and 39% expect their situation to
stay the same.
For many Americans, the cumulative effect of all the swirling economic pressures
can be almost too hard to manage.
Sherry Kamphaus, the Illinois Republican,
has been married for 41 years and now stays
home full time to care for her disabled husband. She said they pay all their bills, stick
close to their budget and try to live within
their means. Every month is still a challenge.
‘‘There’s a difference between living and
surviving,’’ Kamphaus said. ‘‘We’re surviving.’’
PBS News, NPR and Marist Poll conducted
a survey from Dec. 8 through Dec. 11, 2025,
that polled 1,440 U.S. adults by phone, text
and online with a margin of error of 3.2 percentage points, and 1,261 registered voters
with a margin of error of 3.4 percentage
points.

Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, as we mentioned earlier,
Trump’s economy is a mess, and Republicans have failed to step up and do
anything. They fail to step up and
challenge him on any of the issues.
They refuse to allow a vote on the tariffs on the floor of this House. They
stopped the clock so that we wouldn’t
vote on the tariffs in this House.
Today’s bills are another step in Republican efforts to chip away at workers’ rights, their retirement, and their
pay, while costs are sky-high.
House Republicans continue to uphold Trump’s failing economy and broken promises. As one of his campaign
promises, Trump said that, on day one
of his term, he would lower the prices
of all goods and make America affordable again. Yet, nearly a year into his
Presidency, life for Americans is more
expensive than ever.
For the first time in nearly 4 years,
more Americans reported that their
family’s current financial situation
was bad rather than good. This was in
December before the craziness of this—
what?—just 12 days in.
Consumers are worried about prices,
inflation, and tariffs. Those were the
concerns of working Americans, but
none of these bills before us do anything to address that.
b 1250
Mr. Speaker, the wallets of Americans are emptier today than they were
a year ago. My colleagues refuse to call
out Trump’s broken promises or stand

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8472

up against his tariffs or all of his policies, any of his policies. I guess they
are just afraid of him.
As working-class Americans work
paycheck to paycheck to paycheck,
millionaires and billionaires get richer
and richer. What is the response? They
offer bills about showerheads and bills
that tip the scales against workers.
They want workers to get less money
for more work. That is a lousy deal.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
reject these bills and to vote against
the rule, and I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I
yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, I am so happy to get
back to actually addressing the rules
and the bills that are before us, instead
of listening to Democrat talking points
over and over.
I have listened to my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle during this
debate. It seems that they are once
again choosing to prioritize Federal bureaucracy and woke social agendas
over the actual needs of the American
worker.
They claim to be the party of the
worker. Yet, they oppose H.R. 2262,
which simply increases opportunities
for hourly employees to voluntarily
take training classes to better their careers. They claim to support families.
Yet, they oppose H.R. 2270, a bill that
makes it easier for small businesses to
offer childcare benefits.
The American people are tired of a
government that treats every voluntary interaction between an employer and employee as a potential
crime. They are tired of the 80–20 rules
that make it harder for small businesses. They are tired of joint employer standards that were designated
by union lawyers in Washington to destroy the franchise model that has provided a path for the American Dream
for millions.
With H.R. 4366, the Save Local Businesses Act, we are finally bringing stability back to our Main Streets. We are
telling the small business owners in my
district and across the country that if
they do not have direct, actual control
over the worker, the Federal Government is not going to pretend they do
just to satisfy a political agenda.
We cannot ignore the retirement security of our constituents. H.R. 2988 is
a commonsense safeguard. When an
American worker hands over their
hard-earned paycheck to a fiduciary,
they expect that money to be invested
to maximize their return and not to
fund a political experiment or a green
energy fantasy. This bill ensures that
pecuniary factors are the only things
driving retirement investments.
The legislation in this package represents a fundamental shift back to the
principles that made our country and
our economy strong, which are clarity,
flexibility, and individual opportunity.
We are removing regulatory hurdles
that have stifled upward mobility for
far too long.
Mr. Speaker, it is time to put the interests of the American worker, the
small business owner, and the retiree
ahead of the interests of Washington
bureaucrats. I am proud to support this
rule, and I am glad that I was able to
speak about the rule and about the

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.003

H13JAPT1

H676

bills, instead of talking points. I urge
my colleagues to do the same.
The material previously referred to
by Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ is as follows:
AN AMENDMENT TO H. RES. 988 OFFERED BY
MS. LEGER FERNANDEZ OF NEW MEXICO
At the end of the resolution, add the following:
SEC. 5. Immediately upon adoption of this
resolution, the House shall proceed to the
consideration in the House of the bill (H.R.
20) to amend the National Labor Relations
Act, the Labor Management Relations Act,
1947, and the Labor-Management Reporting
and Disclosure Act of 1959, and for other purposes. All points of order against consideration of the bill are waived. The bill shall be
considered as read. All points of order
against provisions in the bill are waived. The
previous question shall be considered as ordered on the bill and on any amendment
thereto to final passage without intervening
motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally
divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on
Education and Workforce or their respective
designees; and (2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 6. Clause 1(c) of rule XIX and clause 8
of rule XX shall not apply to the consideration of H.R. 20.
SEC. 7. The Clerk shall transmit to the
Senate a message that the House has passed
H.R. 20 no later than three calendar days
after passage.

Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I
yield back the balance of my time, and
I move the previous question on the
resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, on that I demand the yeas
and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question are postponed.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess subject to
the call of the Chair.
Accordingly (at 12 o’clock and 53
minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1330
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. BOST) at 1 o’clock and 30
minutes p.m.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Proceedings will resume on questions previously postponed. Votes will be taken
in the following order:
Ordering the previous question on
House Resolution 988; and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

Adoption of House Resolution 988, if
ordered.
The first electronic vote will be conducted as a 15-minute vote. Pursuant
to clause 9 of rule XX, the remaining
electronic vote will be conducted as a
5-minute vote.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 2988, PROTECTING PRUDENT INVESTMENT OF RETIREMENT SAVINGS ACT; PROVIDING
FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R.
2262, FLEXIBILITY FOR WORKERS
EDUCATION
ACT;
PROVIDING
FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R.
2270, EMPOWERING EMPLOYER
CHILD AND ELDER CARE SOLUTIONS ACT; PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 2312, TIPPED
EMPLOYEE
PROTECTION
ACT;
AND PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 4366, SAVE LOCAL
BUSINESS ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on ordering
the previous question on the resolution
(H. Res. 988) providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 2988) to amend
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to specify requirements concerning the consideration of
pecuniary and non-pecuniary factors,
and for other purposes; providing for
consideration of the bill (H.R. 2262) to
amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of
1938 to exclude certain activities from
hours worked, and for other purposes;
providing for consideration of the bill
(H.R. 2270) to amend the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938 to exclude child
and dependent care services and payments from the rate used to compute
overtime compensation; providing for
consideration of the bill (H.R. 2312) to
amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of
1938 to revise the definition of the term
‘‘tipped employee’’, and for other purposes; and providing for consideration
of the bill (H.R. 4366) to clarify the
treatment of 2 or more employers as
joint employers under the National
Labor Relations Act and the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938, on which
the yeas and nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 206, nays
205, not voting 20, as follows:
[Roll No. 16]
YEAS—206
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole

Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Hudson
Huizenga

Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett

Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)

Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—205

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.025

H13JAPT1

Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum

January 13, 2026
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters

Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stanton

NOT VOTING—20
Boebert
Casar
Dunn (FL)
Gimenez
Gray
Houchin
Houlahan

Hunt
Kiggans (VA)
Luna
Mast
Miller (WV)
Moolenaar
Murphy

Sherman
Stansbury
Swalwell
Sykes
Van Orden
Wilson (FL)

b 1355
Ms.
VELÁZQUEZ,
Messrs.
LANDSMAN,
CUELLAR,
BERA,
GOTTHEIMER,
and
MOSKOWITZ
changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to
‘‘nay.’’
So the previous question was ordered.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
Stated against:
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, had I been
present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call
No. 16.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the resolution.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
RECORDED VOTE

Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I demand a recorded vote.
A recorded vote was ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—ayes 214, noes 207,
not voting 10, as follows:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 17]
AYES—214
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H677

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)

Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry

Jkt 069060

Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy

Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro

DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating

Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOES—207

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 6333

Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone

Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon

Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)

Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)

NOT VOTING—10
Casar
Dunn (FL)
Gray
Houlahan

Hunt
Murphy
Swalwell
Sykes

Van Orden
Wilson (FL)

b 1403
So the resolution was agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

b 1410
FLEXIBILITY FOR WORKERS
EDUCATION ACT
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to House Resolution 988, I call up
the bill (H.R. 2262) to amend the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 to exclude
certain activities from hours worked,
and for other purposes, and ask for its
immediate consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MEUSER). Pursuant to House Resolution 988, the amendment in the nature
of a substitute recommended by the
Committee on Education and Workforce, printed in the bill, modified by
the amendment printed in part B of
House Report 119–440, is adopted and
the bill, as amended, is considered
read.
The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:
H.R. 2262
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Flexibility for
Workers Education Act’’.
SEC. 2. TREATMENT OF ATTENDANCE OR PARTICIPATION IN CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 3(o) of the Fair

Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(o)) is
amended to read as follows:
‘‘(o) HOURS WORKED.—In determining for the
purposes of sections 6 and 7 the hours for which
an employee is employed—
‘‘(1) there shall be excluded—
‘‘(A) any time spent in changing clothes or
washing at the beginning or end of each workday which was excluded from measured working
time during the week involved by the express
terms of or by custom or practice under a bona
fide collective-bargaining agreement applicable
to the particular employee; and
(B) except as provided in paragraph (2), any
time spent attending or participating in an education or training program or a similar activity

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.005

H13JAPT1

H678

(such as a lecture), regardless of whether the
program or activity is offered or facilitated by
the employer, provided that—
‘‘(i) such attendance or participation occurs
outside of the employee’s regular working hours;
‘‘(ii) such attendance or participation is voluntary, and the employer does not take adverse
action against the employee on the basis that
such employee does not so attend or participate;
and
‘‘(iii) the employee does not perform any work
for the employer during such attendance or participation; and
‘‘(2) there may be excluded, in accordance
with section 785.32 of title 29, Code of Federal
Regulations (as in effect on the date of enactment of the Flexibility for Workers Education
Act), any time spent in an organized program of
related, supplemental instruction working under
a bona fide apprenticeship program.’’.
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendment made
by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to
hours worked on or after the date of enactment
of this Act.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill,
as amended, shall be debatable for 1
hour equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Education and
Workforce or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Michigan (Mr.
WALBERG) and the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. SCOTT) each will control 30
minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Michigan (Mr. WALBERG).

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days in which to
revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on H.R. 2262.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Michigan?
There was no objection.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, hardworking Americans
should never be barred from voluntarily pursuing professional development or training opportunities. In fact,
we should be giving workers more opportunities to get the skills they need
to thrive in a rapidly changing economy.
Unfortunately, current Federal law
makes it harder for employers to provide voluntary training and upscaling
opportunities. Oftentimes that means
workers must take time out of their
busy lives to look beyond the workplace for programs that they should be
able to get at work.
Needless to say, this makes absolutely no sense. Employers understand
their employees and whether skills
gaps exist in their own workforces. If a
business knows how to train its employees to succeed in a role, then it
should be allowed to teach those skills
and invest in the employees’ professional development. There simply is no
need for arbitrary roadblocks that
make it harder for businesses to offer
voluntary trainings to their own employees.
Republicans are already promoting
upscaling and training opportunities to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

help strengthen the American workforce. Last summer, we passed a Working Families Tax Cuts Act, which expanded opportunities for young Americans to access short-term, high-quality
credentialing and training opportunities.
Mr. Speaker, H.R. 2262 builds on that
success by simply allowing employers
to offer voluntary education and
upscaling opportunities to nonexempt
employees so that workers can easily
take control of their own professional
development. This doesn’t just help the
business grow. It provides new, tangible skills that help employees do better in their own careers and sets them
up for success on their own.
Mr. Speaker, let’s make one thing
clear: H.R. 2262 expands voluntary—
voluntary—employer-led training opportunities. Businesses would still be
required to compensate workers who
receive mandatory job training. This
bill simply makes it easier for ambitious employees to pursue additional
professional development opportunities
on their own terms, whether or not it
is directly tied to their current job. If
a bartender wants to take a course in
restaurant management, he or she
should be able to do so, and the employer would welcome that dedication.
Let’s look at the bigger picture. Our
workforce still has millions of unfilled
jobs caused, in part, by a widening
skills gap. As our own economy grows,
thanks to the progrowth policies of Republicans and the Trump administration, many growing businesses are likely to face skills shortages of their own.
That is why we need commonsense
legislation like the Flexibility for
Workers Education Act, which makes
it easier for workers to get the skills
that they need to succeed and for businesses to find the right person for the
job.
Throughout my time in Congress and
now as chairman of the Education and
Workforce Committee, I have consistently fought to expand opportunities to
help workers thrive and grow. That is
why I am proud to support H.R. 2262,
the Flexibility for Workers Education
Act, to remove obstacles and give
workers more controls over their own
careers.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
H.R. 2262, the so-called Flexibility for
Workers Education Act.
We have heard about these roadblocks and obstacles. Mr. Speaker, the
roadblocks and obstacles are a requirement that people get paid for their
time.
Too many Americans still work too
hard but can’t afford the basics, such
as groceries, rent, or utilities. Even
more, they are struggling to afford the
little extras that give you a slice of the
American Dream, like owning a home,
taking your family on vacation, or

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

even occasionally going out to a restaurant.
Yet, simply put, the economy just
isn’t working for everybody. According
to Moody’s Analytics, the top 10 percent of earners account for nearly 50
percent of all of the United States’ consumer spending, so obviously something is out of whack. Despite this reality, House Republicans are attempting to pass three bills this afternoon
that would cut workers’ wages.
This bill, H.R. 2262, would relieve employers of the obligation to pay employees for training outside of their
regular working hours.
Under the Fair Labor Standards Act,
employees must be compensated for
employer-mandated
education
and
training outside the regular work
hours. Essentially, the FLSA protects
workers from being compelled to volunteer their time for job-related training without wage and hour protections.
However, this bill significantly weakens the protections because it would
permit employers to provide job-related training after hours but off the
clock so long as they do not state that
it is technically required.
However, employers can still lead
workers to believe that the training is
needed. You can just imply that if you
want a raise or promotion, it would be
nice to get the training. That is not
really required. The legislation is
based on the flawed premise that if you
provide workers with certain opportunities or benefits, employers must be
able to pay them less. That doesn’t
make sense.
We should not let employers get
away with failing to pay workers for
their time while claiming that it is in
the workers’ best interests. These
workers, if they are working on an employer-provided training, should not be
required to work off the clock without
any compensation.
For that reason, I recommend a ‘‘no’’
vote, and I reserve the balance of my
time.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
3 minutes to the gentlewoman from
Iowa (Mrs. HINSON), the sponsor of this
legislation, to present her bill.
Mrs. HINSON. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman for yielding and for his
leadership in committee on this piece
of legislation that is designed to empower the American worker.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support
of my bill, H.R. 2262, the Flexibility for
Workers Education Act.
For too long, we know that Washington, D.C., has pursued policies that
left American workers behind. Republicans continue to advance progrowth,
proworker policies that expand opportunity, reward hard work, and help
Americans to get ahead.
No matter where I go out in Iowa—
Main Street businesses, farm shops,
manufacturing facilities, healthcare facilities—I meet the hardworking men
and women of Iowa who want to take
that next step in their careers. They
want to build skills. They want to earn

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.007

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

more money for their families, and
they want to provide a better future
for their kids and for other Iowans.
However, outdated regulatory red
tape prevents skilled workers from
being able to take advantage of voluntary—I repeat—voluntary professional development opportunities offered by employers. My bill, the Flexibility for Workers Education Act,
would cut this red tape, expanding access to these voluntary education programs that allow workers to reach
their full potential on their terms.
Mr. Speaker, imagine a facilities associate, ready for advancement, who
can take evening training courses
sponsored by their employer to become
an appliance technician. That kind of
flexibility opens the door to higher pay
and that long-term career growth that
they need to see.
I am also very proud to have the support of the chairman of the Education
and Workforce Committee, so I thank
Representative WALBERG for his support. The gentleman understands how
much this will impact workers’ bottom
lines, being able to take more money
home to provide for their families, and
so I thank the gentleman for this practical approach that benefits everyone.
b 1420
Again, we know workers gain skills.
They gain opportunity. Employers retain these talented employees in the
workforce. There is stronger morale,
and communities are building a stronger, more resilient workforce.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this legislation and continue
to expand opportunities for American
workers and families. I look forward to
continuing to deliver more commonsense solutions to help Iowans and
Americans comfortably work and raise
their families.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield such time as he may consume to
the gentleman from New Jersey (Mr.
NORCROSS), a distinguished member of
the Committee on Education and
Workforce.
Mr. NORCROSS. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the chairman and ranking member for what they have done to try to
make it better for those who we represent, but I am here to speak out
against the flexibility for workers not
to be paid education act. Yes, I said
that.
This disastrous bill would be a blueprint to commit wage theft on a silver
platter.
I know what it is like to be cheated
out of wages. That happened to me, unfortunately, when I was a younger
man. The rules that are set up are
there to protect those who had the
least ability to protect themselves.
A fair day’s pay for a hard day’s
work. This is not a slogan. It is a principle of who we are in this country. It
is those values that hold this country
together.
This bill is pushing corporations to
create a loophole. I want to take just a

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H679

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

moment, ‘‘voluntary for good causes’’
is something we all do in America, and
we have the ability to do it now. This
bill would create more gray areas and,
for those who want to exploit workers,
give them a roadmap to do it.
Allowing companies to require worker attendance—and you call it voluntary and it is not job-related—without pay, this is what fundamentally is
going to change here. If your boss requires it and if you work, you have to
be paid. It is the system that is not
broken now. This would create ambiguity for those workers saying they are
voluntary.
That is not good. In fact, we call
those captive meetings now when they
come in to preach why worker unions
are bad, but they have to pay them
now. This would give them the ability
to call it a training and not pay them.
This is a loophole.
I urge those who introduced this to
come up with language that would not
allow that to happen. If you truly believe that, then the language that we
offered would be something that we
could both stand together on.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
reject this bill. As I say, if it is not
broke, you don’t have to fix it. We have
a system where people pay to go to college, to go to trade school. I went
through an apprenticeship. There are
ways we can do this that benefits
workers while not creating an opportunity for those who want to exploit
them.
Mr. Speaker, at the appropriate time,
I want to offer a motion to recommit
the bill back to committee. If the
House rules permitted, I would have offered this motion with an important
amendment to this bill. My amendment, Raise the Wage Act, would ensure all workers receive a long-overdue
raise. $7.25 an hour is minimum wage.
That is incredible. Mr. Speaker, 2009
was the last time we touched this. It is
unbelievable that 16 years have gone by
and that we haven’t found it within
ourselves the values we hold dear in
America to give those who have the
least a raise.
We gave billion dollar giveaways to
those in the top tax bracket, and we
can’t raise the minimum wage from
$7.25 an hour. We should hang our
heads in shame that we don’t think
about those who can’t make it.
I have heard all of the excuses. We
used to regularly have increases on a
bipartisan basis since minimum wage
started almost a half century ago. Both
Democrat and Republican Presidents,
Congress, we all understood it. Well,
amnesia is something that has hit us.
Please, Mr. Speaker, we need to raise
the minimum wage. Our policy decisions cannot undercut workers and
their families. Raising the minimum
wage is not only good for the worker,
but for their families.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of this amendment into the RECORD immediately
prior to the motion to recommit.

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from New Jersey?
There was no objection.
Mr. NORCROSS. Mr. Speaker, I hope
my colleagues will join me in voting
for this motion to recommit.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I certainly applaud my
friend and colleague on the other side
of the aisle for the commitment to
making sure that workers are cared
for, employees, but also I want employers to be cared for as well, and the two
working together ends up to be the
best.
Employers, generally speaking, care
about their employees. I know my
Democrat colleagues often disagree
with that statement, but it is almost
always the case in a successful business, especially in a time of intense
competition for the workforce.
My Democrat colleagues have suggested that employers will attempt to
use H.R. 2262 to commit wage theft.
However, the bill clearly states that
the educational activity must occur
outside of an employee’s regular working hours. The attendance is voluntary.
The employer cannot take adverse action against an employee for attending
the training or not, and the employee
cannot perform any work for the employer during their attendance at the
training.
I am not sure that it can be any more
clear. H.R. 2262 gives employees more
options to pursue success, not just in
their current role, but in roles they
may be interested in and would like to
upskill and pursue. Employers recognize that investing in their workers is
essential if they are to be successful.
This legislation offers a win for employees wanting to upskill and a win
for employers who wish to develop
their existing talent.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I was just looking over
the internet and found a Reddit discussion board and found one entry that
said: ‘‘I am bothered by unpaid 2-day
training, which is going to be 9 hours
each day.’’ This kind of crosses the
line, and they just wanted to know if
that was legal in New York.
In reference to the motion to recommit, I hope we would support the motion to recommit. It would give us an
opportunity to vote on an increase in
the minimum wage which hasn’t been
increased in over a decade.
A few years ago, it was noted that a
full-time minimum wage worker could
not afford a modest two-bedroom
apartment in any county in the United
States. Since then, housing costs have
gone up, but the minimum wage has
stayed the same.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time and am
ready to close.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.034

H13JAPT1

H680

Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
in closing, I yield myself the balance of
my time.
Mr. Speaker, according to last week’s
Bureau of Labor statistics, 2025 was the
worst year for job growth in this country since the last Trump administration. 2025 had 3 months of job losses.
Meanwhile, President Biden had 48 consecutive months without a single loss.
At this point in President Biden’s
term, he had already created millions
of jobs. At the end of the first year,
President Trump has only created a
few hundred thousand.
Yet, despite this reality, the House
Republicans are attempting to advance
this bill which would allow employers
to get away without paying workers
for job-related training outside of regular hours so long as it is technically
not required.
It will do nothing to lower the costs
of living or give working families a leg
up. For this reason, I hope we will defeat the bill, and I yield back the balance of my time.
b 1430
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Republicans are committed to expanding opportunities for American
workers. H.R. 2262, the Flexibility for
Workers Education Act, is a commonsense bill that makes it easier for a
business to offer voluntary upskilling
opportunities to its employees.
As our Nation faces a widening skills
gap and millions of unfilled jobs, H.R.
2262 would provide additional pathways
for workers to pursue training and fill
a growing number of jobs that require
skilled workers.
As chairman of the Education and
Workforce Committee, I am committed
to cutting red tape and removing roadblocks that make it harder for workers
and businesses to succeed. The Flexibility for Workers Education Act is another strong step, Mr. Speaker, toward
ensuring Washington doesn’t put up
roadblocks that hinder progress in our
workforce.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this bill, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 988,
the previous question is ordered on the
bill, as amended.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the engrossment and
third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

MOTION TO RECOMMIT

Mr. NORCROSS. Mr. Speaker, I have
a motion to recommit at the desk.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will report the motion to recommit.
The Clerk read as follows:
Mr. Norcross moves to recommit the bill
H.R. 2262 to the Committee on Education and
the Workforce.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

The material previously referred to
by Mr. NORCROSS is as follows:
Mr. Norcross moves to recommit the bill
H.R. 2262 to the Committee on Education and
the Workforce with instructions to report
the same back to the House forthwith, with
the following amendment:
Add at the end the following:
SEC. 3. MINIMUM WAGE INCREASES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 6(a)(1) of the Fair

Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C.
206(a)(1)) is amended to read as follows:
‘‘(1) except as otherwise provided in this
section, not less than—
‘‘(A) $9.50 an hour, beginning on the effective date under section 8 of the Flexibility
for Workers Education Act;
‘‘(B) $11.00 an hour, beginning 1 year after
such effective date;
‘‘(C) $12.50 an hour, beginning 2 years after
such effective date;
‘‘(D) $14.00 an hour, beginning 3 years after
such effective date;
‘‘(E) $15.50 an hour, beginning 4 years after
such effective date;
‘‘(F) $17.00 an hour, beginning 5 years after
such effective date; and
‘‘(G) beginning on the date that is 6 years
after such effective date, and annually thereafter, the amount determined by the Secretary under subsection (h);’’.
(b) DETERMINATION BASED ON INCREASE IN
THE MEDIAN HOURLY WAGE OF ALL EMPLOYEES.—Section 6 of the Fair Labor Standards
Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206) is amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(h)(1) Not later than each date that is 90
days before a new minimum wage determined under subsection (a)(1)(G) is to take
effect, the Secretary shall determine the
minimum wage to be in effect under this subsection for each period described in subsection (a)(1)(G). The wage determined under
this subsection for a year shall be—
‘‘(A) not less than the amount in effect
under subsection (a)(1) on the date of such
determination;
‘‘(B) increased from such amount by the
annual percentage increase, if any, in the
median hourly wage of all employees as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics;
and
‘‘(C) rounded up to the nearest multiple of
$0.05, if the amount after applying subparagraphs (A) and (B) is not a multiple of $0.05.
‘‘(2) In calculating the annual percentage
increase in the median hourly wage of all
employees for purposes of paragraph (1)(B),
the Secretary, through the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, shall compile data on the hourly
wages of all employees to determine such a
median hourly wage and compare such median hourly wage for the most recent year
for which data are available with the median
hourly wage determined for the preceding
year.’’.
SEC. 4. TIPPED EMPLOYEES.
(a) BASE MINIMUM WAGE FOR TIPPED EMPLOYEES AND TIPS RETAINED BY EMPLOYEES.—Section 3(m)(2)(A)(i) of the Fair Labor

Standards
Act
of
1938
(29
U.S.C.
203(m)(2)(A)(i)) is amended to read as follows:
‘‘(i) the cash wage paid such employee,
which for purposes of such determination
shall be not less than—
‘‘(I) for the 1-year period beginning on the
effective date under section 8 of the Flexibility for Workers Education Act, $6.00 an
hour;
‘‘(II) $8.00 an hour, beginning 1 year after
such effective date;
‘‘(III) $10.00 an hour, beginning 2 years
after such effective date;
‘‘(IV) $12.00 an hour, beginning 3 years
after such effective date;
‘‘(V) $13.50 an hour, beginning 4 years after
such effective date;

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(VI) $15.00 an hour, beginning 5 years
after such effective date;
‘‘(VII) $17.00 an hour, beginning 6 years
after such effective date; and
‘‘(VIII) for each succeeding 1-year period
after the increase made pursuant to subclause (VII), the minimum wage in effect
under section 6(a)(1); and’’.
(b) TIPS RETAINED BY EMPLOYEES.—Section
3(m)(2)(A) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of
1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(m)(2)(A)) is amended—
(1) in the second sentence of the matter
following clause (ii), by striking ‘‘of this subsection, and all tips received by such employee have been retained by the employee’’
and inserting ‘‘of this subsection. Any employee shall have the right to retain any tips
received by such employee’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘An
employer shall inform each employee of the
right and exception provided under the preceding sentence.’’.
(c) SCHEDULED REPEAL OF SEPARATE MINIMUM WAGE FOR TIPPED EMPLOYEES.—
(1) TIPPED EMPLOYEES.—Section 3(m)(2)(A)
of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29
U.S.C. 203(m)(2)(A)), as amended by subsections (a) and (b), is further amended by
striking the sentence beginning with ‘‘In determining the wage an employer is required
to pay a tipped employee,’’ and all that follows through ‘‘of this subsection.’’ and inserting ‘‘The wage required to be paid to a
tipped employee shall be the wage set forth
in section 6(a)(1).’’.
(2) PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.—Subsection (i)
of section 6 of the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206), as added by section 6
and amended by section 7(b)(1), is further
amended by striking ‘‘or in accordance with
subclause
(II)
or
(III)
of
section
3(m)(2)(A)(i),’’.
(3) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments
made by paragraphs (1) and (2) shall take effect on the date that is 1 day after the date
on which the hourly wage under subclause
(VIII) of section 3(m)(2)(A)(i) of the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C.
203(m)(2)(A)(i)), as amended by subsection
(a), takes effect.
(d) PENALTIES.—Section 16 of the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 216) is
amended—
(1) in the third sentence of subsection (b),
by inserting ‘‘or used’’ after ‘‘kept’’; and
(2) in the second sentence of subsection
(e)(2), by inserting ‘‘or used’’ after ‘‘kept’’.
SEC. 5. NEWLY HIRED EMPLOYEES WHO ARE
LESS THAN 20 YEARS OLD.

(a) BASE MINIMUM WAGE FOR NEWLY HIRED
EMPLOYEES WHO ARE LESS THAN 20 YEARS
OLD.—Section 6(g)(1) of the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206(g)(1)) is
amended by striking ‘‘a wage which is not
less than $4.25 an hour.’’ and inserting the
following: ‘‘a wage at a rate that is not less
than—
‘‘(A) for the 1-year period beginning on the
effective date under section 8 of the Flexibility for Workers Education Act, $6.00 an
hour;
‘‘(B) for each succeeding 1-year period until
the hourly wage under this paragraph equals
the wage in effect under section 6(a)(1) for
such period, an hourly wage equal to the
amount determined under this paragraph for
the preceding year, increased by the lesser
of—
‘‘(i) $1.75; or
‘‘(ii) the amount necessary for the wage in
effect under this paragraph to equal the
wage in effect under section 6(a)(1) for such
period; and
‘‘(C) for each succeeding 1-year period after
the increase made pursuant to subparagraph
(B)(ii), the minimum wage in effect under
section 6(a)(1).’’.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.036

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

(b) SCHEDULED REPEAL OF SEPARATE MINIMUM WAGE FOR NEWLY HIRED EMPLOYEES
WHO ARE LESS THAN 20 YEARS OLD.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 6(g) of the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206(g)),
as amended by subsection (a), shall be repealed.
(2) PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.—Subsection (i)
of section 6 of the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206), as added by section 6
and amended by sections 7(b)(1) and 4(c)(2), is
further amended by striking ‘‘or subparagraph (B) or (C) of subsection (g)(1)’’.
(3) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The repeal and
amendment made by paragraphs (1) and (2),
respectively, shall take effect on the date
that is 1 day after the date on which the
hourly wage under subparagraph (C) of section 6(g)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206(g)(1)), as amended by
subsection (a), takes effect.
SEC. 6. PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.

Section 6 of the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206), as amended by section
3(b), is further amended by adding at the end
the following:
‘‘(i) Not later than 60 days prior to the effective date of any increase in the required
wage determined under subsection (a)(1) or
subparagraph (B) or (C) of subsection (g)(1),
or in accordance with subclause (II) or (III)
of section 3(m)(2)(A)(i) or section 14(c)(1)(A),
the Secretary shall publish in the Federal
Register and on the website of the Department of Labor a notice announcing each increase in such required wage.’’.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC.

7.

PROMOTING ECONOMIC SELF-SUFFICIENCY FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES.

(a) WAGES.—
(1) TRANSITION TO FAIR WAGES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES.—Subparagraph (A)
of section 14(c)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 214(c)(1)) is amended to read as follows:
‘‘(A) at a rate that equals or exceeds, for
each year, the greater of—
‘‘(i)(I) $5.00 an hour, beginning on the effective date under section 8 of the Flexibility
for Workers Education Act;
‘‘(II) $7.50 an hour, beginning 1 year after
such effective date;
‘‘(III) $10.00 an hour, beginning 2 years
after such effective date;
‘‘(IV) $12.50 an hour, beginning 3 years
after such effective date;
‘‘(V) $15.50 an hour, beginning 4 years after
such effective date; and
‘‘(VI) the wage rate in effect under section
6(a)(1), beginning 5 years after such effective
date; or
‘‘(ii) if applicable, the wage rate in effect
on the day before the date of enactment of
the Flexibility for Workers Education Act
for the employment, under a special certificate issued under this paragraph, of the individual for whom the wage rate is being determined under this subparagraph,’’.
(2) PROHIBITION ON NEW SPECIAL CERTIFICATES; TRANSITION ASSISTANCE.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Section 14(c) of the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 214(c))
is amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(6) PROHIBITION ON NEW SPECIAL CERTIFICATES.—Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the
Secretary shall not issue a special certificate
under this subsection to an employer that
was not issued a special certificate under
this subsection before the date of enactment
of the Flexibility for Workers Education Act.
‘‘(7) TRANSITION ASSISTANCE.—Upon request, the Secretary shall provide—
‘‘(A) technical assistance and information
to employers issued a special certificate
under this subsection for the purposes of—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H681

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

‘‘(i) assisting such employers to comply
with this subsection, as amended by the
Flexibility for Workers Education Act; and
‘‘(ii) ensuring continuing employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities
receiving a special minimum wage rate
under this subsection; and
‘‘(B) information to individuals employed
at a special minimum wage rate under this
subsection, which may include referrals to
Federal or State entities with expertise in
competitive integrated employment.’’.
(B) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments
made by this paragraph shall take effect on
the date of enactment of this Act.
(3) SUNSET.—Section 14(c) of the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 214(c)),
as amended by paragraph (2), is further
amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(8) SUNSET.—Beginning on the day after
the date on which the wage rate described in
paragraph (1)(A)(i)(VI) takes effect, the authority to issue special certificates under
paragraph (1) shall expire, and no special certificates issued under paragraph (1) shall
have any legal effect.’’.
(b) PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.—
(1) AMENDMENT.—Subsection (i) of section 6
of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29
U.S.C. 206), as added by section 6, is amended
by striking ‘‘or section 14(c)(1)(A)’’.
(2) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendment
made by paragraph (1) shall take effect on
the day after the date on which the wage
rate described in paragraph (1)(A)(i)(VI) of
section 14(c) of the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 214(c)), as amended by subsection (a)(1), takes effect.
SEC. 8. GENERAL EFFECTIVE DATE.

Except as otherwise provided in this Act,
this Act and the amendments made by this
Act shall take effect on the first day of the
third month that begins after the date of the
enactment of this Act.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 2(b) of rule XIX, the previous question is ordered on the motion
to recommit.
The question is on the motion to recommit.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Mr. NORCROSS. Mr. Speaker, on
that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will be postponed.
f

EMPOWERING EMPLOYER CHILD
AND ELDER CARE SOLUTIONS ACT
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, Pursuant to House Resolution 988, I call up
the bill (H.R. 2270) to amend the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 to exclude
child and dependent care services and
payments from the rate used to compute overtime compensation, and ask
for its immediate consideration in the
House.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 988, the
amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee on Education and Workforce,
printed in the bill, is adopted and the
bill, as amended, is considered read.
The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

H.R. 2270
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Empowering
Employer Child and Elder Care Solutions Act’’.
SEC. 2. EXCLUSION OF CHILD AND DEPENDENT
CARE IN COMPUTING OVERTIME
COMPENSATION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 7(e) of the Fair

Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 207(e)) is
amended—
(1) in paragraph (2), by inserting ‘‘payments
or reimbursements for child or dependent care
services;’’ after ‘‘by the employer;’’;
(2) in paragraph (7), by striking ‘‘or’’ at the
end;
(3) in paragraph (8)(D)(ii), by striking the period at the end and inserting ‘‘; or’’; and
(4) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(9) the value of any child or dependent care
services provided by an employer.’’.
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendment made
by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to
overtime compensation required to be paid for
workweeks beginning on or after the date of enactment of this Act.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill,
as amended, shall be debatable for 1
hour equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Education and
Workforce or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Michigan (Mr.
WALBERG) and the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. SCOTT) each will control 30
minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Michigan (Mr. WALBERG).
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days in which to
revise and extend their remarks and to
insert extraneous material on H.R.
2270.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Michigan?
There was no objection.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in strong
support of the Empowering Employer
Child and Elder Care Solutions Act, a
bipartisan proposal that meets working
families where they are and strengthens our economy at the same time.
Across this country, millions of
Americans are doing two full-time jobs
at once. They are employees striving to
be productive and dependable at work,
and they are caregivers—parents of
young children, sons and daughters
caring for aging parents, or both. These
responsibilities do not disappear when
the workday begins. They shape whether a worker can show up on time, stay
focused, or remain in the workforce at
all.
Along with many other affordability
challenges, the increasing cost of child
and dependent care is a serious issue
facing our country. Parents leave jobs
they want to keep. Caregivers turn
down promotions or reduce hours.
Businesses lose skilled workers, productivity declines, and the entire economy pays the price.
Many employers want to provide
child and elder care for their employees, but the law discourages them from

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.012

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H682

doing so by asserting that routinely
provided childcare must be included in
an hourly employee’s regular pay
rates.
The Empowering Employer Child and
Elder Care Solutions Act removes this
longstanding obstacle for employers
wishing to provide these highly valued
accommodations to their workforce
and aligns the treatment of these profamily benefits with other employerprovided benefits.
For
workers,
employer-supported
care can be the difference between
staying in the job or being forced out
of the workforce. It reduces stress, improves mental health, and allows parents and caregivers to focus on their
work, knowing their loved ones are
safe and supported.
Supporting caregivers should not be
a partisan issue. Every one of us represents constituents who are struggling and juggling with the work that
they have and the care that they give.
Every district in every State has employers struggling to attract and retain workers because care options are
limited or unaffordable.
The Empowering Employer Child and
Elder Care Solutions Act sends a clear
message: We value work. We value family. We understand that the two are
deeply connected.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this legislation, not only because it is good policy but because it
reflects the lived reality of millions of
Americans who are doing their very
best every day to care for their families and contribute to our economy.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
H.R. 2270, the Empowering Employer
Child and Elder Care Solutions Act.
Unfortunately, it doesn’t solve anything. It doesn’t provide any additional
child or elder care.
What it does is take money out of
people’s pockets because, under current
law, employers must pay hourly workers time and a half for hours worked
over 40 hours in a week. That overtime
rate is based on a worker’s regular rate
of pay, which includes not only the
cash payment but also non-wage compensation and presently includes the
value of child or dependent care services when employers decide to provide
them as part of the benefit package.
Existing law already provides incentives for these benefits, allowing employers to deduct them as a cost of
doing business and offering tax preferences for certain child and dependent
care assistance.
This bill would change the Fair
Labor Standards Act to exclude the
value of these services from the regular
rate used to calculate overtime.
Despite its name, the bill does not require employers to provide any child or
elder care. Instead, it just reduces the
cost of overtime if they provide it.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

That is the problem. In practice, this
bill encourages employers to keep
workers on the job longer rather than
expanding access to affordable care. It
increases the time away from families
while offering no assurance that any
support for childcare will be provided.
Workers who already receive these benefits will see their overtime pay reduced.
There is no evidence that these workers who do not receive this benefit are
likely to get the benefit. The only
group we know for certain will be affected is those who already have it, and
they will lose money on overtime. That
makes no sense. I don’t know how that
solves anything.
I would hope that we would not reduce workers’ pay. To do that, we have
to oppose the legislation.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
b 1440
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I would
make mention that for gym memberships offered by an employer and other
benefits, health insurance benefits,
they aren’t calculated in overtime either.
This brings us together on those
issues. In fact, I believe it makes certain that there is more opportunity for
small businesses especially to have the
ability to have dollars that could be
put toward the childcare.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 4 minutes to the
gentleman
from
Indiana
(Mr.
MESSMER), who is the sponsor of this
bill. He is also a member of the Subcommittee on Workforce Protections.
Mr. MESSMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to address an issue affecting
both families and businesses in Indiana
and across the United States, which is
the expensive, but essential, financial
support workers need to provide care
for their young children and elderly
parents.
Current law discourages employers
from helping their workers pay for onsite childcare or elderly dependent care
because of the unreasonable pay calculations that increase costs and burdensome regulations for the company.
This guidance is so outdated. It was
enacted in 1938, and we all know things
have come a long way since then when
families did not use daycare services
for their little ones and elderly parents
lived with their adult children until
death.
The current mandates of the Fair
Labor Standards Act related to dependent care drive up costs for businesses
through unreasonable pay calculations.
These expensive requirements naturally remove the incentive for many
companies to provide this important
coverage for their employees. It is high
time we eradicate this unwarranted red
tape and let businesses invest in the
needs of their employees without punishing the company for doing just that.
That is why I introduced the Empowering Employer Child and Elder Care
Solutions Act. Hoosiers and all Ameri-

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

cans must not be forced to choose between caring for a loved one and working outside of the home.
Businesses deserve to be profitable
but are also entitled to have the most
qualified workers to support their company’s growth. A company must be rewarded and not penalized for making
critical benefits available to their employees, which, in turn, helps the company recruit the best and the brightest
to their workforce.
The Empowering Employer Child and
Elder Care Solutions Act lowers costs,
cuts red tape, and better serves American companies by making profamily
benefits achievable. Passing this legislation contributes to our goal of returning affordability to the American
people and the U.S. workforce.
The American taxpayer needs our
help now more than ever to get our
economy back on track, and this bill
will be one small step in making that
dream a reality.
Mr. Speaker, I thank the chairman
for his support on H.R. 2270.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield such time as he may consume to
the gentleman from California (Mr.
TAKANO), who is a distinguished member of the Education and Workforce
Committee and the ranking member of
the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the ranking member for yielding me
time.
Mr. Speaker, this bill is yet another
effort to chip away at the protections
guaranteed at the Federal level and
take money out of the American worker’s pocket.
The concept of overtime is very simple. If you work more than your traditional 40 hours a week, then you make
more money, and you get to take home
what you earn.
Now, instead of protecting that very
basic principle, my Republican colleagues are trying to make it easier for
employers to pay their workers less for
working more. They want to pay workers less for working more. This bill
would exclude child and dependent care
from the rate of pay used to calculate
a worker’s overtime pay. In other
words, this bill makes it permissible to
pay workers less than their regular
rate if they picked up an extra shift.
Taking on extra work doesn’t mean
you don’t need someone to watch your
kids, and it shouldn’t cost you a benefit that you are entitled to.
Despite the misleading title, this bill
cheapens the value of an employee’s
overtime labor. The overtime salary
threshold is already far too low. When
the first Trump administration set the
current threshold, 8.2 million Americans saw their overtime protections
just vanish, and even those eligible employees earning $36,000 a year were
making too much money to qualify for
overtime pay.
Mr. Speaker, imagine making $36,000
a year and that would disqualify you
from being able to get overtime pay.
You have no right to it.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.041

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

Childcare and dependent care assistance should be more accessible and far
more affordable for working families,
but this Republican proposal merely
incentivizing employers to provide assistance will not solve that issue and
cutting down already low levels of
overtime pay will not do that either.
Right now, working families are
watching their access to basic support
services shrink before their eyes. Head
Start has seen five of their regional offices across the country abruptly
closed. Medicaid could face over $800
billion in cuts over the next 10 years.
These lifelines that working families
depend on for affordable support services are rapidly diminishing, largely
due to this administration and this majority’s attack on these lifelines as
‘‘waste.’’
The resources that working families
need are not waste. The tools for economic survival are not waste. Americans deserve better.
Mr. Speaker, I oppose this bill, and I
urge my colleagues to oppose it as well.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
My colleague on the other side of the
aisle has said this bill is an assault on
working families. That could not be
further from the truth.
H.R. 2270 is a narrowly tailored solution to the growing challenge working
families are facing when it comes to
childcare. I fail to see, again, how excluding the value of an employer-sponsored childcare subsidy in the calculation of an employee’s regular rate will
result in lower take-home pay as my
colleagues have said on the other side.
The issue this legislation attempts to
fix is that in many cases, employers
are currently unable to offer childcare
to employees due to the prohibitively
high overtime cost.
H.R. 2270 rights that wrong by excluding child and dependent care from
regular rate calculations as has been
done several times, as I mentioned earlier, for other benefits and bonuses because Congress rightly saw that, without exclusion, employers would not be
able to do more for their employees
even as they want to.
This bill enhances the opportunity
for the care that we need for childcare
as well as dependent care.
Mr. Speaker, I urge support, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Pennsylvania (Ms. LEE), who is a
distinguished member of the Committee on Education and Workforce.
Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, we have a childcare crisis in this
country. In my home State of Pennsylvania, infant and toddler care costs on
average $14,000 per year. That is almost
one-half of the average annual salary
of the childcare workers in my district.
Childcare, if folks can even find it, is
pushing families into poverty as they
are forced to make impossible choices
between paying the rent or paying for
care, between staying employed or
staying home.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H683

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Republicans are doing everything in
their power to undermine investments
in childcare, including with this bill,
which will allow employers to exclude
childcare benefits from overtime pay.
Employees working overtime are the
ones who need childcare the most and
the bill undermines workers’ ability to
pay for that care.
For this reason, at the appropriate
time I will offer a motion to recommit
this bill back to committee. If the
House rules permitted, I would have offered the motion with an important
amendment to this bill.
My amendment would replace the
text of this bill with the Child Care for
Working Families Act.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert into the RECORD the text
of this amendment immediately prior
to the motion to recommit.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania?
There was no objection.
Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, my legislation with Ranking Member BOBBY SCOTT would make sure families actually have access to childcare
slots, that no family spends more than
7 percent of their income on childcare,
and that all early childhood educators
make a livable wage.
If Republicans actually care about
children and families, then I encourage
them to pass the Child Care for Working Families Act. I hope my colleagues
will join me in voting for the motion to
recommit.
b 1450
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I am
prepared to close, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself the balance of my time
to close.
Mr. Speaker, I encourage people to
support the motion to recommit, which
would actually create childcare availability.
Mr. Speaker, I include in the RECORD
a letter from the AFL–CIO which says,
in part: ‘‘ . . . there is no evidence that
reducing the overtime rate for employees will spur a widespread willingness
of employers to offer reimbursement
for child or elder care.’’
AFL–CIO, LEGISLATIVE ALERT,
January 12, 2026.
DEAR REPRESENTATIVE: On behalf of the 15
million workers and 64 affiliate unions represented by the AFL–CIO, I urge you to oppose the following anti-worker bills scheduled for consideration on the House floor
this week: the Flexibility for Workers Education Act (H.R. 2262), the Empowering Employer Child and Elder Care Solutions Act (H.R.
2270), and the Tipped Employee Protection Act
(H.R. 2312).
H.R. 2262, Flexibility for Workers Education Act, would let employers require
workers to attend job-related training without paying them for that time. The bill allows employers to label training as ‘‘voluntary,’’ even when workers feel pressured
to attend to keep their jobs or advance, and
removes current protections that ensure
training closely tied to a worker’s job is

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

paid. As a result, employers could push essential training outside of regular work
hours and off the clock, increasing unpaid
work for low-wage workers.
H.R. 2270, Empowering Employer Child and
Elder Care Solutions Act, would exclude
from the calculation of an employee’s regular wage rate any employer reimbursement
for child or elder care when calculating an
employee’s overtime rate of pay. Under this
bill, employees who receive these reimbursements would see their overtime wage rate
cut. Reducing a worker’s overtime earnings
will not help them afford the cost of child or
elder care. Instead, it will make life harder.
And there is no evidence that reducing the
overtime rate for employees will spur a widespread willingness of employers to offer reimbursement for child or elder care. Workers
need both decent wages and access to affordable child and elder care. There are ways to
achieve the latter without attacking the
former.
H.R. 2312, the Tipped Employee Protection
Act, would change federal wage law in a way
that makes pay more unstable for many lowwage workers by allowing employers to treat
almost any worker as a ‘‘tipped employee’’ if
they receive even small or occasional tips
over a time period the employer chooses,
whether that is a single day or an entire
month. This could allow employers to pay
the tipped subminimum wage to workers
such as baristas, hotel staff, delivery drivers,
salon workers, stadium staff, and other service workers who do not regularly earn tips.
For example, a worker who waits tables
would be paid the full minimum wage for
non-tipped cooking shifts, but under this bill
the employer could average tips earned earlier in the week and use them to justify paying $2.13 an hour for cooking shifts as well,
which would cut weekly pay. By weakening
existing rules that limit when the tip credit
can be used, the bill would result in reduced
take-home pay for workers, give employers
greater control over how workers are classified and paid, make it harder for workers to
know if they are being paid correctly, and increase the risk of wage theft in industries
where it is already common.
Collectively, these bills nickel and dime
workers’ pay at a time when so many struggle to afford the basics. Wages should be
raised, not cut. Please vote no on H.R. 2262,
H.R. 2270, and H.R. 2312.
Sincerely,
JODY CALEMINE,
Director, Government Affairs.

Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
this bill does nothing to solve, as I
said, the elder or childcare crisis in
this country. It does not create affordable care, and it does not guarantee a
single new benefit for working families.
What it does do is reduce overtime
pay for workers who already receive
these benefits while encouraging employers to keep people at work longer
without fully paid compensation. That
means more time away from loved
ones, less money in workers’ pockets,
and probably more need for childcare.
If we are serious about supporting
families, then Congress should be expanding access to affordable care, not
cutting wages under the guise of helping workers. We could really do some
help by supporting the motion to recommit and passing the Child Care for
Working Families Act. That would actually lower costs for families and create childcare opportunities.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.042

H13JAPT1

H684

Mr. Speaker, I hope we would support
the motion to recommit, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, I know I spent my opening remarks discussing how the Empowering Employer Child and Elder
Care Solutions Act helps empower
working families. In closing, I would
like to highlight how access to affordable childcare benefits job creators and
our Nation’s economy.
For employers, the return on investment is well documented. Companies
that offer care solutions see lower
turnover, reduced absenteeism, and
higher employer/employee engagement.
In a competitive labor market, the
ability to offer these benefits is vital
to attracting and retaining talent and
ensuring American businesses remain
competitive at home and abroad.
For our economy, the stakes could
not be higher. Labor force participation, particularly among women, continues to be constrained by caregiving
responsibilities. When caregivers are
sidelined, we lose talent, experience,
and economic growth potential. This
bill helps remove one of the biggest
barriers to keeping willing workers on
the sidelines and strengthens our overall economic resilience.
This legislation also recognizes that
caregiving does not end with childhood.
As our population ages, more workers
are caring for elderly parents or relatives. Eldercare challenges can be just
as disruptive and unpredictable as
childcare needs, and yet they are often
overlooked in policy decisions.
This bill addresses both, reflecting
the real-life responsibilities families
face. This is a smart use of policy to
align incentives with outcomes we all
support: stronger families, a more resilient workforce, and a healthier economy. Let’s give employers the tools to
help give workers the support they
need and move our country forward.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Representative
MESSMER for bringing this bill before
us. I encourage my colleagues to support it, and I yield back the balance of
my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 988,
the previous question is ordered on the
bill, as amended.
The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

MOTION TO RECOMMIT

Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, I have a motion to recommit at the
desk.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will report the motion to recommit.
The Clerk read as follows:
Ms. Lee of Pennsylvania moves to recommit the bill H.R. 2270 to the Committee on
Education and the Workforce.

The material previously referred to
by Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania is as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

Ms. Lee of Pennsylvania moves to recommit the bill H.R. 2270 to the Committee on
Education and the Workforce with instructions to report the same back to the House
forthwith, with the following amendment:
Add at the end the following:
TITLE I—CHILD CARE AND EARLY
LEARNING PROGRAM
SEC. 101. BIRTH THROUGH FIVE CHILD CARE
AND EARLY LEARNING PROGRAM.
(a) CHILD CARE DEFINITIONS.—The defini-

tions in section 658P of the Child Care and
Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42
U.S.C. 9858n) shall apply to this section, except as provided in subsection (b) and as otherwise specified.
(b) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS.—In this section:
(1) APPRENTICESHIP.—The term ‘‘apprenticeship’’ means an apprenticeship registered
under the Act of August 16, 1937 (commonly
known as the ‘‘National Apprenticeship
Act’’; 50 Stat. 664, chapter 663; 29 U.S.C. 50 et
seq.).
(2) CHILD CARE CERTIFICATE.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘‘child care certificate’’ means a certificate (that may be a
check or other disbursement) that is issued
by a State, Tribal, territorial, or local government under this section directly to a parent who shall use such certificate only as
payment for child care services or as a deposit for child care services if such a deposit
is required of other children being cared for
by the provider.
(B) RULE.—Nothing in this section shall
preclude the use of such certificates for sectarian child care services if freely chosen by
the parent. For the purposes of this section,
child care certificates shall be considered indirect Federal financial assistance to the
provider.
(3) CHILD EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS.—
The term ‘‘child experiencing homelessness’’
means an individual who is a homeless child
or youth under section 725 of the McKinneyVento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C.
11434a).
(4) ELIGIBLE ACTIVITY.—The term ‘‘eligible
activity’’, with respect to a parent, shall include, at minimum, activities consisting of—
(A) full-time or part-time employment;
(B) self-employment;
(C) job search activities;
(D) secondary, postsecondary, or adult education, including education through a program of high school classes, a course of
study at an institution of higher education,
classes towards an equivalent of a high
school diploma recognized by State law, or
English as a second language classes;
(E) health treatment (including mental
health and substance use treatment) for a
condition that prevents the parent from participating in other eligible activities;
(F) activities to prevent child abuse and
neglect, or family violence prevention or
intervention activities;
(G) employment and training activities, including job training, under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3101
et seq.); and
(H) taking leave under the Family and
Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2601 et
seq.) (or equivalent provisions for Federal
employees), a State or local paid or unpaid
leave law, or a program of employer-provided
leave.
(5) ELIGIBLE CHILD.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘‘eligible child’’
means an individual—
(i) who is less than 6 years of age;
(ii) who is not yet in kindergarten; and
(iii) who—
(I) resides with a parent or parents who are
participating in an eligible activity;
(II) is included in a population of vulnerable children identified by the lead agency

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

involved, which at a minimum shall include
children with disabilities, infants and toddlers with disabilities, children experiencing
homelessness, children in foster care, children in kinship care, children in a family
that is eligible for assistance through the
special supplemental nutrition assistance
program for women, infants, and children established by section 17 of the Child Nutrition
Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786), a household that
is eligible to receive assistance through the
supplemental nutrition assistance program
established under the Food and Nutrition
Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), or a family
that is eligible to receive assistance through
the program of block grants to States for
temporary assistance for needy families established under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), and
children who are receiving, or need to receive, child protective services; or
(III) resides with—
(aa) a parent who is more than 65 years of
age;
(bb) a parent who is employed by an eligible child care provider; or
(cc) a parent who is enrolled in high school
and has not exceeded the maximum age of
enrollment in high school.
(B) LONGER-TERM PERIOD ELIGIBILITY.—An
individual who is determined to be an eligible child shall not be required to reverify eligibility for purposes of this title during the
period after the determination and before
the individual becomes 6 years of age or enters kindergarten, whichever occurs earlier.
(6) ELIGIBLE CHILD CARE PROVIDER.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘‘eligible child
care provider’’ means a center-based child
care provider, a family child care provider,
or other provider of child care services for
compensation that—
(i) is licensed to provide child care services
under State law applicable to the child care
services it provides or, in the case of an Indian Tribe or Tribal organization, meets the
rules set by the Secretary;
(ii) participates in the State’s tiered system for recognizing and supporting the quality of child care services described in subsection (f)(3)(B), or, in the case of an Indian
Tribe or Tribal organization, meets the rules
set by the Secretary—
(I) not later than 4 years after the State
first receives funds under this section; and
(II) for the remainder of the period for
which the provider receives funds under this
section; and
(iii) satisfies the State and local requirements, including those requirements described in section 658E(c)(2)(I) of the Child
Care and Development Block Grant Act of
1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858c(c)(2)(I)), applicable to
the child care services it provides.
(B) SPECIAL RULE.—A child care provider
who is eligible to provide child care services
in a State for children receiving assistance
under the Child Care and Development Block
Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9857 et seq.) on
the date the State submits an application for
funds under this section, and remains in
compliance with any licensing or registration standards, or regulations, of the State,
shall be deemed to be an eligible child care
provider under this section for 3.5 years after
the State first receives funding under this
section.
(7) FMAP.—The term ‘‘FMAP’’ has the
meaning given the term ‘‘Federal medical
assistance percentage’’ in the first sentence
of section 1905(b) of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)).
(8) FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER.—The
term ‘‘family child care provider’’ means one
or more individuals who provide child care
services, in a private residence other than
the residences of the children involved, for
less than 24 hours per day per child, or for 24

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.045

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

hours per day per child due to the nature of
the work of the parent involved.
(9) INCLUSIVE CARE.—The term ‘‘inclusive’’,
with respect to care (including child care),
means care provided by an eligible child care
provider—
(A) for whom the percentage of children
served by the provider who are children with
disabilities or infants or toddlers with disabilities reflects the prevalence of children
with disabilities and infants and toddlers
with disabilities (whichever the provider
serves) among children within the State involved; and
(B) that provides care and full participation for children with disabilities and infants
and toddlers with disabilities (whichever the
provider serves) alongside children who are—
(i) not children with disabilities; and
(ii) not infants and toddlers with disabilities.
(10) INFANT OR TODDLER.—The term ‘‘infant
or toddler’’ means an individual who is less
than 3 years of age.
(11) INFANT OR TODDLER WITH A DISABILITY.—The term ‘‘infant or toddler with a
disability’’ has the meaning given the term
in section 632 of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1432).
(12) LEAD AGENCY.—The term ‘‘lead agency’’ means the agency designated under subsection (e).
(13) PROVIDER TYPE.—The term ‘‘provider
type’’ means a type that is—
(A) a center-based child care provider;
(B) a family child care provider; or
(C) another non-center-based child care
provider.
(14) RECOGNIZED POSTSECONDARY CREDENTIAL.—The term ‘‘recognized postsecondary
credential’’ has the meaning given the term
in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
(15) STAFFED FAMILY CHILD CARE NETWORK.—The term ‘‘staffed family child care
network’’ means a nonprofit organization or
nonprofit cooperative—
(A) that may be a component of a child
care resource and referral organization;
(B) that has at least one paid staff member; and
(C) that offers evidence-based professional
development, quality improvement support,
business support, and technical assistance,
including on achieving licensure as a child
care provider, to family child care providers.
(16) STATE.—The term ‘‘State’’ means any
of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
(17) TERRITORY.—The term ‘‘territory’’
means the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
the Virgin Islands of the United States,
Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
[For full text please see H.R. 2743, Raise
the Wage Act.]

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 2(b) of rule XIX, the previous question is ordered on the motion
to recommit.
The question is on the motion to recommit.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question are postponed.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H685

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

TIPPED EMPLOYEE PROTECTION
ACT
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to House Resolution 988, I call up
the bill (H.R. 2312) to amend the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 to revise
the definition of the term ‘‘tipped employee’’, and for other purposes, and
ask for its immediate consideration in
the House.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 988, the
amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee on Education and Workforce,
printed in the bill, is adopted, and the
bill, as amended, is considered read.
The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:
H.R. 2312
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Tipped Employee Protection Act’’.
SEC. 2. TIPPED EMPLOYEES.

Section 3(t) of the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(t)) is amended—
(1) by striking ‘‘(t)’’ and inserting ‘‘(t)(1)’’;
(2) by striking ‘‘engaged in an occupation in
which he customarily and regularly receives
more than $30 a month in tips.’’ and inserting ‘‘,
without regard to the duties of the employee,
who receives tips and other cash wages for a
work period described in paragraph (2) at a rate
that, when combined with the cash wage required under subsection (m)(2)(A)(i), is not less
than the wage in effect under section 6(a)(1).’’;
and
(3) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(2) A work period described in this paragraph is a work period that is determined by the
employer of the employee, such as a work period
of 1 day, 1 week, every 2 weeks, every 28 days,
or every pay period.’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill,
as amended, shall be debatable for 1
hour, equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Education and
Workforce or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Michigan (Mr.
WALBERG) and the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. SCOTT) each will control 30
minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Michigan (Mr. WALBERG).
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days in which to
revise and extend their remarks and insert extraneous material on H.R. 2312.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Michigan?
There was no objection.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of H.R.
2312, the Tipped Employee Protection
Act.
Mr. Speaker, America’s labor law
hasn’t kept up with the times. The Fair
Labor Standards Act, which governs
much of our modern workforce policy

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and regulations, was written in 1938
and has never been updated to meaningfully protect tipped workers.
As a result, tipped workers are not
clearly defined or protected under the
law. This leaves their jobs vulnerable
to the whims of administrative regulations, court rulings, and too often unclear guidance written by unelected bureaucrats that inconsistently interpret
the rights of tipped workers. That creates chaos for millions of workers.
The Biden-Harris administration was
perhaps the most striking example of
government overreach and the harm it
can do to working families’ bottom
lines. Its disastrous 80/20 rule required
that no more than 20 percent of the
work performed by tipped employees
could be categorized as untipped work,
and those untipped tasks could only be
performed for 30 minutes at a time.
Basically, this required minute-byminute manager supervision to ensure
workers were complying with the rule.
Anyone in the service industry would
tell you in a high-paced environment
like a restaurant or bar that is next to
impossible, but because tipped workers
had no clear definition or proper protections under the FLSA, the BidenHarris administration was free to try
and
impose
overly
complex
timekeeping requirements that were
impossible to enforce.
For several years, this created an
enormous headache for small businesses like restaurants that heavily relied on tipped workers. Even worse,
such convoluted timekeeping requirements directly impact how much pay
Americans take home.
Like many of my colleagues, I want
to see Americans rewarded for their
hard work and ensure they are paid
what they earn. That is why I am
proud to rise in support of H.R. 2312,
the Tipped Employee Protection Act,
which creates stability for tipped
workers and preserves opportunities
for them to earn a good wage.
The bill creates a clear, commonsense definition of a tipped worker and
prevents future attempts by misguided
activist judges and bureaucrats seeking
to implement policies that hurt workers’ bottom lines.
b 1500
The Tipped Employee Protection Act
also ensures workers earn at least the
minimum wage, and the bill respects
States’ authority to set higher wage
levels. This creates even more opportunities for tipped workers to earn more,
often far above the minimum wage.
As we have discussed at length in the
Education and Workforce Committee,
Federal policy far too often treats a
State like California the same as
Michigan or Arkansas. One-size-fits-all
rarely works.
The bill also preserves the current
tip credit system, which workers
across the country overwhelmingly
support—90 percent. This is just one of
the ways Republicans are helping
tipped workers earn more.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.015

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H686

As part of the working families tax
cuts, Republicans enacted landmark
policies like no tax on tips and no tax
on overtime, which put more money
back into the working family’s pockets.
Republicans are working hard to deliver solutions that help Americans
thrive. H.R. 2312 puts more money back
in workers’ pockets and eases the burden on employers by removing needless
Federal regulations.
I am proud to support the Tipped
Employee Protection Act. Congress
should make it clear that we are working to help put more money back in
tipped workers’ pockets.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this bill and the millions of
workers who will benefit from it, and I
reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
H.R. 2312, the Tipped Employee Protection Act. It is actually the tipped employer protection act.
Today, we are discussing one of several bills that House Republicans claim
will benefit workers but ultimately
falls short of what workers need.
H.R. 2312 would redefine the Fair
Labor Standards Act, the FLSA, to
make workers more vulnerable to wage
theft and give employers an excuse not
to pay workers what they are otherwise owed.
Under present law, the FLSA allows
employers to take a tip credit only if
employees are in jobs where they regularly and customarily earn at least $30
a month in tips. If workers split their
time between jobs that regularly earn
tips and jobs that don’t, such as one
shift as a restaurant server and another as a restaurant line cook, the
employer can apply the tip credit
today only to the tip-earning shifts.
This bill would tear down that distinction.
Ultimately, the bill seeks to expand
the pool of workers that employers can
pay a subminimum wage rather than
the full wage. This is problematic because tipped workers are paid less per
hour and have less access to benefits
such as sick leave, healthcare, shortterm disability, and life insurance.
In fact, the Federal tipped minimum
wage is only $2.13 an hour. Instead of
giving workers a leg up, this bill offers
bad actors an opportunity to cut corners and shortchange their workers.
Mr. Speaker, for that reason, I oppose the bill and urge my colleagues to
do the same.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
6 minutes to the gentleman from Arkansas (Mr. WOMACK), the sponsor of
this good bill.
Mr. WOMACK. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Chairman WALBERG for this opportunity.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of my
legislation, the Tipped Employee Pro-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

tection Act, which clarifies the definition of a tipped employee, providing
long-term certainty for the service industry and, ultimately, protecting
tipped employees’ right to earn a living, a good living.
Mr. Speaker, our local service industry businesses, like the family-owned
restaurant down the street, both reflect and shape the culture in each of
our communities.
These establishments aren’t just
places to enjoy a good meal. They are
where we foster and grow relationships.
From catching up with friends to shaking hands on new business to marking
some of life’s biggest accomplishments—birthdays, anniversaries, graduations, and promotions. Where do we
do this? We do this down at the local
restaurant.
Many eateries like the ones I just described make their home in my own
area of northwest Arkansas. Some of
my favorites include Neal’s Cafe in
Springdale. By the way, I should give
credit to its owner, Micah Neal, for
helping provide the inspiration for the
legislation that we are talking about
here today. Another place is Herman’s,
an iconic rib house in Fayetteville.
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on,
naming some of my area’s most popular restaurants. What do they have in
common? To begin with they have
great food, but it is the hardworking
people behind the counter or taking
your table order who truly make these
businesses landmarks in our communities. We all have them.
The bill I stand here in support of
today, Mr. Speaker, is about protecting
these workers. Restaurants, most of
which are small businesses, operate on
very thin margins. The tip credit system is the foundation on which these
small businesses operate.
The tip credit, or the tipped wage,
has been part of the Fair Labor Standards Act for decades. It allows employers to pay tipped workers a base wage
with tips—handsome tips, in many
cases—making up the rest of those
workers’ earnings.
This system empowers tipped employees to maximize their earning potential. In fact, research shows that
servers at full-service restaurants earn
over twice—let me say it again, earn
over twice—the Federal minimum
wage. According to the National Restaurant Association, tipped servers nationally make a median income of $27
an hour, with the highest paid workers
in the $41 an hour range.
The tip credit also offers flexibility
for operators to invest in their businesses and staff. Without it, restaurant
operators would be forced to make
some very tough decisions, such as
raising prices on their customers or reducing workers’ hours, maybe even
cutting jobs altogether.
Unfortunately, regulatory overreach
has put the tipped credit system at
risk, creating uncertainty for restaurant operators. Different administrations have issued conflicting rules

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and guidance, producing a regulatory
roller coaster for restaurant owners
and their staff. This instability makes
it difficult for owners and operators to
make
long-term
business
plans.
Antiworker efforts that chip away at
the tipped wage altogether interfere
with employees’ hard-earned paychecks and livelihoods.
My bill, Mr. Speaker, the Tipped Employee Protection Act, provides a commonsense solution. It puts an end to
hurtful regulatory confusion and litigation. It preserves the tipped wage
and protections in the Fair Labor
Standards Act. It provides clarity and
simplicity in categorizing workers as
tipped employees. It seeks to maintain
a consistent regulatory environment.
To put it simply, my legislation will
protect the hard-earned paychecks of
tipped employees across the country
and right at home in my Third District
of Arkansas, the people who work day
in and day out to put food on the tables
of your favorite restaurant, as well as
on their own kitchen tables at home.
This bill, Mr. Speaker, is how we deliver bigger paychecks to our constituents back home.
One other thing, Mr. Speaker. If you
ever find yourself in Springdale, Arkansas, at Neal’s Cafe, order some
apple salad. You will thank me later.
Mr. Speaker, I support this bill, and
I urge its passage.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from California (Mr. TAKANO), a distinguished member of the Committee on
Education and Workforce and the ranking member of the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the ranking member for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, once again, my Republican colleagues are selling Americans
on a bill with a flashy title and hoping
that they don’t read the fine print.
The so-called Tipped Employee Protection Act implies that something in
this bill might actually benefit workers who work for tips. In reality, this
bill manipulates labor law to decrease
employees’ earning power and allow
employers to skirt minimum wage requirements.
Mr. Speaker, I was a high school
English teacher, and I taught my students about irony. This bill is more
aptly titled the Republican invent new
ways to pay workers less bill.
Here is a closer look at the bill. For
jobs like waiting tables, which regularly generate a large proportion of pay
from tips, employers may pay their
employees a small portion of the minimum wage, a mere $2.13 an hour, as
long as what they normally make in
tips makes up the rest.
b 1510
Mr. Speaker, this bill, however, opens
the opportunity for employers to manipulate FLSA definitions and classify
other workers who receive tips only
sometimes to also be paid a subminimum wage.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.050

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

Under this bill, hotel housekeepers,
valets, manicurists, and other workers
could see their tips used to offset what
their employers owe them, rather than
serving as an occasional boost in takehome pay for a job well done.
In short, it expands the subminimum
wage and offers more opportunities to
pay workers less. As I said, we should
really call this bill the Republican invent new ways to pay workers less bill.
No responsible policymaker should
be arguing that Americans should be
making less. People in this country are
feeling serious financial strain as the
cost of living soars and wages remain
stagnant.
Everything is more expensive, and
here we are, debating a proposal that
would allow employers to pay people
less than what they earned so employers can save a few dollars on the hour.
Shame on this majority.
Once again, this Republican proposal
to stimulate the economy relies on
Americans in the lowest income brackets getting squeezed the most.
Mr. Speaker, we need to eliminate
the subminimum wage entirely and
make sure that Americans make
enough money to live with dignity and
not invent new ways to pay Americans
less. I encourage my colleagues to vote
‘‘no’’ on this bill.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
3 minutes to the gentleman from Washington (Mr. BAUMGARTNER), a great
member of the Education and Workforce Committee.
Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker,
my voters and my constituents sent me
here to help solve problems, to help
small business, to help employees, and
to help grow the economy. As such, I
am proud to support the Tipped Employee Protection Act. This important
bill will help codify changes we are
making in Congress to help tip the
scales in favor of our service workers
and waitresses.
Current Fair Labor Standards Act
rules define tipped work as someone
who customarily and regularly receives
more than $30 a month in tips. It also
considers a standard known as the 80/20
rule, which stipulates that tipped
workers can spend no more than 20 percent of their time, or 30 minutes at a
stretch, doing tasks that don’t directly
earn tips. If that sounds arbitrary, that
is because it is.
Restaurants and similar businesses
already run on thin margins. Keeping
track of that kind of detail adds unnecessary red tape and stress. We all know
how tough it is out there right now for
small businesses.
That is why Representative STEVE
WOMACK and I introduced the Tipped
Employee Protection Act. This bill replaces the outdated definition of tipped
employees with a simpler and more realistic definition. The bill defines a
tipped worker as anyone who receives
tips and other cash wages that together add up to the Federal minimum
wage, without worrying about how
much time they spend on this or that.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H687

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

This change gives businesses more
flexibility and protects them from unfair and crippling penalties for small
recordkeeping mistakes they might
make.
This bill resolves a longstanding
issue that has been the subject of expensive litigation and ensures that the
Federal Government does not set a
standard that it cannot reasonably expect to enforce. It also helps the Department of Labor focus on real wage
violations instead of technical paperwork issues.
Let’s help small business. Let’s help
employers. Let’s do the right thing.
Let’s not work for the people that just
want to have endless lawsuits, endless
litigation, and red tape.
Mr. Speaker, I urge everyone to vote
‘‘yes’’ on H.R. 2312 because businesses
don’t need Federal bureaucrats micromanaging their timekeeping.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 4 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Nevada (Ms. TITUS).
Ms. TITUS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to voice opposition to this bill, the
Tipped Employee Protection Act.
Don’t be fooled by the name of it.
There is nothing proworker in this bill.
It is like calling increased air pollution
the blue sky initiative. This is just another attempt from my Republican colleagues to create loopholes that allow
employers to get away with wage theft.
Anyone who has visited my district
in downtown Las Vegas and the strip
will know that our world-class hospitality workers are the magic behind
the glitz and glamour. With the power
of organized labor, casino workers,
servers, line cooks, housekeepers, and
others put Las Vegas on the map as a
world-renowned hospitality center.
The tourism, gaming, and entertainment industries account for more than
315,000 jobs in our State. We have proven in Nevada that if you pay workers
what they deserve, everybody wins.
I am especially proud that our State
bans subminimum wages for tipped employees. That means, whether an employee has a good or a bad tipping
month, an employee can still earn an
honest living.
More needs to be done to support our
workers. This is especially true as the
Trump slump threatens our tourism
economy and the Trump administration cuts vital safety nets like SNAP.
That is why I introduced the LIFT
Act last year. It would raise the minimum wage and all subminimum wages
to $17 an hour over the next 3 years
with annual increases after that. In
contrast, the bill before us today would
change the definition of tipped employee in a manner that would allow
employers to undercut wages.
Anybody in the service industry
knows that tips vary from shift to
shift. Under the current law, the definition of tipped employee accounts for
those realities by stipulating that an
employee must customarily and regularly—customarily and regularly—receive more than $30 a month in tips.

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Yet, the bill we are considering today
would allow employers to measure a
worker’s tips over just a single day of
work. Employers could manipulate
schedules and purposely choose to
count days where workers get more
tips in order to pay them less.
In 15 States, that means even more
workers will be making just $2.13 an
hour. That can’t even buy a carton of
eggs in Trump’s economy, much less
pay the rent. A more accurate name for
this would be the employer profits protection act.
Mr. Speaker, I agree with my colleagues on this side of the aisle and
urge everyone to stand up for workers
and vote ‘‘no’’ on this bill.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, let’s talk facts again.
The Fair Labor Standards Act sets the
Federal minimum wage, as well as a
separate minimum wage, for tipped
workers. This recognizes the reality
that tipped workers have a higher
earning ceiling when tips are combined
with base wages, representing an employee’s total compensation.
There is no limit to the amount one
can earn as a tipped worker, so long as
the employer is not forced to cut jobs
or close businesses. That is the reality.
If small restaurants were all required
to pay the full Federal minimum wage
to all tipped workers, as my Democrat
colleagues suggest, on top of a complete elimination of the overall tip
credit system, which has also been supported by my Democrat colleagues,
there wouldn’t be very many small restaurants remaining at the end of it all.
Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government should not micromanage businesses by setting requirements that
cannot be enforced such as the BidenHarris administration’s 80/20 rule. This
required employers to monitor tasks of
tipped workers minute by minute. It
sure gives incentive to have less employees.
I can think of many better ways to
utilize a Wage and Hour inspector’s
valuable time than harassing restaurants about their bartenders helping out cooks, hosts, and other nontipped employees, all who often work
in a fast-paced environment.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman
from Nevada (Mr. HORSFORD).
Mr. HORSFORD. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the ranking member for yielding
time.
Mr. Speaker, this debate comes down
to one simple question: What is fair for
tipped workers?
All across America, and especially in
my home State of Nevada, tipped workers show up every day, serving food and
cleaning rooms. They keep our restaurants, hotels, and casinos running.
They work hard. They deserve to be
paid fairly for every hour that they
work.
Under current law, there is a commonsense protection in place. A worker

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.052

H13JAPT1

H688

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

can only be paid a tipped wage if their
job actually depends on tips. That is
why the law says workers must regularly earn tips before an employer can
pay a subminimum wage.
b 1520
That rule exists to prevent abuse.
H.R. 2312, the so-called Tipped Employee Protection Act, tears down that
protection. Under this bill, an employer could say that you earned a tip
once this week, so every hour you work
now counts as tipped work.
A worker could wait tables one night,
earn a few tips, and then spend the rest
of the week cooking, cleaning, or washing dishes and still be paid as little as
$2.13 an hour for that work. That is not
tip work. That is a pay cut.
That is why we need to pass my TIPS
Act, which would raise the wages for
tipped workers—which has not been
raised since 1991, the year I graduated
from high school—not cut them.
This GOP bill lets employers average
tips however they want over whatever
time period they choose and use that
as an excuse to lower wages for hours
when workers are not earning tips at
all.
Mr. Speaker, let’s be honest: Tips
aren’t guaranteed. They depend on the
customer, the shift, the economy, and
pure luck. That is why tips are gifts,
not a guarantee and not wages. No
worker should have to gamble with
their paycheck just to make rent or to
put food on the table.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
stand with working people, stand with
tipped workers, and vote ‘‘no’’ on H.R.
2312.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Georgia (Mrs. MCBATH), a member
of the Committee on Education and
Workforce.
Mrs. MCBATH. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the ranking member for yielding me
time.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to fight for
some of the most overworked and underpaid people in our country to ensure
that the money that they work so hard
for goes to them and their families, not
to someone who didn’t work for it.
The true purpose of this bill is not to
protect tipped employees. The true
purpose is to make it easier to pay people less for their work and to pay them
less than $7.25 an hour.
This bill allows employers to classify
anyone who may receive a seasonal or
random tip as a tipped employee,
meaning they can now be paid below
minimum wage by their employer.
Those tips should be in addition to a
worker’s wage.
Employers should not be able to pay
their workers less because that worker
happened to receive a Christmas bonus
or an occasional tip from a customer,
but that is exactly what this bill would
do.
This bill flies directly in the face of
President Trump’s campaign promise

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

to help tipped workers. What good is no
tax on tips if you have to give those
tips directly to your boss so that they
can take it out of your base pay?
When someone pays taxes, they at
least get something in return. Like
many Americans, I do not think that
the average person sees the benefit
that they really should for what they
pay in taxes. That is because the Republican majority chooses to spend the
American people’s money on tax
breaks for billionaires instead of spending it on our kids, and instead of spending
it
on
childcare,
housing,
healthcare, on things that really make
people’s lives far more affordable.
What is the worker getting in return
in this situation? It is just the opportunity to work. I think the American
people agree that their employers
should be paying them to work and not
the other way around.
No worker in this country should be
paid this low. I don’t care who they
are. Many States have raised their
minimum wages. Unfortunately, my
State of Georgia has not. Without the
Federal floor of $7.25, workers in Georgia could legally be paid just over $5 an
hour because our State minimum wage
is just $5.15. Who can live on that?
Instead of trying to find ways to pay
people as little as possible, this body,
Congress, should be raising the wages
and helping Americans keep more of
their hard-earned dollars in their pocket, the money that they worked so hard
for.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
BABIN). The time of the gentlewoman
has expired.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield an additional 1 minute to the
gentlewoman from Georgia.
Mrs. MCBATH. Mr. Speaker, before I
came to this body, I was a flight attendant for a national air carrier. The
money that I am making today is far
more than I ever made as a contract
employee for an airline.
Mr. Speaker, I will tell you that during the hard, 16-hour days that I had,
much like what I have here, we weren’t
allowed to receive any tips. We weren’t
allowed to receive any of those kinds of
benefits. Basically, if we did, if someone really, really pushed a tip on us,
we would spread it among our crew. It
was the right thing to do because in
the airline industry, there is a cap on
what you can make. There is a cap on
your salary.
Mr. Speaker, having been a contract
employee and having done all of that
before I came here, I am so grateful
every time I come across an individual
in the customer service industry who
has really done a good job. Paying
them tips is the least that we can do to
make sure that they are honored for
their service.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I am
prepared to close, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Illinois (Ms. BUDZINSKI).

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Ms. BUDZINSKI. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the ranking member for yielding
me time.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in strong
opposition to this legislation. This bill,
deceptively named the Tipped Employee Protection Act, would change
Federal wage law to allow employers to
treat almost any worker as a tipped
employee, even if they receive small or
occasional tips. This means lower
wages for everyday Americans who are
struggling daily with higher costs.
Mr. Speaker, think of a restaurant
worker who both waits tables and covers with some back-of-the-house shifts.
This legislation would allow her employer to average her tipped wage from
waiting tables with the standard minimum wage she earned during her
back-of-the-house hours.
By doing this, the employer could
justify paying her a subminimum wage
for all hours worked. If this bill were to
become law, the employer could classify her as a tipped employee and could
legally pay her as little as $2.13 an
hour.
In a time of rising costs and an uncertain economy and working families
all across my district struggling to
make ends meet, this bill to reduce
take-home pay for workers is tonedeaf, at best. At worst, it is a handout
to corporations at a time when workers
can least afford it.
For this reason, at the appropriate
time, I will offer a motion to recommit
this bill back to the committee. If the
House rules permitted, I would have offered the motion with an important
amendment to this bill.
My amendment would attach the
Wage Theft Prevention and Wage Recovery Act to this bill, which would establish new and increased penalties for
violations of overtime and minimum
wage requirements, a real commonsense solution for working people.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of my amendment into the RECORD immediately
prior to the vote on the motion to recommit.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Illinois?
There was no objection.
Ms. BUDZINSKI. Mr. Speaker, I hope
my colleagues will join me in voting
for the motion to recommit.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
b 1530
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, we received a letter
from the Union SEIU, which says in
part that this bill, the so-called Tipped
Employee
Protection
Act,
would
amend Federal minimum wage and
overtime law by broadening the definition of tipped employee and increasing
the employer’s power to move workers
in and out of tipped employee status,
including allowing employers to decide
on a daily or weekly basis whether a
worker counts as a tipped worker.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.053

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

This is a harmful and ill-conceived
bill in every possible way. Most tipped
workers already struggle to make ends
meet. We should be doing away with
the subminimum wage for tipped workers, not incentivizing and expanding
tipped work.
Mr. Speaker, I include in the RECORD
a January 13, 2026, letter from SEIU.
JANUARY 13, 2026.
DEAR REPRESENTATIVE: On behalf of SEIU’s
2 million members and worker leaders, I
write to urge you to vote NO on a slate of
‘‘labor’’ bills expected to come to the floor
for a vote this week. The bills Republicans
are bringing to the floor do not represent serious attempts by Speaker JOHNSON or the
GOP to help working people or working families. This is the party that just this last
week stripped five states of $10 billion in
childcare funding and funding to needy families. This is the party that shut the government down because they were unwilling to
save 22 million people from having their
health care costs dramatically rise or are
lost. These pieces of legislation do not represent any serious effort at curbing costs or
making life better for everyday people.
The bills are as follows: H.R. 2988—Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement
Savings, H.R. 2270—Empowering Child and
Elder Care Solutions Act, H.R. 4366 Save
Local Business Act, H.R. 2312—Tipped Employee Protection Act, H.R. 2262—Flexibility
for Workers Education Act. Far from making
conditions better for working people, these
bills weaken existing protections and further
stack the deck in favor of employers and
against workers.
H.R. 2988, the Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act, amends the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974 (ERISA) to codify Trump Administration rules that undermine workers’ retirement security by, among other things,
chilling fiduciaries’ consideration of a set of
important financial risks and I opportunities. This bill misguidedly attacks Environmental, Social, and Governance (‘‘ESG’’)
considerations in fiduciary decision-making
as ‘‘woke’’ rather than legitimate and important factors to be considered in decisionmaking.
H.R. 2270, the Empowering Employer Child
and Elder Care Solutions Act, would allow
employers to pay their workers less overtime
than they are owed by excluding child and
dependent care services and payments from
the rate used to compute overtime compensation. Rather than incentivize employers to subsidize care, this bill could encourage excessive work without fairly compensating the workers or doing anything to
make childcare or elder care more affordable
or accessible.
H.R. 4366, the Save Local Business Act,
would limit workers’ protections under labor
and employment laws by adopting a single,
weak, joint employer test for both the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA) and the
National Labor Relations Act (NLRA). Joint
employer tests are used to determine who is
responsible for wrongdoing when there are
multiple entities with the power to determine employment conditions. An improperly
narrow FLSA or NLRA standard would make
it harder for workers to hold the right entities responsible for abuse. Further, a narrow
NLRA joint employer standard effectively
extinguishes the collective bargaining rights
of millions of workers by permitting companies that control their jobs to escape the
bargaining table. SEIU represents tens of
thousands of workers, including janitors, security guards, and healthcare workers, who
would have their rights weakened if this bill
passes.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H689

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

H.R. 2312, the Tipped Employee Protection
Act, would amend federal minimum wage
and overtime law by broadening the definition of tipped employee and increasing employers’ power to move workers in and out of
tipped employee status, including allowing
employers to decide on a daily or weekly
basis whether a worker counts as a tipped
worker already struggle to make ends meet.
We should be doing away with the subminimum wage for tipped workers, not
incentivizing and expanding tipped work.
H.R. 2262, the Flexibility for Workers Education Act, would carve out time spent participating in education or training related to
employment from the calculation of a worker’s paid time. This bill would undercut the
longstanding principle that FLSA requires
minimum wage and overtime protections for
all time that employees spend working for
the benefit of the employer, and would enable employers to steal time from employees
by scheduling unpaid—but essential to the
job—training.
As stated above, these bills would hurt
working people by chipping away at existing
legal protections meant to protect workers
from harm. They are unnecessary and burdensome new legal requirements that do
nothing to improve working conditions. We
strongly urge you to vote NO on all the
above bills.
If you have any questions, please contact
Sarah Heydemann.
Thank you,
JOHN GRAY,
Director, Legislation, Service Employees
International Union.

Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I also include in the RECORD a January
13, 2026, letter from the Economic Policy Institute to Speaker JOHNSON.
JANUARY 13, 2026.
Re Opposition to H.R. 2988, Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings
Act; H.R. 2270, Empowering Child and
Elder Care Solutions Act; H.R. 4366, Save
Local Business Act; H.R. 2312, Tipped
Employee Protection Act; and H.R. 2262,
Flexibility for Workers Education Act.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Hon. HAKEEM JEFFRIES,
House of Representatives, Washington, DC.
DEAR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS: The undersigned organizations dedicated to worker
rights and building a just and inclusive economy write in opposition to H.R. 2988, Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement
Savings Act; H.R. 2270, Empowering Child
and Elder Care Solutions Act; H.R. 4366, Save
Local Business Act; H.R. 2312, Tipped Employee Protection Act; and H.R. 2262, Flexibility for Workers Education Act. If enacted,
these bills would harm workers by weakening longstanding labor and employment
laws, leading to lower pay, reduced employer
accountability, and more precarity.
H.R. 2988, Protecting Prudent Investment of
Retirement Savings Act
The Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act would amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
(ERISA) to block retirement plan fiduciaries
from considering climate change and other
environmental, social, and governance factors when they select retirement investments. The bill would constrain plan fiduciaries’ ability to account long-term financial risks in their investment decisions,
which would undermine workers’ retirement
security.
H.R 2270, Empowering Employer Child and
Elder Care Solutions Act
The Empowering Employer Child and Elder
Care Solutions Act would exclude child, dependent, and elder care payments from the

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

rate used to compute overtime compensation
for eligible workers. This would result in
workers receiving less overtime than they
are owed under current law, which would in
turn incentivize employers to impose longer
workweeks on already over-worked employees. Further, workers who face longer workweeks as a consequence of H.R. 2270 would
likely experience higher childcare costs as
childcare providers who operate during nontraditional hours (including evenings and
weekends) tend to cost more. H.R. 2270 would
contradict the basic premise, going back to
1938. that employers should be deterred from
requiring employees to work excessive and
burdensome hours.
H.R. 2262, The Flexibility for Workers Education Act
The Flexibility for Workers Education Act
would amend the Fair Labor Standards Act
to excuse employers of their responsibility
to pay workers for trainings or other professional development opportunities that are
outside of regular work hours. Despite the
bill’s generous-sounding title, this bill would
not give workers any more flexibility. Instead, it allows employers to hold trainings
and professional development opportunities
after work hours and not pay workers who
attend—as long as the employer does not say
it’s required. However, employers can still
lead workers to believe these trainings and
professional development opportunities are
required, which would result in workers not
being paid for their time.
H.R 2312, Tipped Employee Protection Act
This bill amends the FLSA’s definition of
‘‘tipped employee’’, by allowing employers to
classify workers as tipped employees—and
thus allow employers to take a tip credit—if
workers receive (1) any amount of tips (2)
over a period of time selected by the employer, (3) regardless of the employees’ duties. Eliminating the requirement that workers must be ‘‘engaged in an occupation in
which he customarily and regularly receives
more than $30 a month in tips.’’ And allowing employers to choose any time period
would give employers nearly unfettered discretion to re-classify almost any worker receiving any amount of tips for any amount
of time as tipped employees and pay them a
subminimum wage of $2.13 an hour, including
for time spent doing non-tipped duties. This
goes well beyond reversing the 80/20 rule
challenged by the restaurant industry and
would only further exacerbate the precarity
of workers in an industry that already includes many of the nation’s lowest-paid occupations and suffers from already high
rates of wage theft. If Congress truly wants
to protect tipped workers, it should pass the
Raise the Wage Act, which would raise the
federal minimum wage floor and gradually
phase out the subminimum wage for tipped
workers.
H.R. 4366, Save Local Business Act
The ‘‘Save Local Business Act’’ would ensure that trillion-dollar corporations like
Amazon can use subcontracting and outsourcing arrangements to escape accountability to their workers. Businesses have
long relied on subcontracting arrangements—such as hiring workers through temporary staffing agencies—to avoid their responsibility to comply with the FLSA and
NLRA, even though they maintain power to
control working conditions and that the
workers are integral to their business. These
contracting work-arounds were present when
the FLSA and NLRA were passed in the
1930’s, and versions of this outsourcing are
used today by companies. Indeed, businesses
across the economy—including in labor-intensive and low-paid sectors like construction, home and health care, janitorial and

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.056

H13JAPT1

H690

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

building services, hotels and hospitality, and
warehousing and logistics—use similar contracting arrangements to insulate themselves from accountability. Limiting employer accountability and enabling corporations to avoid responsibility for violations of
workers’ rights under the FLSA and the
NLRA will hasten race-to-the-bottom on
labor standards, with businesses that treat
their workers fairly finding it harder to compete.
Should H.R. 2988, Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act; H.R.
2270, Empowering Child and Elder Care Solutions Act; H.R. 4366, Save Local Business
Act; H.R. 2312, Tipped Employee Protection
Act; and H.R. 2262, Flexibility for Workers
Education Act be brought to the floor, we
strongly urge all Members of Congress to
vote No.
With any questions, please reach out to
Charlotte Dodge, National Employment Law
Project; Sam Sanders, Economic Policy Institute or Michelle Feit, National Partnership for Women & Families.
Sincerely,
ECONOMIC POLICY
INSTITUTE.
NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT
LAW PROJECT.
NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP
FOR WOMEN & FAMILIES.

Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
this is an open invitation for employers, particularly those involving restaurants and hotels, to lower their employees’ wages by combining traditionally tipped occupations with nontipped
occupations. For example, they will be
able to put a line cook on the floor for
a few hours a day and then apply the
tip credit to all of the hours that the
employee works.
Tipped workers already are paid less
per hour and have less access to benefits such as paid sick leave, healthcare,
short-term disability and life insurance, and under this bill employers
would be given a pass to not pay workers what they otherwise would have
been owed.
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to
reject the bill, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, we can all agree that
our Nation’s workers deserve to be
compensated fairly. H.R. 2312, the
Tipped Employee Protection Act,
meaningfully updates the Fair Labor
Standards Act to ensure tipped workers can take home what they earn, and
small businesses are not micromanaged
by Federal regulators.
Too often, the political whims of
Washington have hurt tipped workers.
Their earnings have been hurt instead
of boosting them. H.R. 2312 puts an end
to this and shields workers from the
misguided actions of unelected bureaucrats.
I am proud of the work my Republican colleagues and I have done this
Congress to implement policies like no
tax on tips that let working Americans
and tipped workers keep more of what
they make.
I urge my colleagues to support the
Tipped Employee Protection Act and
help put more money back into American families’ pockets.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 988,
the previous question is ordered on the
bill, as amended.
The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
MOTION TO RECOMMIT

Ms. BUDZINSKI. Mr. Speaker, I have
a motion to recommit at the desk.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will report the motion to recommit.
The Clerk read as follows:
Ms. Budzinski of Illinois moves to recommit the bill H.R. 2312 to the Committee on
Education and Workforce.

The material previously referred to
by Ms. BUDZINSKI is as follows:
Ms. Budzinski moves to recommit the bill
H.R. 2312 to the Committee on Education and
Workforce with instructions to report the
same back to the House forthwith, with the
following amendment:
Add at the end the following:
SEC. 3. FINDINGS.

Congress finds the following:
(1) Wage theft occurs when an employer
does not pay an employee for work that the
employee has performed, depriving the worker of wages and earnings to which the worker
is legally entitled. This theft occurs in many
forms, including by employers violating minimum wage requirements, failing to pay
overtime compensation, requiring off-theclock work, failing to provide final payments, misclassifying employees as being exempt from overtime compensation or as
independent contractors rather than as employees, and improperly withholding tips.
(2) Wage theft poses a serious and growing
problem across industries for working individuals of the United States. Wage theft is
widespread and is estimated to cost workers
more than $15,000,000,000 per year. In certain
industries, compliance with Federal wage
and hour laws is less than 50 percent.
(3) Wage theft is closely associated with
employment discrimination, with women,
immigrants, and racial and ethnic minorities
being disproportionately affected. Women
are significantly more likely to experience
minimum wage violations than men, foreignborn workers are nearly 2 times as likely to
experience minimum wage violations as
their counterparts born in the United States,
and African Americans are 3 times more
likely to experience minimum wage violations than their White counterparts.
(4) Wage theft is closely associated with
unsafe working conditions.
(5) Wage theft—
(A) depresses the wages of working families
who are already struggling to make ends
meet;
(B) strains social services funds;
(C) diminishes consumer spending power
and hurts local economies;
(D) reduces vital State and Federal tax
revenues;
(E) places law-abiding employers at a competitive disadvantage with noncompliant
employers;
(F) burdens commerce and the free flow of
goods; and
(G) lowers labor standards throughout
labor markets.
(6) Low-wage workers are at the greatest
risk of suffering from wage theft. A survey of

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

4,387 low-wage workers in New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago found that 68 percent of
the workers surveyed had experienced some
form of wage theft in the workweek immediately before the survey was conducted.
These workers experienced a range of wage
and hour violations: 26 percent of such workers were not paid minimum wage; 76 percent
of such workers who worked more than 40
hours in the workweek immediately before
the survey was conducted were not paid at
the overtime rate; and, in the year before the
survey was conducted, 43 percent of the
workers who attempted to address such
issues by filing a complaint with their employer or who attempted to form a labor organization experienced retaliation by their
employers, including by being fired, suspended, or receiving threats of reductions in
their hours or pay.
(7) In 2012, State and Federal authorities as
well as private attorneys recovered at least
$933,000,000 in wage theft enforcement actions, which was nearly 3 times the value of
all bank robberies, residential robberies,
convenience store and gas station robberies,
and street robberies in the United States
during that year.
(8) A Department of Labor study of wage
theft in California and New York found that
wage theft deprived workers of 37 percent to
49 percent of their income, pushing at least
15,000 families below the poverty line and
driving another 50,000 to 100,000 families
deeper into poverty.
(9) A study analyzing wage theft claims in
the State of Washington from 2009 to 2013 estimated that the total economic cost of wage
theft to the State totaled more than
$64,000,000 resulting from the lower economic
activity and spending of low-wage workers
due to their lost wages.
(10) A Department of Labor study of wage
violations in California and New York found
that wage theft deprived families of $5,600,000
in possible earned income tax credits and resulted in a $22,000,000 loss in State tax revenue, a $238,000,000 loss in payroll tax revenue, and a $113,000,000 loss in Federal income tax revenue.
(11) Barriers to addressing wage theft continue to exist decades after the enactment of
the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29
U.S.C. 201 et seq.). These barriers have resulted, in significant part, because enforcement of such Act has not worked as Congress
originally intended and because many of the
provisions of such Act do not include sufficient penalties to discourage violations. Improvements to enforcement and amendments
to such Act are necessary to ensure that
such Act provides effective protection to individuals subject to wage theft.
(12) The lack of a Federal right for employees to receive full compensation at the
agreed upon wage rate for all work performed by the employee has resulted in
workers being able to recover only the applicable minimum wage, or the overtime rate if
applicable, when employers engage in wage
theft.
(13) The lack of a Federal requirement to
provide employees with paystubs indicating
how their pay is calculated or to allow employees to inspect their employers’ payroll
records significantly impedes efforts to identify and challenge wage theft.
(14) The lack of a Federal requirement to
pay employees their final payments in a
timely manner upon termination of the employment relationship between the employer
and employee has led to unreasonable, and
sometimes indefinite, delays in compensation after an employment relationship ends.
(15) While the Fair Labor Standards Act of
1938, and regulations promulgated by the
Secretary of Labor, as in effect on the day

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.019

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

before the date of enactment of this Act, require employers to compensate employees at
the minimum wage rate and to provide overtime compensation when appropriate, the
lack of civil penalties for most violations of
these requirements has dampened their effectiveness.
(16) While the Fair Labor Standards Act of
1938 and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Labor, as in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act, provide employees who are subject to wage theft
with the right to unpaid minimum wages or
unpaid overtime compensation plus an additional equal amount as liquidated damages,
this low level of damages has proved insufficient to deter employers from stealing the
wages of their employees.
(17) While the Fair Labor Standards Act of
1938 and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Labor, as in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act, require employers to keep records of employees’ pay, the lack of remedies beyond injunctive relief for this requirement diminishes
the effectiveness of the requirement.
(18) While the Fair Labor Standards Act of
1938 and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Labor, as in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act, provide for limited criminal penalties when employers violate the provisions of such Act,
the Secretary of Labor rarely resorts to
these penalties, causing them to serve as a
hollow threat.
(19) The statute of limitations under section 6 of the Portal-to-Portal Act of 1947 (29
U.S.C. 255), as in effect on the day before the
date of enactment of this Act, precludes employees from commencing a claim for wage
theft more than 2 years after the cause of action accrued, or more than 3 years after the
cause of action accrued if the claim is with
respect to a willful violation by the employer. Additionally, the statute of limitations is not automatically suspended while
the Secretary of Labor investigates a complaint. These strict confines of the statute of
limitations sometimes result in employees
being deprived of their ability to institute a
private lawsuit against their employer in
order to recover their stolen wages.
(20) Section 16(b) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 216(b)), as in effect
on the day before the date of enactment of
this Act, requires employees to affirmatively
‘‘opt-in’’ in order to be a party plaintiff in a
collective action brought by another aggrieved employee seeking to recover stolen
wages in court. This provision limits the
ability of employees to unite and pursue private lawsuits against employers.
(21) Under the penalty structure of the
Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, as in effect
on the day before the date of enactment of
this Act, many employers who are caught
violating such Act continue to violate the
Act. A Department of Labor investigation
found that one-third of employers who had
previously engaged in wage theft continued
to do so.
(22) The Government Accountability Office
and the Department of Labor have recognized that when employers are assessed civil
penalties, they are more likely to comply
with the law in the future and other employers in the same region—regardless of industry—are also more likely to comply with the
law.
(23) States that have enacted legislation to
address wage theft by increasing the damages to which employees are entitled following violations of wage and hour laws have
positively impacted the workers in such
States. However, many States have not enacted such legislation and, worse still, some
States do not have any laws protecting
workers from wage theft or even agencies to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H691

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

enforce workers’ rights to compensation for
work. This discrepancy in State laws has resulted in a fragmentation of workers’ rights
across the United States, with some workers
having a measure of protection from wage
theft and other workers being left extremely
vulnerable to wage theft.
(24) Effective enforcement of wage and
hour laws is critical to increasing compliance. Given the limited resources available
for enforcement, enhanced strategic enforcement of Federal wage and hour laws is crucial.
(25) For enhanced strategic enforcement to
be effective, government regulators must
work with community stakeholders who
have direct knowledge of ongoing violations
of Federal wage and hour requirements and
who are in a position to prevent such violations.
(26) Partnerships between regulators,
workers, nonprofit organizations, and businesses can increase compliance by educating
workers about their rights, collecting evidence, reporting violations, identifying noncompliant employers, and modeling good
practices.
(27) Partnerships between regulators,
workers, nonprofit organizations, and businesses have been successful in combating
wage theft. In 2006, the Division of Labor
Standards Enforcement of the State of California created a janitorial enforcement team
to work closely with a local janitorial
watchdog organization. As of 2015, the partnership had resulted in countless administrative, civil, and criminal actions against employers and in the collection of more than
$68,000,000 in back pay for janitorial workers.
(28) The Comptroller General of the United
States has recommended that the Department of Labor identify ways to leverage its
resources to better combat wage theft by improving services provided through partnerships.
[For full text, please see H.R. 5402 from the
118th Congress.]

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 2(b) of rule XIX, the previous question is ordered on the motion
to recommit.
The question is on the motion to recommit.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Ms. BUDZINSKI. Mr. Speaker, on
that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will be postponed.
f

CONTINUATION OF THE NATIONAL
EMERGENCIES WITH RESPECT
TO THE SOUTHERN BORDER OF
THE UNITED STATES AND CARTELS
AND
OTHER
TRANSNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS—MESSAGE
FROM
THE
PRESIDENT
OF
THE
UNITED
STATES (H. DOC. NO. 119–126)
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following message
from the President of the United
States; which was read and, together
with the accompanying papers, referred
to the Committees on Foreign Affairs,
Judiciary, Ways and Means, Armed
Services, and Transportation and Infrastructure and ordered to be printed:

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

To The Congress of the United States:
Section 202(d) of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622(d)) provides
for the automatic termination of a national emergency unless, within 90
days prior to the anniversary date of
its declaration, the President publishes
in the Federal Register and transmits to
the Congress a notice stating that the
emergency is to continue in effect beyond the anniversary date. In accordance with this provision, I have sent to
the Federal Register for publication the
enclosed notice stating that the national emergencies declared or expanded in Proclamation 10886 of January 20, 2025, Executive Order 14157 of
January 20, 2025, Executive Order 14193
of February 1, 2025, Executive Order
14194 of February 1, 2025, and Executive
Order 14195 of February 1, 2025, are to
continue in effect beyond their applicable anniversary date(s).
The circumstances related to these
emergencies continue to pose unusual
and extraordinary threats to the national security, foreign policy, or economy of the United States. Therefore, I
have determined that it is necessary to
continue the national emergencies declared or expanded in Proclamation
10886, Executive Order 14157, Executive
Order 14193, Executive Order 14194, and
Executive Order 14195.
DONALD J. TRUMP.
THE WHITE HOUSE, January 12, 2026.
f

CONTINUATION OF THE NATIONAL
EMERGENCY WITH RESPECT TO
ENERGY—MESSAGE FROM THE
PRESIDENT
OF
THE
UNITED
STATES (H. DOC. NO. 119–127)
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following message
from the President of the United
States; which was read and, together
with the accompanying papers, referred
to the Committees on Armed Services,
Energy and Commerce, Financial Services, Natural Resources, and Transportation and Infrastructure and ordered
to be printed:
To the Congress of the United States:
Section 202(d) of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622(d)) provides
for the automatic termination of a national emergency unless, within 90
days prior to the anniversary date of
its declaration, the President publishes
in the Federal Register and transmits to
the Congress a notice stating that the
emergency is to continue in effect beyond the anniversary date. In accordance with this provision, I have sent to
the Federal Register for publication the
enclosed notice stating that the national emergency with respect to energy declared in Executive Order 14156
of January 20, 2025, is to continue in effect beyond January 20, 2026.
The United States continues to need
a reliable, diversified, and affordable
supply of energy to drive our Nation’s
manufacturing, transportation, agriculture, and defense industries, and to
sustain the basics of modern life and

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.020

H13JAPT1

H692

military preparedness. However, our
Nation faces inadequate energy supply
and infrastructure, due not only to the
harmful and shortsighted policies of
the previous administration, but also
to many harmful State and local policies, especially in our Nation’s Northeast and West Coast. These policies
worsened high energy prices that devastate Americans and undermined grid
reliability with insufficient development of our Nation’s domestic supply
of energy. Without robust development
of domestic energy resources, we further risk leaving our Nation vulnerable
to hostile foreign actors, jeopardizing
our Nation’s core national defense and
security needs, stalling technological
innovation, and deteriorating grid reliability.
The circumstances related to this
emergency continue to pose an unusual
and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and
economy of the United States. Therefore, I have determined that it is necessary to continue the national emergency declared in Executive Order 14156
with respect to energy.
DONALD J. TRUMP.
THE WHITE HOUSE, January 12, 2026.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess subject to
the call of the Chair.
Accordingly (at 3 o’clock and 38 minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1631
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. DESJARLAIS) at 4 o’clock
and 31 minutes p.m.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Proceedings will resume on questions previously postponed.
Votes will be taken in the following
order:
The Motion to Recommit H.R. 2262;
Passage of H.R. 2262, if ordered;
The Motion to Recommit H.R. 2270;
Passage of H.R. 2270, if ordered;
The Motion to Recommit H.R. 2312;
Passage of H.R. 2312, if ordered;
The Motion to Recommit H.R. 4593, if
offered; and
Passage of H.R. 4593, if ordered.
The first electronic vote will be conducted as a 15-minute vote. Pursuant
to clause 9 of rule XX, remaining electronic votes will be conducted as 5minute votes.
f

FLEXIBILITY FOR WORKERS
EDUCATION ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfin-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

ished business is the vote on the motion to recommit on the bill (H.R. 2262)
to amend the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 to exclude certain activities
from hours worked, and for other purposes, offered by the gentleman from
New Jersey (Mr. NORCROSS), on which
the yeas and nays were ordered.
The Clerk will redesignate the motion.
The Clerk redesignated the motion.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion to recommit.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 209, nays
213, not voting 9, as follows:
[Roll No. 18]
YEAS—209
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen

Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross

Aderholt
Alford

Allen
Amodei (NV)

Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)

NAYS—213

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Arrington
Babin

Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony

Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)

Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—9
Casar
Dunn (FL)
Hunt

Murphy
Rogers (AL)
Swalwell

Sykes
Van Orden
Wilson (FL)

b 1659
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
Messrs. PATRONIS, HARRIS of
North Carolina, ONDER, GROTHMAN,
GUEST,
BAUMGARTNER,
MAST,
DIAZ-BALART, SHREVE, PERRY, and
NEWHOUSE changed their vote from
‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
Messrs. THOMPSON of Mississippi,
HIMES, GARCÍA of Illinois, COSTA,
PETERS, and Ms. KAPTUR changed
their vote from ‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the motion to recommit was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.022

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the passage of the bill.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 209, nays
215, not voting 7, as follows:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 19]
YEAS—209
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino

Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán

Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)

Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fitzpatrick
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
LaLota
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Moore (WV)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi

Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Van Drew
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)

NOT VOTING—7
Casar
Hunt
Murphy

Swalwell
Sykes
Van Orden

Wilson (FL)

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1751
Mr. BRESNAHAN changed his vote
from ‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
Mr. OGLES changed his vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the bill was not passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

NAYS—215

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H693

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson

Jkt 069060

EMPOWERING EMPLOYER CHILD
AND ELDER CARE SOLUTIONS ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on the mo-

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tion to recommit on the bill (H.R. 2270)
to amend the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 to exclude child and dependent
care services and payments from the
rate used to compute overtime compensation, offered by the gentlewoman
from Pennsylvania (Ms. LEE), on which
the yeas and nays were ordered.
The Clerk will redesignate the motion.
The Clerk redesignated the motion.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion to recommit.
This will be a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 209, nays
213, not voting 9, as follows:
[Roll No. 20]
YEAS—209
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.066

H13JAPT1

Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross

Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)

H694
NAYS—213
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Garbarino
Gill (TX)

Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)

Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—9
Casar
Fedorchak
Fulcher

Hunt
Murphy
Swalwell

Sykes
Van Orden
Wilson (FL)

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1757
So the motion to recommit was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 1(c) of rule XIX, further
consideration of H.R. 2270 is postponed.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

TIPPED EMPLOYEE PROTECTION
ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on the motion to recommit on the bill (H.R. 2312)
to amend the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 to revise the definition of the
term ‘‘tipped employee’’, and for other
purposes, offered by the gentlewoman
from Illinois (Ms. BUDZINSKI), on which
the yeas and nays were ordered.
The Clerk will redesignate the motion.
The Clerk redesignated the motion.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion to recommit.
This is a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 209, nays
215, not voting 7, as follows:
[Roll No. 21]
YEAS—209
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw

Wasserman
Schultz

Waters
Watson Coleman

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino

Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)

Whitesides
Williams (GA)

NAYS—215
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—7
Casar
Hunt
Murphy

Swalwell
Sykes
Van Orden

Wilson (FL)

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1804
Mr. CLEAVER changed his vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the motion to recommit was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 1(c) of rule XIX, further
consideration of H.R. 2312 is postponed.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.024

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

SAVING
HOMEOWNERS
FROM
OVERREGULATION WITH EXCEPTIONAL RINSING ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 1(c) of rule XIX, further
consideration of the bill (H.R. 4593) to
amend the Energy Policy and Conservation Act to revise the definition
of showerhead will now resume.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the engrossment and
third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
MOTION TO RECOMMIT

Mr. RILEY of New York. Mr. Speaker, I have a motion to recommit at the
desk.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will report the motion to recommit.
The Clerk read as follows:
Mr. Riley of New York moves to recommit
the bill H.R. 4593 to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.

The material previously referred to
by Mr. RILEY of New York is as follows:
Mr. Riley of New York moves to recommit
the bill H.R. 4593 to the Committee on Energy and Commerce with instructions to report the same back to the House forthwith,
with the following amendment:
Page 3, line 21, insert ‘‘In revising such
regulations, the Secretary of Energy may
only establish or amend standards under the
Energy Policy and Conservation Act for any
type or class of showerhead if such standards
do not result in increased costs for consumers.’’ after ‘‘section.’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 2(b) of rule XIX, the previous question is ordered on the motion
to recommit.
The question is on the motion to recommit.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Mr. RILEY of New York. Mr. Speaker, on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This
will be a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 209, nays
215, not voting 7, as follows:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 22]
YEAS—209
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H695

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost

Jkt 069060

Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner

Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds

Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson

Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)

NAYS—215

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)

Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)

Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong

Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—7
Casar
Hunt
Murphy

Swalwell
Sykes
Van Orden

Wilson (FL)

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1811
So the motion to recommit was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the passage of the bill.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 226, nays
197, not voting 8, as follows:
[Roll No. 23]
YEAS—226
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.073

H13JAPT1

Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Cuellar
Davidson
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino

Gill (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Gosar
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Houlahan
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)

H696
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perez
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures

Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Goodlander
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Torres (CA)
Tran
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—197

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser

McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Peters
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland

Jkt 069060

Subramanyam
Suozzi
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda

Tonko
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman

Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)

NOT VOTING—8
Casar
Hunt
Murphy

Pettersen
Swalwell
Sykes

Van Orden
Wilson (FL)

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1817
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

b 1820
CONGRATULATING KENDRA
AUCKER
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize
Kendra Aucker, president and CEO of
the WellSpan Evangelical Community
Hospital in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania.
Kendra retired earlier this month after
30 years of dedicated service.
Kendra began her career at Evangelical Community Hospital in the
early 1990s. Kendra left the hospital for
a position at Capital Blue Cross, but
returned in 1999, and stayed there ever
since. She was appointed president and
CEO of the hospital in 2015.
Throughout her career, Kendra has
worked to grow Evangelical Community Hospital. Some of her achievements include the opening of the ambulatory surgical center and urgent care,
the expansion of specialty care units,
and a cardiovascular expansion project.
Kendra is the fourth president and
CEO in the hospital’s 100 years.
Throughout her career, she has seen
many changes and was pivotal in helping the hospital successfully navigate
the COVID–19 virus.
Mr. Speaker, Kendra has dedicated
her career to growing the WellSpan
Evangelical Community Hospital and
helping others. I wish Kendra the best
and thank her for her years of service.
f

MESSAGE FROM THE STATE
A message from the Senate by Ms.
Lasky, one of its clerks, announced
that the Senate has passed a bill of the
following title in which the concurrence of the House is requested:
S. 1837. An act to improve rights to relief
for individuals affected by non-consensual
activities involving intimate digital forgeries, and for other purposes.

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

INVESTING IN EASTERN NORTH
CAROLINA
(Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, we must continue to focus on
strengthening our local economy and
keeping the American Dream within
reach for eastern North Carolina families.
Back in October 2024, Johnson &
Johnson announced a $2 billion commitment to build a pharmaceutical
manufacturing facility for innovative
biologics in Wilson, North Carolina, a
move that will create 420 good-paying
jobs. Most recently, they have announced a second investment: a new
drug product manufacturing facility.
In addition, Electrolux is investing
$23 million to expand its production facility in Kinston, North Carolina, adding 74 new positions to the local workforce.
These announcements prove that
when we prioritize economic revitalization, we can bring real opportunity
back to rural communities that need it
most.
Together, we are building a brighter
future where families can thrive.
f

HONORING COLORADO STATE
SENATOR LEWIS H. ENTZ
(Mr. HURD of Colorado asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. HURD of Colorado. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today to recognize and celebrate
the life of former Colorado State Senator Lewis H. Entz, who passed away
on December 10 at the remarkable age
of 94.
Senator Entz was a deeply respected
member of the San Luis Valley and a
steadfast advocate for Colorado communities. Before serving as Colorado
senator from 2001 to 2006, he dedicated
16 years to the Colorado House of Representatives. His lifetime of service
also includes fighting in the Korean
war as a member of the Marine Corps,
serving as an Alamosa County Commissioner, and as a member of the Colorado Water Conservation Board.
During his time in public office, Senator Entz carried 70 water bills and
earned recognition as a national leader
in water conservation.
Those who knew him remember him
as a mentor, a conservationist, a farmer, and a friend. He touched countless
lives, and his legacy will continue to
live on through his four children and
through the many Coloradans he
served.
f

DELTA SIGMA THETA FOUNDERS
DAY
(Mrs. BEATTY asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.027

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

rants, without body cams, targeting
people based on their race or the sound
of their voice, and detaining people
without cause, that is not law enforcement. That is lawlessness.
The result is a tragedy. Renee Good
is dead.
In the days since, there has been no
remorse and no accountability from
the White House. Instead, the President doubled down with more agents
and more confrontation. It is violence
they want to happen, with no apologies
and no shame; far from it. In fact, they
want more.
This is not normal, and it is not
right. We must stand united against
this illegal and immoral agenda. History is watching.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
CRANK). Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the President.

publicly available behind a paywall
makes achieving accountability much
more difficult for our residents, especially those who won’t be able to afford
it, and they tend to be the ones more
frequently abused by police.
That is why I am introducing the
Stop Body Camera Paywalls Act to
prevent any State or unit of local government that creates a paywall for access to these public records from receiving
Federal
law
enforcement
grants.
Again, we must make sure that we
have transparency, especially when it
comes to Federal law enforcement
grants. This bill is a necessary step in
a wider effort to end police impunity
for abuses and ensure the utmost
transparency, accountability, and justice for our communities.

f

f

DR. TIM CONNELLY RECEIVES 2025
GEORGIA PHYSICIAN HERO AWARD
(Mr. CARTER of Georgia asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Dr. Tim
Connelly, an internal medicine physician at Memorial Health University
Medical Center, who has been named
the 2025 Physician Hero Award recipient by the Georgia Hospital Association.
This award honors physicians who
give their time and expertise to
strengthen their institutions and improve lives. Dr. Connelly embodies that
calling through his commitment to patient care and medical education.
In addition to serving patients, he
plays a vital role as the associate program director for Memorial’s internal
medicine residency program, helping
train the next generation of physicians. Dr. Connelly’s leadership shapes
young doctors who will serve communities across Georgia for years to come.
His dedication reflects the highest
standards of medicine and service.
This recognition speaks not only to
his skill as a physician but to the trust
and respect that he has earned from
colleagues and patients alike.
We thank Dr. Connelly for his compassion, his professionalism, and his
unwavering commitment to healing
others.

INDUSTRIAL HEMP IN KENTUCKY
(Mr. COMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. COMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
address an issue very near and dear to
my heart—industrial hemp.
As Kentucky’s Commissioner of Agriculture, I led the charge to make Kentucky the very first State to legally
grow hemp. Fast forward to today,
hemp is a major crop for our Kentucky
farmers, and nearly every farmer I
know who grew hemp last year was a
former tobacco farmer.
Hemp is doing exactly today what I
predicted in 2015. It has become an alternative crop to tobacco for Kentucky
farmers.
The Senate recently added language
to a continuing resolution that would
put our Kentucky hemp farmers out of
business. I will be working to add language to the continuing resolution
next week to fix it. I certainly hope all
my colleagues will join with me in supporting this language to help our Kentucky farmers as well as the hundreds
of jobs that have been created because
of industrial hemp in Kentucky.

HONORING CHIEF WARRANT
OFFICER FIVE BERNARD AGUON
(Mr. MOYLAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. MOYLAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor Chief Warrant Officer
Five Bernard Aguon of the District of
Columbia National Guard, a native of
Guam, as he concludes a lifetime of extraordinary service to our Nation.
With more than 34 years of service
across all three components of the
United States Army, CW5 Aguon represents the very best of what it means
to serve. Most recently, he served as
the command chief warrant officer of
the District of Columbia National
Guard, where he was a trusted adviser
to senior leaders and a steady voice in
guiding complex decisions that affected
the force.
Throughout his career, he served in
an extraordinary range of roles, from
engineer and personnel commands to
senior advisory positions, bringing
clarity, professionalism, and technical
mastery wherever he was called.
Born and raised on Guam, CW5
Aguon’s journey from our island in the
Pacific to the highest levels of the National Guard is a source of great pride.
He has strengthened our Army, supported countless soldiers, and brought
honor to his family and his island.
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a grateful
nation, I thank CW5 Aguon for his
service, his sacrifice, and his enduring
legacy.

Mrs. BEATTY. Mr. Speaker, I rise as
a proud member of Delta Sigma Theta
Sorority, Incorporated, to honor our
Founders Day. Mr. Speaker, 113 years
ago, 22 Black, courageous young
women at Howard University founded
our sorority.
Delta women have always met the
moment with purpose and courage,
from demanding the right to vote to
leading the global fight for equitable
education and opportunity.
I carry that legacy alongside my
sorors—Congresswomen
YVETTE
CLARKE, VALERIE FOUSHEE, STACEY
PLASKETT, LUCY MCBATH, JASMINE
CROCKETT, SUMMER LEE, JENNIFER
MCCLELLAN, and Senator ANGELA
ALSOBROOKS—leading in social action,
protecting voting rights, education,
economic justice, and housing.
Mr. Speaker, to Deltas across the
world, I say Happy Founders Day.

f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H697

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

HISTORY IS WATCHING
(Ms. BROWN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. BROWN. Mr. Speaker, we have a
President who is corrupt, criminal, and
craven to the core, a President who has
declared war on American cities and
flooded the streets with untrained, unqualified, and unidentified agents.
When agents show up in unmarked
vehicles wearing masks without war-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

f

b 1830
STOP BODY CAMERA PAYWALLS
(Ms. TLAIB asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. TLAIB. Mr. Speaker, we all know
the public deserves full transparency
when it comes to holding police accountable for misconduct. Instead,
States and cities all across our country
have started adopting new laws to
charge the public hundreds of dollars in
fees to view or access police body camera footage.
These videos are public records and
are essential for accountability and
justice for victims of police violence.
Putting this footage that should be

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

f

f

REQUESTING THE SENATE TO RETURN TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES H.R. 1834
Mr. LALOTA. Mr. Speaker, I send to
the desk a privileged resolution and
ask for its immediate consideration in
the House.
The Clerk read the resolution, as follows:
H. RES. 991
Resolved, That the Clerk of the House of
Representatives request the Senate to return

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.080

H13JAPT1

H698

to the House the bill (H.R. 1834) entitled ‘‘To
advance policy priorities that will break the
gridlock.’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Without
objection, the resolution was agreed to.
There was no objection.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

RUSSIAN AIR ATTACK ON KYIV
(Ms. KAPTUR asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I rise
this evening to speak of a grave act
that took place last week in the capital
of Ukraine, Kyiv. The Putin dictatorship continues its illegal war with a
double crime—a double-tap strike attack.
A double tap is a merciless attack
when a target is struck, but then
struck again within minutes in an attempt to kill survivors and first responders. I repeat: A double tap is a
war crime.
Sadly, dictator Vladimir Putin’s
criminality against a free nation is
nothing new, and Ukraine has repeatedly seen double-tap strikes specifically targeting first responders over
the past 4 years, with over 500 killed.
Yesterday, 3 days after that attack,
Sergiy Smolyak, a 56-year-old responder, was laid to rest. This champion of healing and compassion served
as a medic for 25 years and had relocated to Kyiv when Russia invaded his
hometown in the southern Kherson region nearly 4 years ago.
A nurse who worked with Smolyak
said, before his funeral, that he was
very kind, always calm, and even-tempered. He saved so many people.
Mr. Speaker, we must do more to
deter illegal Russian aggression, inspire more healers, or innocent Ukrainians will continue to be laid to rest in
a nation that longs to be free.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

PREVENTING FUTURE RENAMING
OF ANY NATIONAL MONUMENT
OR MEMORIAL AFTER A SITTING
PRESIDENT
(Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend her remarks.)
Mrs.
MCCLAIN
DELANEY.
Mr.
Speaker, I rise today with words spoken 65 years ago this month by President John F. Kennedy: ‘‘Ask not what
your country can do for you—ask what
you can do for your country.’’
Sadly, President Trump focuses more
on what our country can do for him.
We saw this last month when he unlawfully branded the John F. Kennedy
Center for the Performing Arts.
The Kennedy Center is a national
treasure of the arts and a memorial to
a fallen President. That is why, in December, I introduced legislation that
would remove all Trump signage.
Today, I am proud to announce a
third bill. Senator SANDERS and I will

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

jointly introduce the Stop Executive
Renaming for Vanity and Ego (SERVE)
Act. The bill will prevent the future renaming of any national monument or
memorial after a sitting President.
Trump’s branding of our Federal
landmarks must end, and we must
bring back common sense and an ethos
of public service over self.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF BARRY DEL BUONO
(Mr. LICCARDO asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LICCARDO. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize the life and contributions of Barry Del Buono, a longtime community leader in San Jose,
California, who we lost this last December. With his passing, I lost a childhood hero, and our community lost a
champion.
Barry’s quiet strength and deep faith
propelled a life of extraordinary service
for our most vulnerable neighbors. He
began his life of public service as a
Catholic priest in San Jose, where he
cofounded Loaves & Fishes Family
Kitchen, a nonprofit that last year provided nearly 2 million meals to families in need.
Barry would eventually leave the
priesthood to marry, but his commitment only deepened. In 1980, he founded
the Emergency Housing Consortium,
now known as HomeFirst, where he pioneered a groundbreaking continuum
of care model that extended beyond
emergency shelter to include transitional and permanent supportive housing.
Decades later, Barry launched his
third act in life in education. He and
his dedicated wife, Maile, inspired a
new generation of adults with a passion
for service through their teaching at
San Jose City College and Evergreen
Valley College.
Barry was most at home with his
family, with Maile, their five children,
and seven grandchildren. With grateful
hearts, we remember Barry not only
for what he built but also for what he
believed and what he inspired all of us
to believe in and build with him.
f

b 1840
CONGRATULATING MONROE RED
JACKETS
(Mr. MORELLE asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. MORELLE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to celebrate the Monroe Red
Jackets high school football team, led
by Coach Terrell Cunningham and New
York State Gatorade Player of the
Year Messiah Hampton, who made history as the first-ever Rochester City
School District Class B State champions.
This team showed what is possible
when talent meets determination,

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

when hard work rises above the challenges we face, and when young people
refuse to be defined by the obstacles in
front of them.
They believed in each other. They believed in themselves. They showed New
York State what Rochester pride looks
like.
This championship brings hope. It
brings hope for the students who have
proven their dreams are within reach,
for a school that showed excellence
thrives here, and for a community that
has so much to be proud of.
We thank the players, coaches, families, and fans for reminding us that
greatness lives right here in Rochester.
I cannot wait to see what all these
young people go on to do. We congratulate the Monroe Red Jackets.
f

CONDEMNING THE JANUARY 6
PARDONS
(Mr. DESAULNIER asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. DESAULNIER. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to express my outrage and
ask my colleagues to join me in condemning the actions of the President
when he pardoned so many of the individuals convicted after January 6.
At least 13 individuals who have been
pardoned by President Trump have
gone on to commit additional crimes,
including sexual assault against a
minor and a fatal DUI.
Instead of promoting accountability
and rehabilitation, when possible, in
our justice system, shouldn’t the President and the majority look at these
pardons and make sure that they accept the consequences of his actions
and their actions by not ignoring
them?
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
join me in condemning the President’s
unvetted and ill-advised pardons that
are leading to repeat offenses. Congress
should be here to protect innocent
Americans and not look away from the
consequences of the President’s actions.
f

PROTECTING EDUCATION FOR
CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mrs. HAYES of
Connecticut was recognized for 60 minutes as the designee of the minority
leader.)
GENERAL LEAVE

Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days to revise
and extend their remarks and include
extraneous material on the subject of
the Special Order.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Connecticut?
There was no objection.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to lead this Special Order hour

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.032

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

and to speak about a matter of great
importance to millions of American
children. With everything going on, it
is easy to overlook what is happening
at the Department of Education.
Today, I would like to highlight the
concerns of parents who have children
living with disabilities. They are
scared, concerned, and confused.
The Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act, or IDEA, is the Federal
law that ensures children with disabilities receive a free and appropriate
public education tailored to their
unique learning needs.
IDEA provides services to children
from birth to age 21. Since its enactment in 1975, IDEA focused on providing children with disabilities the
same educational opportunities as all
other students. It allows the 7.5 million
children living with disabilities who
rely on services to receive early intervention and remain in the least restrictive environments alongside their nondisabled peers.
It provides grants and helps parents
with their rights and to know what is
legally required of schools to develop
individualized educational plans, detailing specific goals, services, and support for students.
IDEA requires that teachers be highly qualified with ongoing training, ensuring they meet the unique needs of
students with disabilities. These services are there to provide students with
postsecondary education, employment,
and independent living.
IDEA addresses past failures to educate students with disabilities. I am
old enough to remember a time when
students with special needs were educated in the basement of schools or
outright denied entry. Before IDEA,
millions of children with disabilities
were denied an education and often refused admission to schools or even programs.
Today, children with disabilities are
able to attend any public school and receive services at no cost to their parents. They have legal and civil rights
protections for their children under
this landmark law.
On March 20, 2025, the President
signed an executive order directing the
Secretary of Education, Linda McMahon, to facilitate the dismantling of
the Department of Education, which
raises significant questions about the
future of IDEA and the impact on the
education of these 7.5 million children.
The students who would be hurt the
most by weakening the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act are the
children who are the most vulnerable.
In nearly every State, public schools
are primarily funded by State and local
governments with local property taxes
playing a crucial role.
Without IDEA and Federal resources,
these students could end up in underfunded schools that lack resources, expertise, or accountability to provide
the special education services and supports they require.
IDEA is Federal law, which means
that even without funding from the De-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H699

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

partment of Education, State and local
districts will have to figure out how
they will make up this deficit. They
will still have to provide services and
likely have to cut other programs.
This could mean a student with dyslexia would no longer receive daily
reading interventions. A student who
was deaf or hard of hearing would not
have a sign language interpreter. A
student who just needed a little bit of
speech therapy in order to be a part of
the class would not have that, making
it nearly impossible to follow daily lessons or participate in discussions.
Weakening IDEA would not only cut
funding or reduce services, but it would
threaten the future of these students
who with just the right amount of support and accommodations could thrive.
The stakes are too high. We must
protect the Department of Education,
and we must protect IDEA. This administration has yet to lay out any detailed plan for the future of IDEA.
I have serious concerns about moving
services for students with disabilities
to HHS because then they are only
being viewed through a medical lens.
They would only be diagnosed and
would not be seen as students first and
given the resources they needed to survive.
Today, I would like to elevate the
stories of my colleagues who have children and families living in their district who rely so heavily on the services that the Federal Government provides.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from North Carolina (Ms.
ADAMS), a member of the Committee
on Education and Workforce.
Ms. ADAMS. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman from Connecticut
(Mrs. HAYES) for yielding time. I thank
her for her unwavering support of children and for having been the National
Teacher of the Year. I thank her so
much.
Mr. Speaker, I rise because dismantling the Department of Education is
not just bad policy. It is dangerous for
North Carolina’s children. In my State,
more than 60 percent of students rely
on Pell grants and Federal aid to afford
college. Nearly 1.5 million K–12 students depend on title I IDEA school nutrition and other Federal supports.
In Charlotte-Mecklenburg, over 70
percent of students benefit directly
from programs administered through
the Department. When the Department
is gutted, when staff are fired, grants
are frozen, and financial aid systems
break, it is our most vulnerable young
people who feel it first. These are lowincome students, first-generation students, students with disabilities, and
families who cannot afford disruptions.
This isn’t efficiency. It is an educational disarmament. I am proud to
defend the Department of Education
because protecting the Department
means protecting opportunity.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Representative ADAMS for her remarks.
As she noted, I was a classroom teacher

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

for over 15 years. I know exactly how
important these resources and supports
are. I had students who had severe
learning disabilities but who were able
to thrive with the appropriate accommodations and the resources and support in the classroom.
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to
note that in my State of Connecticut,
in 2025, we received approximately $160
million from the Federal Government
in order to facilitate services for students with exceptionalities. A State
like Connecticut would have to fill
that gap in order to make sure these
students continue to receive services.
What is happening with the Department of Education is of grave concern
to me.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Oregon (Ms. BYNUM).
Ms. BYNUM. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman from Connecticut
(Mrs. HAYES) for bringing us together
to stand up for children with disabilities.
Mr. Speaker, if I were to not pay
something I owed for 50 years, the consequences would be tremendous. That
is exactly what the Federal Government has done with the IDEA, Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
b 1850
In 1976, just a year after I was born,
Congress promised to pay for 40 percent
of the cost of public education for children with disabilities. Yet, here we are
in 2026. I am 50, almost 51, but the Federal Government is paying less than 12
percent. In my home State of Oregon,
that means a $315 million gap between
the funding that our students are getting and the amount that these schools
are owed.
On top of that, it has been credibly
reported that the Trump administration has started dismantling the Department of Education, including the
staff who oversee these IDEA programs. Now the program is both underfunded and there is no one there to
send the money out.
That is why earlier this Congress, I
introduced the IDEA Full Funding Act.
I urge my colleagues to join me in finally giving our students with disabilities exactly what they are owed.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman from Oregon for her
support.
To the gentlewoman’s point, the
IDEA has never been fully funded as
the Federal Government promised. In
the State of Oregon, they received $162
million in 2025, which is just a fraction
of what it costs to educate students
with special needs.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from New York (Mr. MANNION).
Mr. MANNION. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to share what is at stake for students with disabilities as this administration continues its attacks on the
Department of Education.
Last year, one of our Nation’s most
fundamental laws, the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act, or IDEA,

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.085

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H700

reached its 50th anniversary. IDEA
opened the doors to opportunities and
protected the rights of millions of students with disabilities and their families. It guaranteed a free, appropriate
public education where students with
disabilities could learn in the least restrictive environment and with the
proper support.
Before this landmark piece of legislation, generations of students with disabilities were routinely denied equal
access to education. As a teacher for
almost 30 years and the founding chairman of the New York State Senate Disabilities Committee, I have seen firsthand how IDEA has transformed lives
and what it means to families.
Yet, for all of the progress that we
have made, much work still remains,
and IDEA is still more at risk today
than it has ever been. This administration has recklessly conducted mass
layoffs across the Department of Education, with no regard for the impacts
on programs, school districts, students,
and families whom they serve.
Sadly, these firings have reached the
Office of Special Education Programs,
which administers IDEA, as well as the
Office for Civil Rights, which investigates cases of disability discrimination. Without these agencies and their
dedicated employees, parents would
have little recourse when schools fail
to protect their students and provide
appropriate accommodations.
From day one, it was obvious that
this administration wanted to transfer
IDEA oversight out of the Department
of Education entirely by moving it to
HHS, an agency with no expertise or
legal authority over special education.
Countless disability advocates have
sounded the alarm on this proposal. We
cannot let these attacks continue, and
we must also continue to call out the
vile rhetoric and misinformation about
disabilities in this country and around
the world that this administration has
spread.
Parents of students with disabilities
fight hard every single day for their
children, and there is no reason that
they should have to fight harder. I
came to Congress to be a voice for
those families and to ensure that our
country lives up to its promises and
our values.
That is why my very first bill was
the Protecting Students With Disabilities Act, which would protect IDEA
programs from the illegal dismantling
of the Department of Education. This
should be a bipartisan cause, as it has
long been, and we should be talking
more about fully funding IDEA and
strengthening it. Instead, we are left
defending it from political attacks.
I thank my colleague, Representative
HAYES, for organizing this discussion. I
also thank my fellow members of the
Education and Workforce Committee
for their commitment to maintaining
IDEA. As a fellow educator, I am proud
to stand with Representative HAYES in
this fight.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, as our
colleague on the committee from Or-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

egon makes her way to the podium, I
will just read an excerpt from an email
that I got from a parent in my district:
As a special needs mom, the current news
of the cuts happening in the special education department are frightening to me. I
am not well-versed in politics or government, and I don’t know how or if this will affect us in Connecticut, but I am my child’s
only advocate, and I can tell you that our
special education system is strained.
Please put yourself in the shoes of a special needs parent who relies on the staff to
tell them what happened at school because
their child cannot. I ask that you place yourself in the shoes of a parent who cannot afford out-of-pocket services and relies on the
public school system to provide speech, occupational, and behavioral services.
Please advocate for my child. I don’t even
know how to. I need you to do this for them.

Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Oregon (Ms. BONAMICI).
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Representative HAYES for leading this
important conversation and bringing
her expertise as National Teacher of
the Year to the Congress and to the
Education Committee.
Mr. Speaker, I have been an education advocate for decades, and I
speak with students, parents, and educators in Congress and at home in Oregon, and I can’t count the number of
times where parents have said to me:
Please, please fully fund IDEA.
According to the Department of Education, Secretary McMahon is now exploring additional partnerships to
move the administration of special
education programs under IDEA, the
Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act, to other Federal agencies. The
most likely choice for this unconstitutional and illegal transfer? It is to the
Department of Health and Human
Services.
Mr. Speaker, this means that Secretary Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., would
be in charge of administering IDEA.
This is the man who disregarded established science to advance policies based
on conspiracy theories, including
claiming that Tylenol and vaccines
cause autism and that autism destroys
families.
This agency should not be administering funding or providing guidance
to schools on educating students with
disabilities, especially with its current
Secretary.
IDEA is an education program, not a
medical program. It is designed to provide students with disabilities access
to a free and appropriate public education, often through individualized
education programs, or IEPs.
Those with the expertise and data to
best administer the program are already at the Department of Education,
or at least they were until Secretary
McMahon fired them.
A special education teacher in Beaverton, Oregon, recently wrote to my
office. She is extremely concerned, as
are so many, about the Trump administration’s plans for special education,
and this is what she said: ‘‘When I tell
you that schools are in dire straits already, I mean it—and yet I know it can
get worse.

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

I am terrified for my students. The
mass layoffs and restructuring within
the Department of Education’s Office
of Special Education have left only a
fraction of the staff to manage billions
in IDEA funds and ensure States follow
the law.’’
She continued: ‘‘Without Federal
oversight, States will have less accountability, fewer resources, and more
leeway to deny or reduce services.
Families will be left without recourse,
and the promise of a free and appropriate public education will be broken.’’
These are challenging enough times
for students, families, and schools. In
Portland, the public school district recently redirected an additional $25 million from their general fund to fill the
gap to help provide students with disabilities the resources that they need
that State and Federal funding aren’t
covering, and it is still not enough.
The Trump administration’s proposals to disrupt the administration on
such an important program risks further harming the people we represent.
A mother in Portland wrote to me and
said that she is a full-time caregiver,
has two sons with disabilities, and that
she has only been able to work 2 of the
last 8 years because of the lack of reliable care.
Unfortunately, she was just laid off
again from her most recent job.
She told me: ‘‘We are exhausted and
doing everything we can, but the system leaves too much on families.’’
She begged us to protect access to
services for students with disabilities
and to continue advocating for these
children and their caregivers. In her
words: ‘‘We need policies that recognize
the reality we’re living, not ones that
make it harder.’’
These are the families, teachers, and
the people who will be affected by decisions we make about IDEA. What we
should be doing is fully funding IDEA,
not disrupting the support that already
exists by forcing schools and families
to work with multiple Federal agencies
instead of one.
b 1900
HHS is not equipped to manage this
critical program. I will keep fighting. I
will keep fighting the Trump administration’s efforts to abandon and dismantle the Department of Education
and its core responsibility, especially
its core responsibility to students with
disabilities.
I thank Representative HAYES for her
leadership.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentlewoman from Ohio, Representative BROWN.
Ms. BROWN. Mr. Speaker, I thank
my friend, Congresswoman HAYES, for
hosting this Special Order Hour and for
her leadership on this critical issue.
Mr. Speaker, 50 years ago Congress
passed the Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, or IDEA, because
America rejected exclusion and finally
recognized a simple truth: Every child,

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.087

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

regardless of ability, deserves to learn,
grow, and succeed.
Yet, today, that promise is under attack. Disabled students are more vulnerable than ever, facing threats to
their funding, their services, and the
Federal protections that make equal
education possible.
At the same time, this administration is laying off the very civil servants whose job it is to protect those
children and enforce the law. When you
cut special education funding, cut the
Department of Education, and cut the
staff, no one can speak out for the children who need these programs the
most—children like my nephew RJ,
who was born premature and has dealt
with developmental delays all his life.
His condition requires special care and
attention. He didn’t choose to be disabled or to have additional needs, but
he is made in God’s image, and he deserves every opportunity to reach his
full potential.
Because of programs established by
IDEA, children like RJ can access the
same educational assistance and support that other students enjoy. I think
that is a good thing. I think that is
what should make America America,
but this White House disagrees.
The Trump administration believes
that the rights and opportunities available to students like RJ can and should
be limited. They have spun abandoning
programs as efficiency and told us that
they are cutting waste and saving you
money.
What it really is and what it really
costs is paid for by underserved students and their families, because without the protections and funding provided by IDEA, more students are left
behind. Without federally supported
services that help with early detection,
children are less able to navigate a
world that wasn’t built for them.
IDEA doesn’t provide special treatment. It provides children with fair and
inclusive treatment, and it doesn’t
waste Federal resources. It breaks
through the barriers that children with
disabilities face and levels the playing
field.
Today, that lifeline for children with
disabilities is under threat. In my own
State, nearly one in five students have
disabilities. That is more than a quarter million children in Ohio who rely
on IDEA programs to get the education
they need and deserve.
I have one question today: How exactly does gutting special education
programs and staffing make America
great? It doesn’t. We should be
strengthening IDEA, not weakening it.
We should be protecting civil rights,
not gutting them. We should be recommitting our promise to every child, not
pulling out the rug.
Mr. Speaker, I thank my friend, a
true champion in the education space,
for the leadership she has demonstrated on this critical and, yes, personal issue to me.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Representative BROWN. I think she

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H701

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

knows I will always fight for RJ and all
the kids like him.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Arizona and the newest
member of our committee, Representative GRIJALVA.
Mrs. GRIJALVA. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Congresswoman HAYES for her
leadership and advocacy.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak in
defense of one of the most important
civil rights laws Congress has ever
passed, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and to oppose the
dangerous and unlawful efforts to dismantle the Department of Education.
IDEA is not a suggestion. It is not
discretionary. It is the law of the land,
and for more than four decades, it has
represented a bipartisan commitment
that children with disabilities have the
right to a free, appropriate public education, one that meets their individual
needs and recognizes their full potential.
Before IDEA, millions of children
with disabilities were excluded from
classrooms, denied services, or told
they did not belong in public school at
all. IDEA changed that. It affirmed
that a disability does not diminish a
child’s worth and that access to education is a civil right, not a privilege
reserved for a few.
Today, more than 7 million students
across the country rely on IDEA for individualized education plans, services,
and due process protections. These are
real students whose ability to learn,
communicate, and thrive depends on
fulfilling the promises made in Federal
law.
Those promises are enforced, overseen, and protected by the Department
of Education.
The Department plays an essential
role in ensuring that IDEA is implemented fairly and consistently across
all States. It provides guidance, oversight, enforcement, and accountability.
Without it, IDEA becomes words on
paper with no meaningful guarantee.
Let us be clear. People cannot claim
to support students with disabilities
while dismantling the very agency responsible for protecting their rights.
Efforts to hollow out or get rid of the
Department of Education without congressional authorization are not only
reckless, they are illegal. Congress created IDEA. Congress assigned its enforcement. Attempting to undermine
that structure violates the law and the
Constitution’s separation of powers.
Without Federal oversight, enforcement of IDEA will vary widely from
State to State. A child’s access to services will depend on their ZIP Code.
Families will face confusion, delays,
and costly legal battles just to secure
what the law already guarantees their
children. States and school districts
will be left without clear guidance or
support, increasing litigation, and diverting resources away from classrooms. Families, especially those without financial or legal resources, will
pay the highest price.

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The measure of our commitment to
public education is how the students
who need us the most are treated, and
today, those students are watching.
I urge my colleagues to reject the efforts to weaken IDEA or dismantle the
Department of Education. Congress has
a legal obligation, a moral responsibility, and a constitutional duty to
protect students with disabilities and
ensure they receive the education they
deserve.
I will continue to stand with students, families, educators, and advocates, and I call on this body to do the
same.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from California, another
member of the Committee on Education and Workforce, Representative
TAKANO.
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, it is always an honor and a pleasure to work
with the gentlewoman from Connecticut, a distinguished National
Teacher of the Year and an amazing educator who, like myself, went from the
classroom to the Halls of Congress to
advocate for our students nationally.
The promise of a free and quality
education is a vital part of the American Dream. The embodiment of that
promise came in 1975 when Congress
passed the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act to ensure that children
with disabilities could receive a free,
fair, and equal education.
This landmark legislation changed
the lives of millions of Americans. The
disabled children’s right to an education would not only be recognized,
but it would be funded and enforced nationwide.
Today, 7.5 million students rely on
IDEA funding, and that is nearly one in
seven students whose specialized education is funded in part by the Department of Education.
Every school district in the country
has families that have benefited from
the IDEA, and its 50 years of enactment have improved public education
for all students. That is why the Trump
administration’s actions to gut staffing
at the Department of Education and
move the Office of Special Education
programs to the Department of Health
and Human Services is so devastating.
HHS does not have the structure, nor
the staff, to administer the $15 billion
a year that this office is responsible
for.
The administration also gutted the
Office of Civil Rights, which is responsible for investigating civil rights
abuses in schools. The OCR was responsible for ensuring that students with
disabilities got the quality education
they are entitled to and that cases of
neglect and abuse were duly prosecuted.
b 1910
With the Department of Education
fragmented, teachers and administrators won’t be able to access the resources they need; parents will be unable to get the proper support; and the

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.089

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H702

students will be the ones who pay the
price.
What is clear is that the Department
of Education is the only Department
equipped to be charged with the education of all students, including students with disabilities, not HHS, not
the Department of Labor, not the Department of Justice.
Creating more hoops for schools to
jump through and shattering known
systems and protocol will, at the end of
the day, hurt the students this administration claims they are protecting.
Republicans have not allowed IDEA
to be fully funded. Republicans are
looking to defund public schools, leaving parents with fewer choices and options in educating their children. Republicans’ obsession with dismantling
the Department of Education appears
to be the only education policy they
really have.
Our students need more. Our teachers
deserve more. Our schools require more
to fulfill the American promise of a
free and quality education for every
American child.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I would
just like to say as a teacher, when students with disabilities enter public
schools, they can’t be turned away.
You have to figure out what their
needs are. You have to meet with parents and the team to come up with a
plan and teach those students.
Unlike charter schools, for-profit
schools, or even some private schools,
which can decide that a student doesn’t
belong in their environment, at public
schools, all kids belong there. We just
have to figure out how to teach them.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Wisconsin (Ms. MOORE).
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman from Connecticut for yielding. It is so good to be
here with her.
I want to focus a little bit on the importance of bringing this to the floor
and perhaps even entering into a sort
of dialogue with Mrs. HAYES about it.
I am thinking that the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act came
around 50 years ago. Long before that
time, people recognized that education
was a game changer for anyone.
Frederick Douglass said that knowledge is the ‘‘pathway from slavery to
freedom,’’ and, ‘‘Once you learn to
read, you will be forever free.’’
We found that Brown v. Board of
Education really challenged the Equal
Protection Clause under the 14th
Amendment and made sure that little
Black children would be able to get an
education. Even before the Department
of Education was established, even before that, the IDEA was written into
law.
I bring all of that background up to
say that the Department of Education
was critical because when you think of
all the various laws that need to be administered to make sure that there is
equal protection, the IDEA just being
one of those laws, it is very disturbing
to see that the Department of Edu-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

cation has been stripped down to its
bare bones.
I would like the member of the Committee on Education and Workforce to
help me walk through it.
Am I right about this, that the administration has tried to illegally
move the IDEA office and funding from
the Department of Education to the
Department of Health and Human
Services?
I yield to the gentlewoman for a colloquy.
Mrs. HAYES. It has been floated, but
we haven’t seen any concrete plans,
which is part of the problem.
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. In the middle of the shutdown, was it true that
the Trump administration tried to fire
nearly everyone in the Department of
Education’s Office of Special Education
and Rehabilitation Services?
Mrs. HAYES. Yes. Many employees
were RIF’d at the Department of Education. I think even more concerning is
the Office of Civil Rights in the Department of Education, the number of staff
who were fired.
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin. The Office
of Civil Rights was put in there
through the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
This office is responsible for investigating thousands of allegations of
discrimination each year, which includes enforcing Federal laws, ensuring
equal educational access, and preventing discrimination.
Gentlewoman from Connecticut, am I
wrong about this? I think it is very important because what we have seen is
that so-called disabled people or differently abled people have made such
tremendous contributions to our culture and to our society. I am thinking
of very famous people like Thomas Edison, Franklin Roosevelt, and Fannie
Lou Hamer, people who have had polio,
who have been in wheelchairs, and
physicists who have contributed.
It is important to leave nobody behind because the education of everybody is important to our national security interests and our economic interests.
I am so happy that Mrs. HAYES has
raised this in this Special Order hour,
and I thank her for allowing me to participate.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman for her remarks.
I will say that I am uniquely positioned to speak about some of the
things that were brought up about
what happened to children before IDEA
was passed.
Before becoming a teacher, and, actually, while I was a teacher, I worked at
the Southbury Training School in Connecticut, which is a facility, an institution, that was established in the 1930s
for children with developmental and
mental disabilities.
Many of those people, who are now
adults, became institutionalized because they were placed in this facility.
With their disabilities, had a law like
this been in place, they could have
been able to thrive and live in their

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

community, but we put them behind
walls in institutions. We can never go
back to a time when that happens
again.
I thank Ms. MOORE for joining us tonight.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman
from
New
Jersey
(Mrs.
MCIVER).
Mrs. MCIVER. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman from Connecticut
(Mrs. HAYES) so much for leading this
Special Order hour.
Mr. Speaker, the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act and the Department of Education are vital to all
communities, including the one I represent.
Nearly one in five students in New
Jersey is served under IDEA. Without
this support, almost a quarter-million
students would be denied an adequate
education.
My district, New Jersey’s 10th Congressional District, receives $98 million
in title I and special education grants.
How will our schools support these students without these funds?
As a former education administrator,
I know firsthand the impact IDEA
funding makes on students who need it
the most. Without Federal funding,
States and local communities would
have to cover the costs, but your ZIP
Code should not determine if you deserve to have your children’s educational needs met.
As a public school mom, this is deeply personal for me. People in my community and communities across the
Nation are scared.
My office recently received a letter
from Alexander, a special education
and social studies teacher in my district. Alexander is worried about what
funding cuts would mean for his students, who are among the most vulnerable and underserved.
Too often, the most vulnerable
among us are forced to suffer from bad
policy decisions. In this country, the
richest one, we are supposed to find solutions for those who need our support,
not leave them behind.
This administration came to office
saying it was going to put Americans
first. These attacks on public education show they are putting children
last.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from New York (Mr.
KENNEDY).
Mr. KENNEDY of New York. Mr.
Speaker, first of all, let me thank Representative HAYES for her leadership in
hosting this Special Order hour.
This past November, we celebrated
the 50th anniversary of the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act, an incredible milestone that serves as a reminder of the promise we make to our
Nation’s children that every student,
no matter who they are or how they
learn, deserves equal access to a quality education.
b 1920
Yet, this anniversary comes at a
time when the Trump administration

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.091

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

continues its systematic efforts to
eliminate the Department of Education, gut the Office of Special Education Programs, and undermine IDEA,
a landmark law that fundamentally
changed how we educate children with
disabilities.
Since 1975, IDEA has provided immeasurable support to children with
disabilities, particularly for those in
their earliest and most formative
years. IDEA part C, a Federal program
closely intertwined the Medicaid, provides early intervention from birth to
age 3, oftentimes the difference between a child meeting developmental
milestones or falling behind.
These Federal dollars change millions of lives across the country every
single year. However, Trump and congressional Republicans have told American families that these investments
don’t matter, that their child’s future
does not count, and that Federal dollars are better spent elsewhere.
I am here to remind the American
people that the President’s shameless
assault on early intervention and Medicaid paints a grim picture for the future of special education and for the future of millions of children.
As an occupational therapist myself,
I have worked with children with developmental disabilities in their earliest years, and I have seen what happens when we make good on our promise to invest in special education and
early intervention. Early intervention
care alters the course of a child’s life
for the better, dramatically improves
health and educational outcomes, and
gives working families the support
they desperately need.
Republicans in this body need to remember the sacred promise made to
children with disabilities 50 years ago
and stand by it rather than turn a
blind eye. Democrats will not sit idly
by as this administration jeopardizes
our children’s futures and undermines
the fundamental right to an education.
These aren’t budget cuts. These are
broken promises to children with disabilities. We cannot build a stronger
nation by cutting off critical support
for those who need it most. We must
fully fund and support the essential
mission and fulfill the commitment of
the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentlewoman from Michigan (Ms.
TLAIB), who is a champion for children.
Ms. TLAIB. Mr. Speaker, I thank my
sister
in
service,
Congresswoman
HAYES, who has been leading this fight
to protect our children, especially
making sure that we have access to
public education and quality education
for all of our children.
Alongside millions of children, including children with disabilities and
their families, we are demanding that
Congress fulfill its promise.
Nearly 50 years ago, Congress passed
the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, IDEA, with a commitment
that every child, including students

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H703

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

with disabilities, meet their full potential in every classroom and to ensure
also that every family has the services
they need for their children to succeed.
We didn’t say educate children with
disabilities if it is convenient. We
didn’t say protect their rights unless
the budgets are too tight or we don’t
have enough money. We made a promise. We made a promise to fund 40 percent of the cost of IDEA. That promise
was never kept. The Federal share is
now less than 12 percent.
According to the Autism Alliance of
Michigan, Michigan ranks among the
lowest in the Nation for special education outcomes, due to massive underfunding by our Federal Government.
Students with disabilities in Michigan
are twice as likely to drop out of
school as their peers. Only 60 percent
graduate high school in 4 years, compared to 85 percent among their other
peers.
Right now, we are seeing special education under direct and deliberate attack. We have seen repeated efforts to
slash education funding, weaken civil
rights enforcement and chip away at
the protections IDEA guarantees to
our students with disabilities.
Every dollar we fail to invest in
IDEA is a cost shifted onto our schools,
our local communities, our families,
and our children, who are already feeling financial strain.
Our families are counting on us. Congress cannot continue to fall short on
our students and families regarding
funding when so much is at stake. We
must fulfill our promise and fund
IDEA.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentlewoman from California (Ms.
SIMON), to speak on this very important issue.
Ms. SIMON. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Congresswoman HAYES for bringing us
here tonight.
Mr. Speaker, America, this country,
has long promised that every child has
a right to learn. That promise exists
because parents, not just this Chamber,
parents, refused to give up on their
children’s future.
Mr. Speaker, one of those parents
was my mother, Vicki Simon. I was
born with congenital blindness, and my
mother in the early seventies was on
the phone consistently, day after day
to ensure that I entered a school that
would be there for me, that would ensure that I had assistance and support,
and that I would read large print with
power.
I am thankful for teachers and educators, like the gentlewoman, who
brought children like me in front of the
board. I was so happy to cosponsor the
See the Board Act. It should be in this
Chamber, and we should be voting to
ensure that while the Republicans take
away healthcare from families and disabled children, those deaf and those
blind, that they get education and
screening at their schools of choice.
We are also here because advocates
refused to be silent because Congress

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

recognized that an equal education is
the foundation of any democratic society.
Before these protections, young people with disabilities around the country were not only silenced, they were
institutionalized. Families were told to
stay quiet while bright and brilliant
minds were dismissed, and today that
door is closing again, eerily quickly because of the Trump administration’s
reckless and cruel agenda.
Mr. Speaker, if you would ask any
parent of a disabled child in this country regardless how they vote, red or
blue, if you ask them if they knew that
the Department of Education—yes, we
want to trim it down—but the very department, the Office of Civil Rights,
was all but being severed, and you let
them know what the Office of Civil
Rights did: The Office of Civil Rights in
the Department of Education ensures
that every rape on a college campus in
this country is investigated. If the city
decides not to investigate, then the Office of Civil Rights comes in.
The Office of Civil Rights investigates for the mother and the child
who uses the wheelchair when the
school says they don’t need a ramp.
The Office of Civil Rights literally
provides constant oversight over every
school district in this country so that a
child in Alabama has the same rights
to an education as their disabled peer
in California.
Let’s make it clear: We are not talking about any progressive agenda here.
We are talking about letting it be
known in this country that the Trump
administration is literally taking away
investigators who will oversee the educational progress of disabled children.
Tens of thousands of families are
waiting for justice and their cases to be
investigated. These are not statistics;
these are real families that we serve.
Did Congress ever intend this?
Did the administration ever intend to
block away rights and responsibilities
of folks who are supposed to oversee
the rightful education of disabled children?
The American people will not accept
this.
b 1930
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman from California and
again thank her for cosponsoring that
piece of legislation with me. I understand that if a child can’t see the
board, they can’t learn. Her enthusiasm when I brought it to her is exactly why we need people from diverse
perspectives in this Chamber.
I now yield to the gentlewoman from
Hawaii (Ms. TOKUDA). I thank her so
much for the work that she does on behalf of children in her home State.
Ms. TOKUDA. Mr. Speaker, only 50
years ago, we made a promise as a nation. When Congress passed the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act, we affirmed a simple and profound
truth: Every child, no matter their disability or ability, has the right to a

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.093

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H704

free and appropriate public education;
not as charity, not as an afterthought,
but as a civil right.
Let’s be honest. That promise has
never been self-executing. Making
IDEA real has required vigorous Federal oversight, strong civil rights enforcement, litigation when necessary,
strong parents who demand only the
best for their child, and a willingness
to demand more—not less—resources
and accountability.
That is why the Trump administration’s dismantling of the Department
of Education, the decimation of special
education
enforcement,
and
the
hollowing out of the Office for Civil
Rights is so dangerous. This is not reform. This is retreat. It will set public
education back more than 50 years.
In Hawaii, we know what happens
when FAPE is treated as optional. The
Felix Consent Decree raised the alarm
more than 30 years ago that we were
failing our children. We are the tenth
largest school district in the Nation.
One in ten of our students have an IEP.
Many live on our neighbor islands in
rural and remote communities, where
even access to services or reliable
internet is a challenge. Federal enforcement is not abstract to us. It is
the difference between support and neglect.
The reality is, IDEA has also been an
unfunded mandate. You have heard it
here today from my colleagues. The
Federal Government once promised to
cover 40 percent of the cost. It has
never met that promise, never rising
above 10 or 12 percent at best. Now, instead of finally doing what we owe our
children, our families, our communities, this administration wants to
walk away altogether.
I am a proud product of our public
schools. I am a proud parent of public
school students, and I believe deeply
that an injury to one is an injury and
insult to all.
The
dismantling,
defunding,
destaffing, restructuring of the Department of Education is death by a thousand cuts. If we allow this to continue,
if we walk back all the gains we have
made as a result of IDEA, it will leave
all our children behind.
We must not, cannot let this happen,
and I assure you, all of us here today
on this floor will stand in the way of
the destruction of the Department of
Education and the demise of the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I now
yield to the gentlewoman from New
Mexico (Ms. STANSBURY), a fearless advocate for children and her constituents.
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today first in thanks to our fearless
leader, Representative HAYES, today,
but Mr. Speaker, I rise today to sound
the alarm on what is happening at the
U.S. Department of Education or at
least what is left of it.
For millions of students with disabilities, the IDEA, or Individuals with

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

Disabilities Education Act, is a landmark civil rights law that guarantees a
free and inclusive public education for
all students.
However, under the Trump administration, IDEA is under attack, with the
administration announcing at the
height of the government shutdown in
October that it would fire nearly all of
the staff responsible for ensuring that
students with disabilities have access
to resources and support services.
Can you imagine? It is not just reckless, it is not just illegal. It is heartless, and it is disgusting.
Piled onto continuing cuts and
threats to other programs of vulnerable families, the President and the
GOP have continued to cut healthcare,
education, food assistance, housing,
and childcare to millions of American
families, attacking the very families
who need it most while giving billionaires tax breaks on the backs of hardworking Americans. It is shameful.
Mr. Speaker, I want to address the
administration’s attacks on education
and what these actions mean for all
students, but especially students with
disabilities, their educators, and their
families. The Department of Education
exists to ensure that every student has
access to opportunity, to protect their
civil rights, to ensure that every student has a fair shot at success.
However, since day one, this administration has systematically dismantled
the department, with budget cuts, cutting programs, delaying grants, and firing staff. Over the course of the last
year, my office has heard from hundreds of parents, teachers, and students
who are scared about what is happening and wondering what will come
next: from teachers and counselors who
are stretched thin and uncertain about
whether or not resources will be there
next year, from schools who don’t
know if their funding will be cut, and
from young people, the very children
that these programs serve, who are
afraid because this administration is
terrorizing the children of this country
by attacking education and schools and
their families, attacking the most vulnerable families.
I have to say this, Mr. Speaker, there
is no demand for this. There is no one
out there in the American public who
is demanding that we cut programs for
students and young people with disabilities because it is cruel, wrong, and illegal. It must stop.
That is why Democrats are standing
here tonight: to stand up for our students, to stand up for our young people,
to fight back against these attacks,
and to take a stand against the dismantling of these vital programs.
Let me just say this: In New Mexico,
we understand that our young people
are our future. That is why we are the
first State in the Nation to pass universal free childcare and education for
every single student in our State.
I, for one, as a public school kid, was
deeply proud to carry the Federal enabling legislation. It is why I fought for

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

funding to build new schools at
To’hajiilee, Sandia Pueblo, and Mescalero Apache. It is why I am carrying
legislation to increase teacher pay, to
protect BIE in Tribal schools, to create
a postsecondary pathway of success for
students with disabilities, veterans,
and first-generation students. It is why
I have supported New Mexico also becoming the first State in the country
to guarantee free trade school and free
college for every single New Mexican.
That is how you should be transforming education, that is how you deliver for communities, and that is how
you care for the children that we have
been blessed to take care of in our role
and prepare the next generation of
leaders.
I will say this to Mr. Trump: While
he and his colleagues may not believe
in the power of public education or
civil rights or the need to protect children—because their actions speak as
loud as their words—we do. We believe
in investing in education from early
childhood education to higher education, and everything in between, and
we will continue to use every tool at
our disposal to fight back at every turn
and honor our commitment to the students of this country. I, for one, and all
of us will not stand by and allow this
to happen.
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman from New Mexico and
all my colleagues who showed up tonight. I really thought I would be
standing here for an hour reading
emails from my constituents and telling the stories of the hundreds of students with disabilities that I have
taught in my classroom, telling the
stories of how we met them where they
were and made accommodations so
that they could thrive and really learn.
I can’t express to you what it feels
like as a teacher when you have a student who is struggling or has a disability and you see the moment where
they get it, the moment where the lesson breaks through and they are receiving the information in the same
way as the other students in the classroom.
I want to make sure that those students can continue to be educated
alongside their nondisabled peers and
not put in a basement or behind a wall
at an institution. I also want to make
sure that even if a child doesn’t have a
strong parent advocate or a strong
family at home that they, too, will
have people in their public schools
fighting for them, that they, too, will
still have the services that they need
and deserve.
The Secretary of Education has often
said that her final mission is to close
the Department. I would like to put
her and everyone else on notice that I,
too, am on a mission, on a mission to
make sure that not only the kids that
were in my classroom and in my State
of Connecticut, but kids all across the
country know that they have the right
to a high-quality public education,
know that it is our responsibility to

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.095

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

make sure that they thrive and are
prepared for life and being self-sufficient.
Again, I thank all of my colleagues
for showing up tonight, and I will continue to fight not only for these children and these families, but for all of
the educators who stand in front of
them and pour their heart out so that
they can meet their needs.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

b 1940
ICE UNDER ATTACK
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. ROY of Texas
was recognized for 60 minutes as the
designee of the majority leader.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentlewoman from South Carolina
(Mrs. BIGGS).
RECOGNIZING THE SOUTH CAROLINA NATIONAL
GUARD

Mrs. BIGGS of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentleman from
Texas for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize
and thank the brave men and women of
the South Carolina National Guard
who are currently deployed here in
Washington, D.C.
I have been fortunate to spend time
with these young men and women on
several occasions during their mission.
I have shared a meal with the guardsmen. I visited as they prepared for patrol. I have seen them in action while
on duty.
I also thank the families, spouses,
and loved ones back home who carry
the weight while their Guard members
serve here in D.C. The families’ sacrifice and strength are a vital part of a
successful mission. Their dedication reflects the values we hold dear in South
Carolina. I am grateful to Governor
McMaster for standing firmly behind
them on this important mission.
Mr. Speaker, in the coming days, I
will be introducing legislation to ensure our guardsmen are better protected and supported, both during deployments like this and beyond.
God bless our military. South Carolina stands with you, and so do I.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SUICIDE IS AT CRISIS LEVELS IN THE COUNTRY

Mrs. BIGGS of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, suicide is at crisis levels in
the country, and this year it is hitting
heartbreaking highs in my own district.
As a psychiatric mental health nurse
practitioner, I have met with families
in the hardest moments of their lives,
and I have seen what happens when the
system fails to connect with someone
in a crisis to get the help that they
may need.
That is why I have introduced the
Hope Heals Act. When an individual is
in crisis, they don’t need a maze of red
tape. They need intervention, a professional to see them, to listen, and to
act.
My bill is about making sure families
don’t get left in the dark. It is about

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H705

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

giving communities better tools to recognize when something is wrong and
the confidence to respond before it is
too late.
No one should have to fight the system to save a life. The Hope Heals Act
is about honoring the God-given value
of every life and making sure help is
there when it is needed most.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
join me in this mission.
Mr. ROY. Mr. Speaker, I thank the
gentlewoman from South Carolina,
particularly for her shout-out to the
National Guard from her own State
that has been deployed to the District
of Columbia.
Unfortunately, that has been necessary, and I am proud of the President
for trying to make sure that we secure
the Nation’s Capital. They are one of
the many National Guard units that
have been deployed to do the job that
the people of D.C. should be doing if
they were competent and if they were
doing what they are supposed to do as
the Nation’s Capital. The President is
taking charge, and he is leading to ensure that our Nation’s Capital is safe
for the American people to come visit.
I will note that, relatedly, when we
are talking about the state of law enforcement and the state of the security
of the American people, we have heard
a lot of criticisms from my colleagues
on the other side of the aisle, both in
the House and Senate and generally
around the country, directed at the
great men and women of ICE, the law
enforcement agency that is dedicated
to the task of removing illegal aliens
and, in particular, dangerous illegal
aliens from the streets of the United
States of America according to the
law.
They are particularly focusing on
and targeting those individuals—I believe the number is around 1.5 million
people who are currently in the United
States under orders of removal. That
is, they have gone through the process.
Judges in this country have ordered
the removal of 1.5 million people, and
ICE is tasked with removing them.
Hundreds of thousands of them are
dangerous individuals who have committed crimes in their home countries,
who are trafficking narcotics, and who
have been engaging in criminal behavior in the United States of America.
What do my Democratic colleagues
do? They stand up in defense of criminals, of criminal illegal aliens, and are
in constant attack on the men and
women of ICE.
Let’s just go through some recent
criticisms of the great men and women
who are working for ICE:
Minnesota
Governor
Tim
Walz
smeared ICE officers as a ‘‘threat’’ to
the public, called ICE reckless, suggested the State is at war with Federal
officers and under attack by ICE, and
smeared ICE as the ‘‘modern-day Gestapo.’’
California Governor Gavin Newsom
likened ICE to ‘‘secret police,’’ calling
them authoritarian, and calling on the
people to push back.

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Illinois
Governor
JB
Pritzker
claimed ICE is turning the country
into Nazi Germany.
New York Governor Kathy Hochul
accused ICE of ‘‘terrorizing people.’’
Pennsylvania Governor Josh Shapiro
claimed ICE officers ‘‘make our neighborhoods less safe.’’
Minnesota
Lieutenant
Governor
Peggy Flanagan said ICE officers
caused ‘‘chaos and terror.’’
Senator CHUCK SCHUMER declared
that ICE does not belong in our neighborhoods.
Senator TINA SMITH called ICE ‘‘a
clear and present threat.’’
Senator JOHN HICKENLOOPER smeared
ICE as a ‘‘reign of terror.’’
Senator JEFF MERKLEY likened ICE
operations to ‘‘fascism’’ and claimed
officers are doing nothing but ‘‘terrorizing our communities.’’
Senator BERNIE SANDERS asked people to ‘‘stop ICE from what they are
doing as soon as possible.’’
Senator ELIZABETH WARREN claimed
ICE is ‘‘intentionally stok[ing] fear and
tear[ing] communities apart.’’
Senator RUBEN GALLEGO said ICE exists ‘‘to scare the American public.’’
Senator MARK WARNER equated ICE
officers to a brutal dictator.
Senator DICK BLUMENTHAL accused
ICE of spreading ‘‘lawlessness and
recklessness.’’
Senator ALEX PADILLA accused ICE
of ‘‘indiscriminate violence.’’
Senator DICK DURBIN accused ICE’s
officers of committing ‘‘atrocities.’’
Representative ILHAN OMAR said ICE
is ‘‘state violence,’’ called officers ‘‘vile
and beyond cruel,’’ and stated ‘‘abolishing ICE is not enough.’’
Representative PRAMILA JAYAPAL
called ICE officers ‘‘deranged,’’ accused
them of ‘‘kidnapping,’’ said ‘‘resistance’’ to ICE is ‘‘inspiring,’’ and
claimed ICE officers will ‘‘shoot at you
and kill you.’’
Representative
ERIC
SWALWELL
smeared ICE officers as ‘‘masked
thugs,’’
called
them
‘‘terrorizing
bandit[s],’’ said it was his ‘‘priority’’ to
ensure officers are ‘‘no longer faceless,’’ compared them to the KGB, and
demanded they ‘‘stay the f— out of
California.’’
Representative JASMINE CROCKETT
compared ICE to ‘‘slave patrols’’ and
called them thugs.
Representative DELIA RAMIREZ said
DHS ‘‘is the single biggest threat to
public safety right now.’’ I will repeat:
She said DHS ‘‘is the single biggest
threat to public safety right now’’ and
attacked ICE as a ‘‘terror force.’’
Representative SUMMER LEE said ICE
is ‘‘out of control’’ and ‘‘a police
state.’’
Representative AYANNA PRESSLEY
called ICE ‘‘a rogue, violent agency’’
that ‘‘has no business in our communities’’ and ‘‘must be abolished,’’ and
accused ICE of ‘‘terrorizing our communities.’’
Representative
APRIL
MCCLAIN
DELANEY called ICE ‘‘lawless.’’
Representative ALEXANDRIA OCASIOCORTEZ called ICE ‘‘an anticivilian

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.096

H13JAPT1

H706

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

force’’ and said they ‘‘should not
exist.’’
Representative RASHIDA TLAIB said
ICE is ‘‘terrorizing our communities’’
and ‘‘turning our country into a fascist
police state,’’ called it a ‘‘rogue agency,’’ and called for it to be abolished.
Representative JULIE JOHNSON excused violence against ICE as people
‘‘channeling that frustration.’’
Representative LAURA FRIEDMAN said
ICE officers are ‘‘terrorizing our
friends and neighbors . . . and bringing
chaos and violence to our streets.’’
I have dozens more of these. I could
continue to fill time on the House floor
by going through the absolute vitriolic
attacks on the people of ICE, literally
another 30 in the list that I could read
off. That is what is occurring on a
daily basis and is directed at the people
of ICE.
Now, I will give you a tale of two
choices. I want you to look at and
make a decision here about who you
want to focus on. Over here, we have
victims of dangerous illegal aliens that
were in the United States of America.
Over here, we have five Americans who
are no longer with us.
We have Kayla Hamilton, a 20-yearold woman with autism living in Aberdeen, Maryland, who was savagely
strangled to death by an illegal alien,
an MS–13 gang member released by
Biden at the border.
b 1950
Mr. Speaker, we have Sergeant Brandon Mendoza from Arizona, a 13-year
Mesa Police Department veteran, who
was struck by a previously convicted
illegal alien who was drunk when he
struck Brandon.
Somewhat
probably
most
infamously, we have Laken Hope Riley.
Riley was a 22-year-old nursing student
who attended Augusta University. She
was killed by a Tren de Aragua gang
member illegally paroled into the
country under Joe Biden.
We have Rachel Morin, a 37-year-old
Maryland mother of five. While going
out for a walk, she was raped and murdered by an illegal alien who snuck
across the border under Biden.
We have Jocelyn Nungaray, a woman
whose mother I have gotten to know, a
woman whose mother I invited to join
us at the inauguration of President
Trump a year ago because of her courage for standing up and calling out the
lawlessness of the people who have
been released on the streets of this
country and that resulted in the death
of her daughter, Jocelyn.
Jocelyn was a 12-year-old girl in
Houston, who was out for a walk, when
two Venezuelan illegal aliens released
under Biden forced her under a bridge
and forced her to take off her clothes
before she was savagely killed in Houston, Texas, my home State.
Do you want to know what? Their
lives mattered. Those individuals’ lives
mattered. My colleagues on the other
side of the aisle, whether they are in
this Chamber or in the other Chamber

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

or in State houses across this country,
my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle want to ignore what has happened
to these five Americans.
By the way, they are simply the faces
of hundreds of thousands of Americans
who have lost their lives violently
through narcotics, through fentanyl,
through drunk drivers, through murder, through rape, and through intimidation.
They represent a large block of
Americans suffering at the hands of
people who have been released on our
streets purposely for crass political
purposes by my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle. The fact is that has
left us with a current situation that is
even worse.
I will go through a few more. Then I
want to bring my colleagues into this
conversation.
Here behind me, after all of the eruption over what has occurred in Minnesota, where there has been a lot of
vitriol directed at ICE in Minnesota,
let us look at these individuals right
here. These represent about eighteen
individuals who are the people that ICE
has been arresting in Minnesota. There
has been a lot of news over one incident in Minnesota.
What we have here is a Somalian illegal alien convicted of homicide.
We have a Salvadorian illegal alien
convicted of three counts of homicide
with a deportation order since June of
2025.
We have a Mexican illegal convicted
of homicide, who was previously deported in 2002.
We have a Sudanese illegal alien convicted of homicide.
We have a Laotian illegal alien convicted of two counts of homicide with a
deportation order since 2009.
We have an illegal alien from Sierra
Leon convicted of two counts of homicide with a deportation order since
2022.
We have a Mexican illegal alien convicted of homicide with a deportation
order since 2015.
We have a Somalian illegal alien convicted of manslaughter with a deportation order since 2022.
We have a Sudanese illegal alien convicted of attempt to commit homicide,
weapons possession, and DUI.
We have a Guatemalan illegal alien
convicted of negligent homicide with a
vehicle and a DUI with a deportation
order since 2022.
We have a Burmese illegal alien convicted of negligent homicide.
We have another Laotian illegal
alien convicted of the strong-arm rape
of a 12-year-old girl and kidnapping a
child with intent to sexually assault
her with a deportation order since 2024.
We have a Laotian illegal alien convicted of strong-arm rape, aggravated
assault with a weapon, and strangulation with a deportation order since
2012.
We have a Laotian illegal alien convicted of rape and child fondling with a
deportation order since 2003.

PO 00000

Frm 00044

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

We have a Laotian illegal alien convicted of rape, rape with a weapon, and
sexual assault with a deportation order
since 1996.
We have a Mexican illegal alien convicted of sexual assault of a child and
DUI with a deportation order since
2016.
We have a Laotian illegal alien convicted of a strong-arm sodomy of a boy
and a strong-arm sodomy of a girl with
a deportation order since 2018.
We have a Laotian illegal alien convicted of sexual assault and sodomy of
a girl under age 13 and procuring a
child for prostitution with a deportation order since 2006.
These are the individuals in Minnesota that ICE—who is being attacked, criticized, and demonized by
my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle—went out, risked their lives, and
put their lives on the line to remove
these people from our streets so that
our children and our families might be
safe.
No, I am not going to apologize for
ICE. No, I am not going to join in the
bandwagon of criticism against ICE.
Yes, you review procedures. Yes, you
make sure you do things by the book
and that people have due process.
When we are talking about people
who are on our streets, as guests of our
country, and they are committing violence against the people of our country, let’s remember we have a duty to
remove them, deport them, and do it
immediately and swiftly.
Let’s flip the page real quick. I have
a couple more. Let’s look beyond just
Minnesota. Remember that when you
have dangerous people in places like
Minnesota and lawless States like California and New York, where you have
sanctuary cities, then there are dangerous people throughout our country,
too.
This is just the worst of the worst
from yesterday, just yesterday.
In Virginia, a 20-year-old citizen of
Guatemala was convicted for possessing obscene material of a minor
and filming child porn.
In my home State of Texas, a criminal illegal alien from Mexico was convicted for aggravated assault of a family member in Harris County.
In New York, a criminal illegal alien
from Jamaica was convicted for burglary.
A criminal illegal alien from Mexico
was convicted for burglary.
A criminal illegal alien from El Salvador was convicted for false imprisonment and battery.
That was just yesterday. Let’s look
real quick at the worst of the worst
from 2025 generally, not just yesterday.
In Louisiana, we have a sexual predator, an illegal alien from Honduras,
whose criminal history includes active
warrants for 394 counts of pornography
involving juveniles and two counts of
sexual abuse of an animal.
In Kansas, a violent criminal illegal
alien from Mexico was sentenced to 20
years in prison for one count of forcible

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.098

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

assault on a Federal officer after he
violently punched an ICE officer and
attempted to strangle the officer with
his own badge cord.
In Virginia, an Afghan national who
entered the United States under Joe
Biden’s ‘‘Operation Allies Welcome,’’
provided support to the Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria and his father is a
commander of a militia group in Afghanistan.
In Nebraska, an illegal alien from
Honduras and a leader of MS–13, also
known as Fantasma, was wanted in his
home country for a quadruple homicide. After being charged with firearms
charges in Honduras, he allegedly
bribed his way out of jail and illegally
entered the United States.
In Houston, the criminal history of
an illegal alien from El Salvador included convictions for sexual assault of
a child under 17, multiple DUIs, child
fondling, and illegally reentering the
United States previously. When ICE
conducted an enforcement operation in
November to arrest him, he brutally
beat an ICE officer with a metal coffee
cup. He caused a severe laceration of
the officer’s mouth and burns to the officer’s face.
Where are my Democratic colleagues’
concern about the ICE officer who put
his life on the line and gets mauled and
has a laceration across his face because
he is trying to stop murderers, rapists,
and child pornographers from being on
American streets?
In my home State of Texas, Jose
Alfredo Uzeta, a criminal illegal alien
from Mexico, operated a dental clinic
and performed dental procedures on patients, despite not having a license for
more than 20 years. His clinic was uncovered after one of his former patients
reported he was convicted of a dentistry act violation and indecent assault.
Another criminal illegal alien and
his family members ran a sex trafficking operation where they would approach women and girls, some as young
as 14, and lure them to the United
States under promises of jobs.
That is all these people right here.
That is these people right here.
We have a criminal illegal alien from
Vietnam who has been convicted 25
times for crimes including possession
of a controlled substance; second-degree robbery; cruelty toward the elderly; arson property; taking vehicle without consent; and theft.
b 2000
I could go on and on. Those are the
people who ICE is trying to get off of
our streets.
Here is the question. This is how I
want to open up a conversation with
my good friend from Pennsylvania,
SCOTT PERRY—a great American and
somebody I am proud to serve with
here in this Congress and proud to
serve with in the House Freedom Caucus.
I will yield to the gentleman from
Pennsylvania in colloquy about how he

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H707

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

views whose side we are on. That is
what I want to know: Whose side are
we on?
Are we on the side of American citizens—Americans, including some immigrants and immigrant families, like
beautiful Jocelyn Nungaray—are we on
their side or Officer Mendoza? Or are
we on the side of violent criminals
whom ICE is trying to remove from our
streets?
It sure seems like my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle are on their
side. They are on the bad guys’ side.
There really are white hats and black
hats, and you have to choose. They are
on the bad guys’ side.
They are not standing with ICE, not
standing with law enforcement, not
standing up to defend the law enforcement officers who are putting their
lives on the line to keep these guys off
of our streets so that these Americans
aren’t killed.
I just wonder if my friend from Pennsylvania has a similar view that it
ought to be easy to choose sides, and if
my friend from Pennsylvania, like me,
chooses to side with Border Patrol and
ICE and law enforcement and local law
enforcement to protect Americans
against violent thugs and criminals on
our streets?
Madam Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from Pennsylvania for the purpose of a colloquy.
Mr. PERRY. Madam Speaker, I
thank the gentleman from Texas, and I
surely appreciate his passion. It is
well-deserved.
I am so heartbroken for our country.
In the past, Democrats and Republicans might not have agreed on maybe
the path to get to where we were going,
how we were going to do it, sometimes
not even where we were going. Yet we
loved our country, and we understood
what our job was here: to support and
represent America.
How can it be that we live in a society—people will say—I am sure they
say it to you, CHIP: You are so divided.
Why can’t you people in Washington,
D.C., get along?
They will say to me: Representative,
why can’t you work with your colleagues on the other side of the aisle?
I want to. We look for every opportunity to, and I am just going to tell
you: Look, I am going to call it the
way I see it because my eyes aren’t
lying.
My friends on the other side of the
aisle will tell you, will tell everybody,
will try and get pictures: We stand
with law enforcement. We stand with
the police. We support them. Whatever
they need, we are there.
They want to convince you of that
because, of course, as law-abiding
American citizens, it is the right thing
to do.
Representative ROY, when I was
growing up, if there was a criminal
running down the street and an officer
was chasing him, somebody would be a
Good Samaritan and stick their leg out
or say: He went that way and help out.

PO 00000

Frm 00045

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

But we are literally living in some
dystopia where they say that somehow
it is different because it is ICE. It is
different because we can say ICE; Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
It is no different. These officers are
no different than your local township
police; the State police; Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms; the U.S. marshals.
The good guys, that is who they are.
My colleagues on the other side of
the aisle literally are defending these
people who came here to murder, rape,
and rob. That is who they are defending. They are literally defending—there
is no other way to cut it.
Rachel Morin died about 30 miles
from my house. I don’t live close to the
Texas border. This is everywhere. Representative ROY and I both have daughters, 12 years old. Jocelyn Nungaray
was 12 years old and was heinously
murdered by two people allowed to
come and stay here illegally. These are
animals who did this.
Mr. ROY. Gang members. Tren de
Aragua gang members who took her
under a bridge in Houston, Texas, for
the last moments of her life, raping her
and killing her, and her beautiful
mother today is standing up and saying: Enough. Enough.
We should enforce our laws. We
should stand with law enforcement
against the thugs and the gang members who are killing Americans, including Jocelyn, Officer Mendoza, Laken
Riley, Rachel Morin, and Kayla Hamilton.
Why do I know their names? It is because I met their families, and I have
talked to them, and they are human
beings. They were Americans who were
living their lives and going to college
and going to school and serving their
country, and they are dead because
people decided, for political purposes,
that they wanted to flood our streets
with gang members from Venezuela
and criminals instead of protecting
Americans.
Mr. PERRY. You are right, CHIP.
There are the good guys, and, unfortunately, there are the bad guys; there
just are.
No one would think—I will just try to
put it in any context I can. If I am
driving down the highway and I see a
police officer who has pulled somebody
over for a traffic infraction, I don’t
stop and get involved and say: Whoa,
whoa, whoa, what is going on here, Officer? How do you know—what do you
think you are doing?
I don’t understand why people who
are getting involved in law enforcement activities don’t understand that
they are obstructing justice. Pulling in
front of Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials who are trying to
remove people from our country, who
are here illegally and have had their
due process, is not acceptable in any
manner, shape, or form.
There is no one here who will do
more to defend your First Amendment
liberties to protest and seek redress
from your government.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.100

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H708

Mr. ROY. That is right.
Mr. PERRY. But protesting does not
mean impeding law enforcement. It
does not mean blocking streets. It does
not mean getting on an app on your
phone—that is supported by George
Soros—to track Immigration and Customs Enforcement, law enforcement officers, the law enforcement police, and
track them down and impede their
work to keep everybody else in the
community safe.
Do you know what that is, Representative ROY? I have the definition
right here. That is sedition is what
that is. That is exactly what it is. No
one wants to say it, but we are seeing
it happen.
This is among Americans in our
country. These are our neighbors.
These are people right here in every
town who somehow think that, suddenly, it is okay. Now, there unfortunately has been a death.
The death that happened recently is
so tragic and unfortunate. Ms. Good,
who lost her life, she could have protested peacefully and sought redress
for the things that she thought were
wrong about her government that
should be changed. But she made a decision to inject herself into law enforcement, impede law enforcement,
and make it a dangerous circumstance
where an officer of the law had to make
a split-moment decision about his life
and also the lives of other people in his
community.
Madam Speaker, Representative ROY,
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
officials live in your town. They are
just like the township cop that you
know who stands by your school in the
morning when your kids are getting off
the bus. They are the same people.
They are the same people.
How is it that my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle can somehow
make book and tell you that you must
support violent murderers, rapists, robbers, gang members, drug traffickers,
and human traffickers? It couldn’t be
more black and white, and it is so disappointing.
Mr. ROY. And what we are talking
about, again, at the risk of repetition:
A Somali illegal alien convicted of
homicide, a Salvadoran illegal alien
convicted of three counts of homicide,
a Mexican illegal alien convicted of
homicide, a Sudanese illegal alien convicted of homicide, a Laotian illegal
alien convicted of two counts of homicide, and I could go through all 18
again.
These are violent individuals. These
were all on the streets of Minnesota.
Minnesota ICE was on the streets trying to track down these people, and the
radical left, our colleagues on the other
side of the aisle, want to side with
these guys.
Mr. PERRY. I just have to ask you in
this colloquy, Representative ROY from
Texas: You say, ‘‘the radical left,’’ but
I listened to you rattle off the statements of elected officials.
Mr. ROY. Yes.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. PERRY. Not just Members of
Congress, but Members of the United
States Senate.
Mr. ROY. Yes.
Mr. PERRY. Governors of States, including the one that I come from. Is
this the radical left, or are they our
Democratic colleagues on the other
side of the aisle?
b 2010
Which one of our Democrat colleagues from the other side of the aisle,
whether at the Federal level, the State,
or the local level has come out to denounce the treatment by law enforcement at the hands of these people that
are trying to thwart them and put
their lives in danger for the sake of
murderers? Which ones? Do you know
of any?
Mr. ROY. I have not heard one, but I
have heard—and I read 30 of them before. How about Boston Mayor Michelle
Wu comparing ICE officers to a NeoNazi group.
Chicago Mayor Brandon Johnson accusing ICE of being ‘‘secret police’’ who
are ‘‘terrorizing our communities’’ and
a lawless, racist force.
New York City’s Zohran Mamdani
said: ICE enforcement is ‘‘an attack on
us all.’’
New Jersey State Senator Britnee
Timberlake threatened that ICE officers ‘‘ . . . will find themselves in the
same position as those who carried out
the illegal acts in Nazi Germany. . . . ’’
Mr. PERRY. It is so outrageous.
Mr. ROY. Minneapolis City Council
member Robin Wonsley claimed ICE is
carrying out ‘‘terrorist attacks.’’ I
could go on and on. They have been
calling on people to go out and attack
ICE.
By the way, the man that was engaged in that incident in Minnesota—
and they will review all of that—he was
dragged by a previous protester down
the street by a car.
I read a minute ago about the ICE officer who was lacerated across his face
when one of these thugs attacked him
with a steel coffee mug. I talked about
another guy that had this cord wrapped
around his neck, and they tried to get
him. One of these guys did that to an
ICE officer.
Where is the concern for our law enforcement? My grandfather was the
chief of police of a small town in West
Texas back in the 1940s. Where is the
concern for them? My great-greatgrandfather was a Texas Ranger. I was
proud to be in the U.S. Attorney’s Office, proud to be the first assistant attorney general, and proud to work with
law enforcement.
Does every member of law enforcement always get it right? No. They are
human beings. Do we have ways to go
through and punish, rectify, review,
and ensure due process and that rights
are protected? Yes. Should we? Yes.
I want to remind people these are not
American citizens. These are guests in
our home who are abusing that invitation—or noninvitation to the extent

PO 00000

Frm 00046

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

that they were legally here—invitation
to the extent they overstayed a visa,
invitation to the extent they were
abusing a visa that they were issued.
For whatever reason that they are
here, they are violating that trust and
engaging in illegal activity and carrying out the sickest and most heinous
crimes.
It cannot be allowed to proceed, and
we cannot allow people to side against
our law enforcement that are trying to
keep our streets safe so that we don’t
lose Rachel Morin, and we don’t lose
Laken Riley, and we don’t lose Kayla
Hamilton, and we don’t lose Officer
Mendoza, and we don’t lose Jocelyn
Nungaray.
Mr. PERRY. Representative ROY, you
and I have stood in this Chamber
countless times, for countless hours,
having the same discussion over the
same people, the same people in this
picture, over and over. There are
countless others that aren’t here who
died from drunk driving incidents, died
from drug overdose, human trafficked,
lives destroyed forever. If only they got
to stay alive, if they even had that opportunity to stay alive.
There is so much outrage from my
colleagues on the other side of the
aisle. Yet, I can’t remember, and so I
am going to ask you, Representative
ROY from Texas. I can’t remember one
time my colleagues on the other side of
the aisle came to talk about Laken
Riley,
Rachel
Morin,
Jocelyn
Nungaray, the officer, the young lady,
not one.
Mr. ROY. Totally objectively—I have
been to this floor, I come to this floor
a lot, and I watch the House floor—I do
not remember a single incident, a single time in my 7 years of being in the
United States House of Representatives, not once have I seen it. In fairness, I might have missed one. Maybe
somebody will find it in the RECORD. I
have been down here countless times
when it is an attack on law enforcement, countless times when it is an attack on President Trump and this administration.
I think this really matters. I am
going to ask you another question that
I think is important. Why are these
people here? Why are these gang and
thug members here? Why? Was it President Trump?
Mr. PERRY. No.
Mr. ROY. Did President Trump put
them on our streets?
Mr. PERRY. President Trump did
not. President Trump is credited with
having the most secure border in history.
Mr. ROY. And, today, we have a flow
of basically statistically zero at our
border.
Do you remember when we were in
this House Chamber, do you remember
when we were debating legislation last
year, and we were debating bills, and
what did they say? They said: Well, we
have got to pass comprehensive immigration reform in order to solve the
problem and secure the border, when it

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.101

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

was Joe Biden as the President and
Alejandro Mayorkas as the Secretary
of Homeland Security. Now it turns
out, somehow magically, without that
being signed into law, magically President Trump is able to stop the flow at
the border.
Do you think that is an accident?
Mr. PERRY. No. As I recall, about
10,000 people a week were coming
across the border illegally.
Mr. ROY. Correct. A day. We had as
many as 15,000 in a day, okay, and now
we are getting far fewer than 10,000 in
a month.
Mr. PERRY. Secretary Mayorkas
told us, President Biden told us he
could not solve that problem unless we
passed legislation. We needed to—this
Chamber was delinquent. There was
nothing that could be done until we
took action. As it has been said, we
didn’t need to take action. We needed a
different President.
Mr. ROY. And was it not, in fact,
true that under President Biden and
under Alejandro Mayorkas’ regime at
the Department of Homeland Security,
was it not true that these individuals—
and you saw me reading off, by the
way, a lot of the years when they had
deportation orders, 2022 or previously.
Was it not true that these individuals
that were released into the United
States were either released under parole. In an abuse of law that allows for
isolated cases of parole, they released
thousands en bloc.
Mr. PERRY. Tens of thousands.
Mr. ROY. Hundreds of thousands en
bloc under parole, an abuse of the law,
an illegal act, abuse of asylum to release people in our country, and then
wide-open borders where people were
flooding across the river.
Did that in totality, coupled with
people overstaying their visas, coupled
with, frankly, a far more liberal immigration system than we should have,
result in all of these individuals being
on the streets? None of my constituents asked for that.
Mr. PERRY. None of mine.
Mr. ROY. None of my constituents
wanted illegal aliens who were violent
and committing crimes on the streets
of our country. President Trump is
stopping it. Tom Homan is stopping it.
Stephen Miller, Secretary Noem, all of
the great men and women in Border
Patrol and ICE, they are stopping it.
Now, my question is: Why? Why do
our colleagues on the other side of the
aisle not want to stop it? Could it be
for political reasons? Could it be that
they want non-Americans to be in the
United States to try to transform
America and to politically motivate
and to politically put Democrats in
power? Could that be?
I don’t want to be so cynical as to
speculate here on the House floor, but
what other motives would there be to
allow dangerous individuals to pour
into our communities and carry out
what has been carried out?
Mr. PERRY. I don’t want to speculate either. I will leave that to people

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H709

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

that are listening and people that are
thinking through the situation.
You talked about things that are untrue. I want to let you know that, of
course, I represent 760,000 great people,
hardworking, tax-paying, America-loving individuals in south central Pennsylvania, and I have gotten some complaints. There is some rhetoric and
some claims being made about Immigration and Customs Enforcement in
central Pennsylvania.
I talked to Immigration and Customs
Enforcement today and asked them,
because there were claims that enforcement officers were chasing people
down the street, demanding their papers, going door to door looking for
people, staking out certain activities,
business activities, or recreational activities to just see who would come in
and ask for their papers.
Representative ROY, I am proud to
report what I knew inherently that
that is all a lie. That is all propaganda
meant to scare people and meant to
stop law enforcement from doing its
job.
I am so disgusted by the names that
our men and women that wear the uniform, that make a commitment to put
their lives in danger to keep everybody
else safe that they are characterized by
elected officials and leaders in our
community the way that you have described to me this evening. It is outrageous. Not only is it outrageous, it is
dangerous, and it is irresponsible. It is
leading to not only the division of our
country and our communities, but it is
leading to people suffering injuries and
worse. That, Representative ROY, is on
them.
b 2020
Mr. ROY. The impact of illegal aliens
being in our country or, frankly, those
that were wrongly put in our country
through parole, asylum, overstaying
their visas, or expansive abuse of legal
immigration, has a consequence, right?
Mr. PERRY. Sure.
Mr. ROY. It has a consequence in the
form of lost lives. It has a consequence
in the form of hospitals that are overflowing with individuals, particularly
in Texas, but around the country, jail
cells that are overflowing, and schools
that are overflowing. All of that is a
consequence in terms of costs and continued problems.
Just last week, two illegal aliens suspected of being members of the Venezuelan gang Tren de Aragua were
charged with allegedly weaponizing
their vehicle against a Border Patrol
agent in Portland. Both suspects originally crossed the southern border
under Biden and were released into the
interior. The driver wound up with a
rap sheet, including DUI, while the passenger is linked to a shooting and a
prostitution ring in Portland. That is
what is happening.
Now, why do I mention that here? Because we just said that President
Trump was able to use current law and
current authority to secure the border

PO 00000

Frm 00047

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and stop the flow. He is currently using
current law, current authority, to remove illegal aliens, including the 1.5
million people here under an order of
removal.
I want to remind everybody of that.
We just blow past that little detail.
There are 1.5 million people running
around this country who have an order
of removal from a judge. They have
gone through all the processes. They
have had all the fricking lawyers that
are paid by the NGOs to try to keep
them out of court and keep them in the
country, and 1.5 million of them have
an order of deportation, of removal.
What do we do about it? This is what
I want to say. We, Congress, owe it to
the President and to the great men and
women of Border Patrol and ICE, to
our constituents, and to future Americans, who could be endangered by a future administration with open borders,
to codify that which President Trump
has been carrying out to defend our
country.
We owe it to all of them to pass a
new and updated version of H.R. 2 that
we passed in the previous Congress. We
stood on this floor as conservatives and
united this Conference behind a singular mission of passing laws to prevent the abuses that were being carried
out by Biden and Mayorkas.
I promise you—remember, we had a
President Trump in 2020. We had a secure border in January 2021, with low
numbers of border crossings and enforcement of the law. What happened?
Biden took over; Mayorkas took over;
and we had an explosion. Then, we had
dead Americans and dangerous, lawless
people on our streets.
We, Congress, have a duty to lay it
all on the line and to make sure that,
this year, under this Congress, with the
Republican majority in the House and
a Republican majority in the Senate,
we deliver to the President’s desk the
equivalent of H.R. 2 from the previous
Congress, which would codify the
changes to parole, codify the changes
to asylum, codify the changes in catch
and release, codify the permanent and
continued development of the wall, all
the tools necessary to stop the flow at
the border that the current administration has put into action. We should demand it. We should change the law so
that no future Biden and Mayorkas can
endanger the American people.
Does the gentleman from Pennsylvania agree?
Mr. PERRY. Of course, I agree. As
you bring it up, I think to myself how
heartbreaking it is knowing—I look at
these pictures here of these wonderful
young people with their whole lives
ahead of them. If we had been able to
do that during the first administration,
these five people would be alive, likely
would be alive, right?
Mr. ROY. Right.
Mr. PERRY. Because we have failed
here—not because CHIP has failed, not
because I am not willing to vote for it.
We have to get it on the floor. Let’s
face it, Representative ROY, the great

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.103

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H710

Representative ROY from Texas, how
many votes are you going to count on
for Laken Riley, for Jocelyn Nungaray,
for any of these people? How many
votes are you going to count on to keep
them alive from our colleagues on the
other side of the aisle?
Mr. ROY. Zero. Now, if we are
lucky—if we are lucky—we might get a
handful if pushed to the brink. Remember, we got four or five of them to vote
for, I think, the SAVE Act.
Let’s bring that up for a second.
Should we not—in addition to guaranteeing that we secure the border and
codify the great work of President
Trump to prevent the death and destruction of the American people,
should we not also guarantee the integrity of our elections by passing yet
again the SAVE Act, pushing our Senate colleagues to pass the SAVE Act,
and send it to the President’s desk,
which would simply guarantee that
only American citizens vote in American elections?
It is that simple. Shouldn’t be controversial. Shouldn’t be a really difficult concept. We have passed it in the
House. The Senate is blocking it. The
question is whether Republicans have
the nerve to put it on must-pass legislation, to fight for it, to break the filibuster in the Senate, to move the bill
and get it to the President’s desk,
along with some other good changes,
like voter ID and other things we
should do.
Does the gentleman agree that we
should, in addition to codifying H.R. 2,
secure American elections with these
requirements under the SAVE Act to
save America, as President Trump
rightly said, as President Trump told
us in our Conference meeting a week
and a half ago, to get it to his desk? Do
you agree?
Mr. PERRY. Of course. We passed it
in the House, but that is not enough.
That doesn’t change anything. We can
pass everything we want to in the
House, with or without our friends on
the other side of the aisle, but if we
can’t get a vote and passage in the Senate, it doesn’t get to the President’s
desk.
I would just say this: What I think
would be interesting to see, when we
talk about—look, quite honestly, it is a
travesty to me that we should have to
pass such a bill that only American
citizens vote in American elections.
That should be obvious.
You don’t invite some person from
some other State or some other town
into your home to ask them about your
important family decisions. Yet, somehow in America, my friends on the
other side of the aisle, my colleagues
over there, think that that is what we
should do.
They should put a vote up in the Senate to show the American people who
stands with them and who stands with
letting those people in our country illegally, killing, raping, robbing, and giving them the vote. If they can’t get the
vote, then they need to find a way to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

break the filibuster and make sure that
we stand up for Americans.
Madam Speaker, to my friend from
Texas, we weren’t elected by people
from other countries. We weren’t elected by Tren de Aragua or the Cartel of
the Suns. We were elected by the
American citizens. That is who we are
here to represent.
If somebody wants to represent them,
well, God bless them, but they should
let the American people know by their
votes and go out and decry it to everybody. Amazingly, in some cases, some
of our colleagues actually are.
Mr. ROY. I have one final question,
one final point. In addition to protecting Americans with H.R. 2 to codify the President’s actions, in addition
to ensuring that American elections
are secure and that you can trust the
integrity of elections by passing the
SAVE Act, voter ID, and what is necessary to guarantee the sanctity of our
elections, should we not also consider
something like the PAUSE Act to
pause and take a break on immigration
when, in fact, we legally have 1.1 million green cards, 1 million guest workers, and north of 1 million foreign students each year?
We have more immigrants than every
other country in the world combined.
We have a foreign-born population of
51.9 million, almost 16 percent, a record
high. This is the important part. We
have social welfare and social safety
nets that are being used by noncitizens
that are blowing out the rolls and driving up the cost of all of these goods.
My point here is that we have had
massive amounts of immigration over
our history. All of us love the actual
melting pot that America represents,
but here is the key issue: You actually
have to be willing to assimilate for it
to be a melting pot. It is not a melting
pot if you are coming here and waving
a Palestinian flag or waving the flag of
Honduras or Guatemala instead of saying I am coming here to be American,
to embrace Western civilization, and to
embrace the greatest country the
world has ever known that has bled
around the world not for conquest but
to liberate people, that has died for
people around the globe to make it a
safer and secure place.
People want to come here to be a
part of that, God bless them, but the
people who come here who want to
change it, who want to turn it into an
Islamic state, who want to undermine
it and who want advance sharia law,
who want to bring their flags of their
country here instead of adopting and
becoming an American—shouldn’t we
not take a total review of our immigration system, from top to bottom, in addition to codifying security of our border and ensuring the integrity of our
election, that only citizens vote and
that only citizens are counted for purposes of representation and how we apportion our Members of Congress?
b 2030
All of these things that I am talking
about are common sense to ensure a

PO 00000

Frm 00048

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

simple principle that American citizens are able to run this country.
Mr. PERRY. It is their country. Of
course, the United States of America is
the most generous country ever in history. Certainly with immigration it is
more generous than every other nation
and more generous than all nations
combined.
However, what no one ever envisioned was tens of thousands, daily or
weekly, in the amount of tens of millions of people pouring into our country illegally with no interest in being
American but being in America.
Now what do we do about it?
We have a President who has vowed
to solve that and who has vowed to fix
that. He got elected on that promise,
and now my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle reject following the
law if it means following the law.
So I think that it is the height of disrespect, quite honestly, for people to
come to our country illegally, tell us
that we are awful people, try and
change our country into the country
they came from, have us pay for it, and
then disrespect us while they are doing
it by killing our citizens and while
sending our tax dollars to the terrorist
organizations in the country that they
left.
It is unacceptable at any and every
single level.
Mr. ROY. Madam Speaker, I thank
my friend from Pennsylvania for joining me tonight. I appreciate his commentary, I appreciate his leadership,
and I appreciate his service in the
United States military. I appreciate his
service to his constituents, and I appreciate his great family.
It is a sacrifice for all of us. It is
tough when you have young kids,
Madam Speaker. Our kids are about
the same age. We leave them at home,
and we come here, but we are doing it
because we want to save this country
for our kids and our grandkids. That is
why I am in public service.
I know when I had a diagnosis of cancer about 14 years ago, Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, I didn’t know if I would be
around days or weeks, and 14 years
later, I am sure some of my colleagues,
maybe they are happy to see me,
maybe they are not.
I know that when I leave my kids, I
know God gave me some more breath
and some more time on this planet to
try to make sure that we save this, the
last great hope for mankind as President Reagan called it.
Madam Speaker, I will close with
this, and I will turn it over, so my
friend from North Carolina can take
the floor.
We are here to represent the American people. The American people did
not send us here as Representatives to
give away our country. They did not
send us here as Representatives to
allow our friends on the other side of
the aisle to empower dangerous tax
cuts, thugs, gang members, and people
who are killing Americans. They did
not send us here for that.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.105

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

Every time we vote on appropriations
bills and every time we are putting forward legislation, we ought to be thinking about these Americans who lost
their lives at the hands of these nonAmericans. We ought to be thankful we
have a President who recognizes that
these non-Americans needn’t be on our
streets, that we should be siding with
ICE and Border Patrol, and that we
should be defending the men and
women in our law enforcement across
the country so we can protect these
Americans. So that we can choose to
side with the American citizens, not
the non-Americans who are dangerous,
and we can side with law enforcement
to protect these.
We can act. This is my message to
my Republican colleagues: We have a
choice this year. We can retreat and
get into the mode of elections. Or we
can lead, we can work, and we can roll
our sleeves up and right now codify the
rules, the laws, and the actions of the
President to secure our border and ensure that no future President can abuse
them.
We can do that right now. We can
pass H.R. 2. We can send it to the Senate. We can force the Senate to act if
we just have the will to do it.
We can send the SAVE Act again. We
can add voter ID. We can send it to the
Senate. We can dare them to break the
filibuster by forcing a talking filibuster instead of the fake filibuster of
a forced 60-vote threshold.
Make them work. Make 51 Senators
sit on the floor and have a quorum.
Make them speak. Make them do their
job so that we can defend our country
and defend our people. Pass the SAVE
Act, pass voter ID, and secure American elections. Secure our border permanently instead of just having it depend on the current President. Reform
our immigration system. Pause it. We
have done it before. Pause it, review it,
and stop people from overstaying their
visas. Fix the system.
Make sure we are not importing people who are adherent to sharia law and
want to undermine Western civilization and create mayhem and be against
our way of life.
Choose the path of leadership. Come
here as a Congress and bind together.
Don’t sit around complaining about
having a two- or three- or four-seat
majority.
Lead, act, and go.
That is why we are here. That is why
that flag exists. Madam Speaker, put
your trust in God, and put the armor of
God around you. Stand up and lead for
this country.
If we do it, then the American people
will send us back here in a bigger majority.
If we do it, then President Trump
will be able to accomplish even more in
the next 2 years than in these 2 years.
If we act now, then we can actually
save this country.
If we act now, then we can secure the
border.
If we act now, then we can secure our
elections.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H711

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

If we act now, then we can guarantee
an immigration system that no longer
imports people into our country who
want to undermine it.
We can provide healthcare freedom,
and we can balance the budget if we act
and we lead. Right now, let’s secure
our country. We can do it this year.
That is our calling.
We are not here to get re-elected. We
are here to deliver for the American
people.
Madam Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time.
f

MANDATE OF THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. HARRIS of
North Carolina was recognized for 30
minutes.)
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. HARRIS of North Carolina.
Madam Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material
on the topic of the Special Order into
the RECORD.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from North Carolina?
There was no objection.
Mr. HARRIS of North Carolina.
Madam Speaker, in November of 2024,
the American people didn’t just cast
votes. They issued a thunderous mandate. It was loud, it was clear, and it
was unmistakable. They rose up, and
they declared: Enough is enough.
Enough of the reckless spending that
mortgages
our
children’s
future.
Enough of open-borders flooding our
communities with chaos and danger.
Enough of unelected bureaucrats and
activist judges lording over a free people, and enough of weakness abroad
and surrendering to our enemies while
our adversaries laugh.
The voters didn’t send House Republicans back to Washington to warm
chairs, cut ribbons, and play defense.
They sent us here to fight. They sent
us here to do government differently,
to reverse the damage, and to restore
what made America great.
Now the moment of truth has arrived.
What must the House Republican majority do in 2026, and why must we act
boldly without apology and without
hesitation?
In 2026 the American people expect a
Republican-led Congress to deliver results. Alongside President Trump, we
must leverage our House and Senate
majorities to advance a bold agenda
fulfilling more of our promises. We
must act urgently in the first quarter
of 2026, using every tool available to
compel the Senate to deliver now. The
stakes extend beyond the next election.
America’s future depends on it.
This evening I want to take a few
moments to lay out that answer, four
priorities, four commitments, and four
reasons the future of the Republic depends on what we do next.

PO 00000

Frm 00049

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

b 2040
First of all, there must be a priority
to cut spending because a nation that
can’t balance its books can’t defend its
future. The most fundamental duty of
any government worthy of the name is
stewardship of the taxpayers’ hardearned dollar.
Families balance their checkbooks
every month. Small businesses live
within their means or they fail. Yet,
for too long, Washington has acted as if
math, morality, and accountability
simply don’t apply here.
Today, right now, in January of 2026,
our national debt stands at more than
$38.4 trillion. Madam Speaker, that is
not just statistics, it is a theft from
our children. It is bondage for our
grandchildren. It is a crushing burden
that grows by billions every single day,
while interest payments alone devour
more than a trillion dollars a year.
Please, let’s be crystal clear with
America. We do not have a revenue
problem. We have a spending problem
and a massive fraud problem in this
country. Just look at the scandals exploding across this country right now.
In Minnesota, Democrats allowed millions of taxpayer dollars to flow to
fraudulent daycare centers, fake operations with misspelled signs, empty
buildings, no children in sight. Yet,
they pocketed huge sums from programs meant to help the vulnerable
children.
A viral investigation by independent
journalist Nick Shirley has triggered
Federal probes, payment freezes, and
demands for accountability. Money
that was intended for children, stolen
by criminals exploiting government incompetence.
Back home in my own State of North
Carolina, a fresh Federal audit just revealed that 54 percent—more than
half—of the State’s nondomiciled commercial drivers’ licenses were issued illegally, often to foreign nationals
whose driver licenses were valid long
after their lawful presence in the
United States had expired.
I submit to you, this isn’t a clerical
glitch. It is a systemic failure that is
putting the lives of Americans at risk
on our highways, wastes taxpayer resources, and, yes, threatens millions in
Federal funding.
Mr.
Speaker,
fraud
is
never
victimless. It robs seniors of the benefits they earned. It shortchanges our
veterans who sacrificed for this country. It burdens working families already struggling to get ahead, and it
saddles future generations with debts
they never agreed to carry.
In 2026, I believe House Republicans
must do what Washington has refused
to do for decades: hunt down waste,
fraud, and abuse, and shut it off at its
source. That means oversight with real
teeth, audits that trigger prosecutions,
not just reports, and zero tolerance.
Cut funding to any agency that refuses
to clean house and deal with the situation.
Only a year ago, several in my party
were hyping up DOGE, the Department

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.107

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H712

of Government Efficiency. I must ask,
where is the enthusiasm now? Why are
we not continuing to slash the waste,
fraud, and abuse? We did it with
USAID, NPR, and PBS, but, listen, we
can’t stop there.
While we are wielding the budget ax,
let’s be unequivocal about what should
never receive another dime of taxpayer
money—no taxpayer-funded abortions,
period. Full stop. The Federal Government must never force Americans of
faith, or any Americans for that matter, to bankroll the destruction of innocent life. Life begins in the womb,
and America must never apologize for
defending the most vulnerable among
us.
There is one more pipeline that I believe must be severed: no funding for
lawless jurisdictions. Cities and States
that are defying Federal immigration
law, harboring criminals instead of enforcing the law should receive not one
more cent of Federal grants. We cannot, we must not continue rewarding
sanctuary politicians who put American lives in the crosshairs.
This past Saturday, on what would
have been Laken Riley’s 24th birthday,
we paused to remember a bright, compassionate nursing student whose life
was stolen far, far too soon. Laken was
jogging on a college trail, doing what
young Americans do every day, full of
promise, full of faith, full of the future.
She never made it home. My colleague
talked about her killer tonight: an illegal alien with ties to the Venezuelan
gang Tren de Aragua who crossed our
border, was released, and then brutally
ended her life.
Don’t forget Laken, don’t forget Rachel Morin, don’t forget Joycelyn
Nungaray, don’t forget the countless
American victims—daughters, sons,
mothers, and fathers—who have been
lost to the chaos of reckless open-border policies that have been pushed by
the radical progressive Democrats.
These
same
Democrats
remain
unashamed. They fight harder, they
fight louder for violent criminal aliens
than they ever do for the American
families that have been left shattered.
They shield sanctuary cities that harbor lawbreakers, defund enforcement,
and turn their backs on our people.
However, we remember, and because we
remember, we must act.
In 2026, House Republicans must keep
fighting. No more Federal dollars for
sanctuary jurisdictions that defy the
law, and I mean no more excuses, no
more American blood on the hands of
politicians who choose criminals over
citizens. Laken’s memory demands it.
America’s safety requires it. We will
not rest until justice is restored for
Laken, for every victim, and for every
family that deserves to feel safe in
their own country.
If a city wants our taxpayers’ money,
it must follow Federal law. If it chooses to act as a sanctuary for
lawbreakers, let it do so on its own
dime, not ours. Cut the waste. Cut the
fraud. Cut the funding to lawlessness.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

That is how we will restore fiscal sanity. That is how we will restore public
safety. That is how we will restore
moral clarity to Washington, and I
mean starting today.
There is a second priority: to conserve our way of life, because a Republic only survives if its foundations are
defended. The Bible says in Psalms 11:3
that if the foundations be destroyed,
what can the righteous do?
The second mission of the House Republican majority in 2026 is clear and
nonnegotiable: We must conserve the
American way of life. What good is economic prosperity if our freedoms, the
very soul of our Nation, are eroded day
by day?
Let’s start with the foundation of
self-government. Yes, I am talking
about our elections. Only American
citizens should vote in American elections. This is not controversial. This is
common sense. The House has already
acted decisively. We passed the SAVE
Act requiring documentary proof of
U.S. citizenship to register for Federal
elections.
The need for the SAVE Act couldn’t
be clearer. Just in my own State of
North Carolina last fall, the DMV admitted to registering an unknown
number of noncitizens, and this is just
the tip of the iceberg. Americans, I believe, demand that we have secure elections, and yet the SAVE Act has been
sitting in the Senate gathering dust.
The question is clear: When will the
Senate pass it?
A nation that cannot secure its elections cannot preserve its liberty, and
election integrity is not voter suppression, it is the bedrock of a representative government.
b 2050
Now, let’s talk about justice. We are
witnessing a dangerous trend: rogue,
unelected district judges legislating
from the bench—you know it—issuing
sweeping nationwide injunctions that
overrule the will of the people, the
President, and the Congress.
That is not how our Constitution
works. That is why the House passed
the No Rogue Rulings Act, limiting injunction to the parties in a case, not
the entire country.
Yes, once again, it awaits Senate action. The question I raise, once again:
When will the Senate pass it? Courts
interpret the law; they do not make it.
They do not govern the Nation. We
must also defend the rule of law itself.
American law is grounded in one Constitution, not foreign legal systems.
Let me say it clearly: Sharia law has
no place superseding Federal or State
law in the United States of America.
We must protect our Nation from violence and ideologies that are antithetical to the Constitution. We are one
Nation, one Constitution, and one rule
of law, period.
Finally, while we are talking, think
about free speech, the First Amendment right our Founders placed first
for a reason. Yet, today, as a pastor, I

PO 00000

Frm 00050

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

understand that pastors are being muzzled and churches intimidated. The IRS
has been weaponized as a tool of censorship, threatening tax-exempt status
for daring to speak Biblical truth on
the moral issues of today.
That is why I introduced the Free
Speech Fairness Act, to repeal the remnants of the Johnson amendment and
restore pastors’ God-given right to
preach freely from the pulpits across
this land.
I am sorry, but no government bureaucrat should dictate what a pastor
can say about life, about marriage, or
about liberty. No politician should decide which moral truths are acceptable.
Free speech is not a privilege bestowed
by Washington. It is a right that is endowed by our creator.
Sadly, America has been drifting
away from basic common sense, and
nowhere is this more painfully evident
than in the world of sports. Our daughters are being forced to compete
against males. Our sisters are being
forced to share locker rooms and
changing spaces with boys.
Today, the highest Court in our land
is grappling with this very issue. This
very day, the Supreme Court heard
oral arguments in two critical cases,
Little v. Hecox and West Virginia v.
BPJ, to decide whether State laws that
protect girls’ and women’s sports by
basing eligibility on biological sex at
birth violate Title IX or the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment.
I submit to you tonight that the
American people have already spoken
clearly. It was a January 2025 New
York Times poll that found that 79 percent of Americans, including a majority of Democrats, believed athletes who
were male at birth but pretend to be female should not be eligible to compete
in women’s sports.
That is exactly why the House passed
the Protection of Women and Girls in
Sports Act of 2025, which restores fairness by clarifying that Title IX protects biological females in federally
funded athletic programs. Yet, Senate
Democrats blocked it last year, standing against the overwhelming will of
the American people.
When will Democrats stop rejecting
common sense and start listening to
the American families they claim to
represent?
In 2026, House Republicans will keep
pushing these bills forward, demanding
Senate action, defending our elections,
our courts, our laws, and our voices because if we don’t conserve the American way of life right now, who will?
Who will?
We will not apologize. We will not
back down. We will defend it for our
children, for our faith, and for our future.
The third priority that I think is
critical, and let me move quickly, is
that we codify our border wins because
a nation without borders is not a nation.
The third task before the House Republican majority is urgent and nonnegotiable. We must codify our border
wins into law.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.109

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 13, 2026

President Trump has delivered on his
promise to secure the border. Customs
and Border Protection has achieved 7
straight months of—get this—zero releases of apprehended illegal immigrants into the United States from the
border.
In 2025, DHS enforcement operations
resulted in more than 605,000 deportations, but I submit to you tonight that
executive action is not enough. Temporary enforcement is not enough.
America needs permanent border security. We must ensure the security of
our Nation is not undone by the stroke
of a pen of a future administration.
That means passing H.R. 2, the Secure the Border Act. This legislation,
as you will recall, finishes the wall,
ends catch and release, restores interior enforcement, and puts American
sovereignty back where it belongs, in
American hands.
For years, we were told securing the
border was impossible, and then President Trump proved it was possible simply when the law is enforced.
Now, it is time to lock those victories into statute. No more open borders. No more fentanyl flooding our
streets. No more surrender to cartels
and traffickers. A sovereign nation
controls who enters its territory, and
the House Republican majority must
ensure Americans exactly that.
The fourth and final priority: celebrate freedom. Celebrate freedom because America’s greatness flows from
liberty, not government control.
In 2026, House Republicans must do
what the radical left despises most: We
must celebrate and defend freedom.
Yes, that starts with healthcare, where
Big Insurance and Big Government
have trapped Americans into a broken,
unaffordable system they don’t control.
Just last month, a bombshell GAO
report
exposed
the
truth.
The
ObamaCare
marketplace
rubberstamped approvals for 96 percent
of fake applications. Fictitious identities, stolen Social Security numbers,
dead people, yet billions in taxpayer
subsidies flowed straight to the insurance companies. Your hard-earned dollars were wasted on fraud while families faced skyrocketing premiums.
Democrats are fighting tooth and
nail. Do you know what they are fighting tooth and nail to do? To keep funneling subsidies to Big Insurance giants, to let wealthy individuals continue to access government-funded
healthcare, to allow some Americans
to pay zero for coverage while the rest
of us foot the bill.
Madam Speaker, I am glad to say tonight that Republicans are fighting for
you, the American people, by expanding real choices for families, increasing
competition to drive down prices, and
putting patients and doctors first, not
lining the pockets of Big Insurance.
Something has to change, and we
must put healthcare back in the hands
of individuals, not bureaucrats in
Washington. A powerful first step? Expand health savings accounts, HSAs.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H713

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

b 2100
Madam Speaker, HSAs empower families to make their own decisions. Yes,
they lower costs. Yes, they increase
choice. Yes, they restore freedom to
control your own care. Healthcare
should serve patients, not bureaucrats
or corporate cronies.
We must confront another growing
threat most Americans don’t yet see,
and that is malign foreign influence,
especially from Communist China.
Our colleges and universities have
taken hundreds of millions—estimates
now actually exceed $426 million in recent years—from foreign adversaries
like China. They are selling access, influence, and sensitive research to the
highest bidder. This is unacceptable.
That is why the House passed the DETERRENT Act, which includes language from my No Contracts for Foreign Adversaries Act, to force transparency, block shady deals, and stop
our institutions from taking money
from enemies who wish to harm us.
Once again, that bill is now in the
Senate. The question arises once more:
When will the Senate pass it?
America’s intellectual capital, the
minds of our next generation, should
never be auctioned off to those who
seek to undermine us. Freedom is
worth defending economically, culturally, and morally.
In 2026, our House Republican majority will keep leading the charge to reform healthcare to empower individuals, to secure our campuses from foreign threats, and to celebrate the
American way of life without apology.
We understand that freedom isn’t free.
That is why we will fight to keep it for
our families, for our future, and for our
Nation.
In conclusion, I want you to hear my
heart because it is a call to courage.
This is our moment. As we stand on the
threshold of America’s 250th birthday—
250 years since 56 brave signers pledged
their lives, fortunes, and sacred honor
to the Declaration of Independence—we
are all called to renew the covenant
our Founders made.
The House Republican majority was
not sent here to manage decline. We
were elected to reverse it, to cut reckless spending, to conserve our Godgiven way of life, to secure our sovereign borders, and to celebrate and defend the freedoms they fought to secure. History will not judge how cautious we were. It will judge how courageous we were.
As General George Washington declared to his troops, in 1776, on the
heels of the Continental Congress’ decision for independence, he said: ‘‘The
fate of unborn millions will now depend, under God, on the courage and
the conduct of this Army.’’
Madam Speaker, today the fate of
unborn millions—our children, our
grandchildren, and generations yet to
come—depends on us, on our courage,
on our conviction, and on our unwavering faith in the exceptional Nation
that our Founders envisioned.

PO 00000

Frm 00051

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

I implore my colleagues: Let us act
with conviction. Let us lead with faith.
Let us govern with courage.
America’s best days are not behind
us. They are still ahead. If we are bold
enough, faithful enough, and courageous enough to fight for them, we will
see it through.
Madam Speaker, in this year of
America 250, let us recommit to the
principles of liberty, self-government,
and moral clarity that launched the
greatest experiment in human freedom
that the world has ever known.
We will not shrink. We will not surrender. We will fight. We will win for
what our Founders built and that we
are called to preserve.
Madam Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time.
f

GROWING THE GDP
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. SCHWEIKERT
of Arizona was recognized for 30 minutes.)
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Madam Speaker,
as a mercy to the poor staff here, I am
not going to use the whole half an
hour. I am just going to try to run
through a couple of concepts.
I did a little tripping up of some details last week, where we were trying
to explain some of the things we see
going on in the math. I want to walk
through a concept.
We actually, right now, as a country,
are remarkably blessed. The GDP
growth, the economic growth, is actually well beyond almost any of what
even my economists were predicting
over the last year.
We are seeing some data right now—
if you actually look at the Atlanta
Fed, GDPNow, nowcasts, some of
these—we could hit a five-handle this
quarter, which is remarkable.
Looking at some of the data from the
third quarter of 2025, it looks like the
number of a 4.3 percent GDP growth is
going to hold up.
These numbers are actually remarkable, and I want to make a point here
for the annualized 2025 GDP number. I
know this is geeky. There is a point I
am going to come to, and that is the
irony that tax collections don’t look as
robust as the economy. We are going to
try to explain what is going on. This is
why getting policy right is going to become so critical.
The first quarter of last year, so 1
year ago this quarter, we actually had
negative GDP. The first quarter, when
the Trump administration started,
when our new Congress started, we actually had to go through 3 months of
slower growth. Then, it wasn’t until
the second quarter, third quarter, and
now we believe the fourth quarter—we
don’t have that final number in yet—
we finally hit the acceleration pedal.
What is going on out there? We had
this irony happening where we have
really actually stable and much broader economic growth than we expected.
We are actually seeing some odd
things.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.110

H13JAPT1

H714

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Actually, the labor force participation is pretty flat. We had a small tick
up in some of the last unemployment
data. Also, if you look at this chart
here, we are trying to explain the difference. Here is the number of folks
who are entering the labor force. They
are working. Here is the number of
folks who are available for work.
When we start to get to 4 percent or
4.6 percent unemployment, we are actually, if we look at our historic average, even the last 25 years, that is almost full employment.
Do you see this curve here? It is basically starting to demonstrate the demographics of America. It is also sort
of the demographics of the entire industrialized world. You have a situation where today we functionally have
the same number of 18-year-olds as we
had 20 years ago. Today, we also have
almost double the number of our brothers and sisters who are 65 and up than
25 years ago. That is creating an interesting irony.
We actually take a look here at what
we call tax receipts. Most people like
to call them tax collections. If you are
on Ways and Means, they are tax receipts. Look at this interesting spike
here. That is actually tax receipts.
That is good.
Almost every dime we see on this
chart of the real growth is actually
capital gains. It is those who have had
assets. It is those who have sold real
estate. It is those who have sold
stocks.
The tax receipts really coming in
from labor are good. They are stable,
but they are not growing nearly in
sympathy—if you can play economist
words—in sympathy to the GDP
growth. This is an important part of
what I wanted to share. I am trying—
I hate this term—to socialize the concept.
b 2110
What happens when you are producing growth because we have a lot of
growth policies that are right? Last
summer, earlier in the year, where investment is going into plant, equipment, data centers, AI, and all of these
things are happening, wage growth is
actually okay. It is actually outpacing
inflation now, finally, thank Heaven.
Yet the real GDP growth is coming
from that capital spend and not from
wage and new employment and the demand for labor.
Understand why this is a problem.
We are an income-tax-base country.
There are income taxes on businesses,
but mostly the income tax base is on
working—and also FICA, Social Security tax, Medicare tax, and unemployment tax; those are taxed on your
wages.
We are starting to see this irony
where we are actually doing some data
where we ask what happens when you
hit this type of GDP growth and, at the
same time, the amount of borrowing
and debt in the country is still going to
stay remarkably high.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

We still have a model that we think
will be a bit less, but we could still be
approaching $2 trillion of borrowing
this year. I hope we are wrong, but you
have to understand that the first quarter of this fiscal year, I think we were
borrowing about $90,000 a second.
So far this fiscal year—so we are,
what, 3 months and 10 or 11 days into
it—I think we have now borrowed $800
billion. Sometime. Maybe before this
month is over, we are going to have
borrowed another $1 trillion. This time,
it wasn’t 3 months. It might be coming
in at 4 months. We shouldn’t be seeing
those types of borrowing with this type
of economic growth.
The point I am going to make is:
Why is the borrowing going up? Look
at the spending data. I didn’t bring all
of those charts because they are exhausting, but if you take a look at interest, remember that we have to refinance $10 trillion or maybe $11 trillion
this year. That means that the bonds
that were sold in the past have to come
back to market, refinance, and they
are being refinanced, for many of them,
at much higher interest rates.
The other thing is healthcare, but it
is healthcare, Medicare. We have a
model that says that now, in less than
61⁄2 to 7 years, Medicare will go from $1
trillion to $2 trillion. Also, in 7 years,
Medicare is gone.
Excuse me. Let me rephrase that.
The Medicare trust fund is gone, and
that will result in around an 11 percent
cut, particularly to hospitals.
It is demographics. Baby boomers are
moving into their peak utilization
years of these benefits. We are functioning, I think in the last 3 years or 4
years of baby boomers moving into the
age of 65 and getting their earned benefits, so you see the shift in the labor
market.
What happens if the formulas that I
had come behind these microphones for
years and said: That if we could grow
another point of GDP, it is this many
hundreds of billions of dollars of tax receipts, and now it isn’t.
I know this is geeky, but it is really,
really important because it means
many of the budget documents that the
brain trust around here talk about, we
may be getting wrong—many of the solutions we have had for taking on debt
and deficits.
There is a piece of legislation. I am
absolutely elated. I am trying to get on
it. It basically says: Look, let’s do a
debt and deficit commission, like we
did BRAC many, many years ago to
close excess military bases, and let’s go
for 3 percent of GDP growth.
Madam Speaker, there is a problem
with that number. Just our interest
coverage is over 3 percent of our economy. So we are going to take spending
and get it down to 3 percent. Great. So
we are going to stop borrowing so
much, except just the interest we pay
is bigger than that.
Does anyone see the math problem?
So this is actually the punch line I
have been trying to head toward. This

PO 00000

Frm 00052

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

is a chart that sort of shows labor as a
percentage of income.
I am sorry, but this is actually really
important when you are trying to design how you finance your government.
We are hitting a time way down here.
This is 2024 because that is the last sort
of good data point that I have. We actually believe it has actually fallen
further. For years, 64 percent, and
there may have been times when we
crossed over to 66 percent of our income basically came from labor that financed the government.
Today, we are down to touching—actually, we may be as low as 53 percent.
That is a huge difference, and it is
going to force us—those who care
about the economics, those of us on the
Ways and Means Committee who actually have to do tax policy, those who
actually are paying attention to our
bonds and our promise to pay back $30
trillion-plus of publicly sold debt, and
another $8.5 trillion that we have borrowed internally. How do we pay it
back?
We are going to have to start thinking about the taxation on labor. It is
going to become a problem. I want to
bounce around a little bit because, a
couple of days ago, we got some of the
inflation data, but with that also came
some of the State and localized inflation data. I thought this one was interesting. I am going to be a little caustic
on it, but I haven’t had as much coffee
today, so I am not wound up as tight,
so at least I am not speaking like a
machine gun.
We thought this was interesting. Increase in monthly costs in Arizona, and
we thought we would do a snapshot. I
am blessed that I represent the Phoenix, Scottsdale area. So between January 2021 to September 2021, so we are
actually doing the same snapshot of
time, if you lived in the Phoenix area,
you functionally lost $1,597 to inflation. That is for the average family.
Now we come here to 2025. It is still
not as good as we demand that we get
it to, but it is now $944, a $653 savings.
That is 1 year of the success of Republicans lowering inflation. We have
to get it further, but we actually see
how bad it was before because this was
the inflation that was handed to this
country during Biden’s first year, and
then we start to take a look at the
progress. We are making progress. It is
not as good as I want, but understand
this is the reality of the math.
Madam Speaker, I have a fixation
that we tell the truth and sort of get
an understanding of some of the math.
One of the most difficult things is that
we have been trying to figure out how
do we make sure we preserve our promises.
We owe a promise for Medicare. We
owe a promise for Social Security. We
have to deal with the reality that, in
less than 3 years, over half of everything that this Congress will spend—so
over half of everything that the Federal Government will spend—will go to
people who are 65 and up.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.112

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Why that is just an amazing thing to
think about. In the 1970s, for every dollar that went to those who were 65 and
up, there were $6 to $7 spent for those
who were 18 and younger. Today, that
is flipped.
It is just demographics. It is not
some evil plot. It is a combination of
the baby boomers, a big population
bubble, and healthcare got dramatically more expensive.
Last week, I did a presentation here
and basically showed where Democrats
are turning healthcare into financial
engineering instead of the incentives to
do it better, faster, and cheaper.
We have turned healthcare into—remember the whole debate here on subsidies on top of subsidies? When you
turn healthcare into financing instead
of helping people be healthier, you
have screwed up the economics and the
incentives, and we start to look at
charts like this.
Now, this is Medicare Advantage. I
am actually a big fan of what you call
Medicare part C, Medicare Advantage.
The chart is a little bit distorted because it doesn’t really give you the
population statistics, but we believe
that this year, 55 percent of the population of this country that are in Medicare is going to choose a Medicare Advantage plan.
b 2120
Okay. But we aren’t telling the truth
about the math. There is this thing
that is called the MedPAC reports.
They are big orange reports like this,
hundreds and hundreds of pages. If we
go through them, there will be this section in there that says that it turns
out Medicare Advantage is coming in,
according to the MedPAC report—and
this is the roomful of people that specialize in this and, I hate to say, my
own joint economic economist, the
CMS data and HHS data, and The Wall
Street Journal, everyone else looks
into this—it is coming in at 120 percent
of fee for service.
Why this is a big deal is when Medicare Advantage was designed—it really
came into effect in 2005—Senator Frist,
who is a doctor—they put together a
plan with this idea that we are going to
do managed care. The insurance companies, which are going to be basically
the gatekeeper, are going to make
profit by helping our brothers and sisters on the program be healthier. The
model was it was going to come in at 95
percent of fee for service.
Today, it comes in at 120 percent of
fee for service. That 25 percent, Madam
Speaker, over 10 years is $2 trillion.
When we show a chart like this of the
transition that has been happening for
traditional fee for service Medicare to
now Medicare Advantage, fine, but we
are going to have to have the honest
discussion of how do we get the incentives lined up.
I saw what Senator GRASSLEY published yesterday—and I was going to
bring the report out here and use it as
a prop and show it to you, but it is like

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H715

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

this. It basically talks about hundreds
and hundreds and hundreds of billions
of dollars.
Look, the report, I am only a third
through it, but it is example after example of Medicare Advantage insurers
signing either having companies or
their own folks go out and knock on
grandma’s door and score them as sicker and, therefore, getting bonuses for
having a sicker population.
The Wall Street Journal almost 2
years ago did a major expose on a person. I think they were in Sun City, Arizona, and the insurance company had
scored them I think as having HIV, except the problem is this person didn’t
have that. They had never been tested
for it. However, the insurance company
was getting a bonus for that. It is
called risk scoring.
We are going to have to consider
moving to a model that says we are not
going to let you go and score people
differently. We want to create a model
where it is put in the initial pricing of
the program, and then you make
money by helping the senior population be healthier.
There are so many miracles right
now, the technology can be worn, the
ways you can keep track, the ways of
telehealth, digital health, all these
other things. We want a system that
incentivizes investing in people’s
health instead of profiting from claiming they are sicker.
People have got to understand, there
is actually a piece of legislation to do
this. Preliminary scores, $1.84 trillion
of savings. We are going to fight, knife
fight, complain, cry, and fuss at each
other over things that are absolutely
tiny.
We have been told this piece of legislation actually is the biggest savings
bill in U.S. history. I beg of anyone
that actually cares about these subjects of taking on debt and deficits,
help us. Help us explain it to our brothers and sisters. Help us take on what
will be, let’s be honest, a barrage of
hate from the brokers, from the insurance companies that don’t want a system that lines up the incentives properly.
These were the incentives of the
original design of Medicare Advantage,
and it got perverse by ObamaCare.
They changed parts of the quality ratings that created another bonus system
that could be manipulated.
Congress can fix things like this, but
are we allowed to actually say: We are
going to fix something on Medicare. So
often, that sets off fear.
Did I mention in the beginning here,
you have got less than 7 years and the
Medicare trust fund is gone. If we are
going to preserve these earned entitlements—these are earned programs. You
worked for years. You earned this. This
was part of the societal contract. People like me here, we have got to figure
out how to finance this, keep it going.
Yet it is almost a sin around here to
talk about the problems, the fact we
are hemorrhaging cash, we are bor-

PO 00000

Frm 00053

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

rowing. This year, for every dollar we
take in in tax receipts, we are going to
spend $1.43. The Moody’s model says in
8 years interest will consume 30 percent of all of our tax receipts.
This isn’t a game. We have got to
stop the juvenile discussions we have
around here and start facing the really
big, difficult things ahead of us.
This is us. It may look like a chart
with a handful of different blues on it,
but this is actually us as a people.
What this chart is telling us is that in
less than 3 years, over half of all of our
spending in this government will go to
our brothers and sisters who are 65 and
up.
If that is the societal deal we made,
we made it; but we have an obligation
as Members of Congress to make it
work. If we know there is hundreds of
billions of dollars—let’s not use the
word ‘‘fraud’’—being misallocated—
let’s get fancy on the language, we will
call it misallocated—why wouldn’t everyone line up with us?
I would argue the army of lobbyists
outside our doors here who lose their
mind every time I talk about this, who
scare the crap out of us, we have still
got to do the right thing. Someone running for the United States Senate
today, in your first term—if you are
blessed enough to win—you are going
to have to deal with the fact the Social
Security trust fund is gone, the Medicare trust fund is gone. Our preliminary math says in 2033, the first year
that those trust funds are gone, it is
$638 billion just to make up that shortfall.
This isn’t a game. These are numbers
that should terrify you. Yet for anyone
who is crazy enough to be watching C–
SPAN, how many times have you seen
this week, last week, the week before
that Members come behind these mikes
and talk to you about the real issues
that will change this Republic, or have
we just decided we are going to let the
bond market basically run this country, and we are going to just keep pretending we can keep spending like this?
Much of that spending is not Democrat policy, Republican policy. Look, I
think much of the Democrat policy is
absolutely absurd, but much of it is demographics. In the early 1990s, and
even going back further, we have had
dramatically fewer children.
Remember, Madam Speaker pro tempore, we model—the United States will
be close to almost zero population
growth this year. If you have a Pay-AsYou-Go system, it is really hard to
make that math work. Do you still let
the scams, the misalignments, the taking advantage of these systems, the
fraud go on? It means we are going to
have to talk about it. We are going to
have to dive into it. We are going to
have to take on an army of lobbyists.
They are probably going to run nasty
ads against all of us because it is so
much money.
Let’s step up and do the hard things.
Let’s step up and do the right things.
Madam Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time.

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.114

H13JAPT1

H716

ADJOURNMENT
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Madam Speaker,
I move that the House do now adjourn.
The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 9 o’clock and 28 minutes
p.m.), under its previous order, the
House adjourned until tomorrow,
Wednesday, January 14, 2026, at 10 a.m.
for morning-hour debate.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS,
ETC.
Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive
communications were taken from the
Speaker’s table and referred as follows:
EC–2638. A letter from the Under Secretary, Personnel and Readiness, Department of War, transmitting a letter authorizing Major General Brett G. Sylvia, United
States Army, to wear the insignia of the
grade of lieutenant general, pursuant to 10
U.S.C. 777a(b)(4); Public Law 111-383, Sec.
505(a)(1); (124 Stat. 4209); to the Committee
on Armed Services.
EC–2639. A letter from the Senior Vice
President, Chief of Staff, Export-Import
Bank of the United States, transmitting a
statement with respect the following transaction involving exports to Türkiye, pursuant to 12 U.S.C. 635(b)(3); July 31, 1945, ch.
341, Sec. 2 (as added by Public Law 102-266,
Sec. 102); (106 Stat. 95); to the Committee on
Financial Services.
EC–2640. A letter from the Senior Vice
President, Chief of Staff, Export-Import
Bank of the United States, transmitting a
statement with respect to the following
transaction involving financing to support
U.S. supply chain resiliency projects, pursuant to 12 U.S.C. 635(b)(3); July 31, 1945, ch.
341, Sec. 2 (as added by Public Law 102-266,
Sec. 102); (106 Stat. 95); to the Committee on
Financial Services.
EC–2641. A letter from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health
and Human Services, transmitting the Fiscal
Year 2025 Annual Progress Report to Congress on the C.W. Bill Young Cell Transplantation Program and National Cord Blood Inventory Program, pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
274k(a)(6); July 1, 1944, ch. 373, title III, Sec.
379 (as amended by Public Law 109-129, Sec.
3(a)); (119 Stat. 2554); to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
EC–2642. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule — Air Plan Approval; Indiana; Huntington County 2010 Sulfur Dioxide Redesignation and Maintenance
Plan [EPA-R05-OAR-2024-0378; FRL-12933-02R5] received January 8, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2643. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule — Air Plan Approval; New Hampshire; Updates to Materials Incorporated by Reference [EPA-R01OAR-2025-3027;
FRL-13094-01-R1]
received
January 8, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2644. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule — Approval and
Promulgation of Delegation of Authority for
Designated Facilities and Pollutants; Ohio;
Delegation of Authority [EPA-R05-OAR-20250355; FRL-13131-01-R5] received January 8,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2645. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule — Air Plan Approval; California; Mojave Desert Air Quality Management District; Definition of
Terms [EPA-R09-OAR-2022-0858; FRL-1056302-R9] received January 8, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2646. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule — Air Plan Approval; California; Mojave Desert Air Quality Management District; Replacing Outdated Requirements [EPA-R09-OAR-2024-0210;
FRL-11949-02-R9] received January 8, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2647. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s withdrawal of direct final
rule — Technical Amendments to the
EPCRA Hazardous Chemical Inventory Reporting Requirements To Conform to the
2024 OSHA Hazard Communication Standard;
Withdrawal [EPA-HQ-OLEM-2025-0299; FRL12698-05-OLEM] (RIN: 2050-AH40) received
January 8, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2648. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule — Air Plan Approval; Kentucky; Emissions Inventory and
Nonattainment New Source Review for the
Henderson-Webster Sulfur Dioxide Nonattainment Area [EPA-R04-OAR-2025-0023;
FRL-12899-02-R4] received January 8, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2649. A letter from the Office Manager,
Office of the District of Columbia Auditor,
transmitting a report entitled, ‘‘Twenty
Years of D.C. Agency Overspending’’, pursuant to Public Law 93-198, Sec. 455(d); (87 Stat.
803); to the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform.
EC–2650. A letter from the Deputy General
Counsel for Housing Programs and Alternate
Designated Agency Ethics Official, Department of Housing and Urban Development,
transmitting six notifications of an action
on nomination, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3349(a);
Public Law 105-277, Sec. 151(b); (112 Stat.
2681-614); to the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform.
EC–2651. A letter from the Director, Federal Election Commission, transmitting the
Commission’s report stating that it did not
complete or initiate competitive sourcing for
conversion of an agency activity to contractors for the prior fiscal year, pursuant to 31
U.S.C. 501 note; Public Law 108-199, Sec.
647(b); (118 Stat. 361); to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2652. A letter from the Commissioners,
Federal Maritime Commission, transmitting
the Commission’s Performance and Accountability Report for Fiscal Year 2025, pursuant
to 31 U.S.C. 3515(a)(1); Public Law 101-576,
Sec. 303(a)(1) (as amended by Public Law 107289, Sec. 2(a)); (116 Stat. 2049); to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2653. A letter from the Treasurer, National Gallery of Art, transmitting the Gallery’s Performance and Accountability Re-

PO 00000

Frm 00054

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

port for the year ended September 30, 2025,
pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3515(a)(1); Public Law
101-576, Sec. 303(a)(1) (as amended by Public
Law 107-289, Sec. 2(a)); (116 Stat. 2049); to the
Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform.
EC–2654. A letter from the Director, United
States Office of Personnel Management,
transmitting the Office’s FY 2025 Agency Financial Report, pursuant to 31 U.S.C.
3515(a)(1); Public Law 101-576, Sec. 303(a)(1)
(as amended by Public Law 107-289, Sec. 2(a));
(116 Stat. 2049); to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2655. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; DAHER AEROSPACE (Type Certificate Previously Held by SOCATA) Airplanes
[Docket No.: FAA-2025-2265; Project Identifier MCAI-2024-00714-A; Amendment 39-23224;
AD 2025-26-02] (RIN: 2120-AA64) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2656. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Airworthiness Directives; Diamond Aircraft Industries GmbH
Airplanes
[Docket
No.:
FAA-2025-2263;
Project Identifier MCAI-2024-00729-A; Amendment 39-23204; AD 2025-24-07] (RIN: 2120-AA64)
received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2657. A letter from the Manager, Legal
Litigation and Support, FAA, Department of
Transportation, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Amendment of Colored
Federal Airway Green 8, Jet Route J-115,
United States Area Navigation (RNAV)
Route T-227 and Establishment of RNAV
Route Q-188 in Alaska; Correction [Docket
No.: FAA-2025-0372; Airspace Docket No.: 24AAL-126] (RIN: 2120-AA66) received January
9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
f

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES ON
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XIII, reports of
committees were delivered to the Clerk
for printing and reference to the proper
calendar, as follows:
Mr. WALBERG: Committee on Education
and Workforce. H.R. 2616. A bill to require
public elementary and middle schools that
receive funds under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 to obtain parental consent before changing a minor’s
gender markers, pronouns, or preferred name
on any school form or sex-based accommodations, including locker rooms or bathrooms,
with an amendment (Rept. 119–441). Referred
to the Committee of the Whole House on the
state of the Union.
Mr. WALBERG: Committee on Education
and Workforce. H.R. 2617. A bill to amend the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965 to prevent the use of funds under such
Act to teach or advance concepts related to
gender ideology, and for other purposes; with
an amendment (Rept. 119–442). Referred to
the Committee of the Whole House on the
state of the Union.
Mr. WALBERG: Committee on Education
and Workforce. H.R. 3453. A bill to modify
the program of grants to support high-quality charter schools, with an amendment

E:\CR\FM\K13JA7.116

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

(Rept. 119–443). Referred to the Committee of
the Whole House on the state of the Union.
Mr. WALBERG: Committee on Education
and Workforce H.R. 2516. A bill to amend the
Higher Education Act of 1965 to prohibit political litmus tests in accreditation of institutions of higher education, and for other
purposes, with an amendment (Rept. 119–444).
Referred to the Committee of the Whole
House on the state of the Union.
Ms. FOXX: Committee on Rules. H. Res.
992. A resolution providing for consideration
of the bill (H.R. 7006) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes (Rept. 119–445). Referred to the House
Calendar.
Mr. COMER: Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform. H.R. 580. A bill to
amend the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act
of 1995 to provide for regulatory impact analyses for certain rules, and for other purposes;
with an amendment (Rept. 119–446 Pt. 1). Referred to the Committee of the Whole House
on the state of the Union.
DISCHARGE OF COMMITTEE

Pursuant to clause 2 of rule XIII, the
Committees on Rules, the Budget, and
the Judiciary discharged from further
consideration. H.R. 580 referred to the
Committee of the Whole House on the
state of the Union.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following
titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:
By Mr. BAIRD (for himself, Mr. COMER,
Mr. EVANS of Colorado, Mr. MOORE of
North Carolina, and Ms. CRAIG):
H.R. 7024. A bill to amend the Agriculture,
Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agency Appropriations
Act, 2026, to delay the implementation of
amendments made by such Act to the hemp
production provisions of the Agricultural
Marketing Act of 1946; to the Committee on
Agriculture.
By Mr. YAKYM (for himself, Mr.
BACON, Ms. PETTERSEN, Mr. TIMMONS,
Ms. ROSS, and Mr. MOORE of Utah):
H.R. 7025. A bill to amend title 5, United
States Code, to require the implementation
of evidence-based practices with respect to
certain Federal grants, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform.
By Mr. BARR (for himself and Mr.
PETERS):
H.R. 7026. A bill providing for a joint hearing of the Committees on the Budget of the
House of Representatives and the Senate to
receive a presentation from the Comptroller
General of the United States regarding the
audited financial statement of the executive
branch; to the Committee on Rules.
By Mr. BILIRAKIS (for himself and Mr.
LEVIN):
H.R. 7027. A bill to amend title 10, United
States Code, to eliminate the recoupment of
separation pay, special separation benefits,
and voluntary separation incentive payments from members of the Armed Forces
who subsequently receive disability compensation under laws administered by the
Department of Veterans Affairs and to impose limitations on the authority of the Secretary of Defense to recoup such pay from
members who subsequently receive military
retired or retainer pay; to the Committee on
Armed Services, and in addition to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, for a period to
be subsequently determined by the Speaker,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H717

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. BURCHETT:
H.R. 7028. A bill to require the Secretary of
State to submit a notification to Congress
prior to obligating funds for certain art-related purchases, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mrs. DINGELL (for herself, Mr.
FITZPATRICK, Mr. PANETTA, and Mr.
HUFFMAN):
H.R. 7029. A bill to ensure that older adults
and individuals with disabilities are prepared
for disasters, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, and in addition to the Committees
on Education and Workforce, and Energy and
Commerce, for a period to be subsequently
determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. EMMER (for himself and Mr.
TORRES of New York):
H.R. 7030. A bill to amend section 242 of the
National Housing Act to provide parity with
respect to access to the mortgage insurance
for hospitals program for licensed hospitals,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Financial Services.
By Mr. FULCHER:
H.R. 7031. A bill to direct the Secretary of
the Interior to upgrade existing emergency
communications centers in units of the National Park System to Next Generation 9-11 systems, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Natural Resources.
By Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois (for himself,
Mrs. HAYES, Mrs. GRIJALVA, Mr.
Ms.
CRAIG,
Mr.
CASAR,
KRISHNAMOORTHI, Ms. TLAIB, Mr.
LANDSMAN, Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia,
Ms. BUDZINSKI, Mrs. CHERFILUSMCCORMICK, Mr. CARBAJAL, Mr. GARCIA of California, Mr. CARSON, Ms.
CHU, Ms. TOKUDA, Ms. TITUS, Mr.
EVANS of Pennsylvania, Ms. NORTON,
Ms. STANSBURY, Mr. BOYLE of PennMr.
sylvania,
Mrs.
RAMIREZ,
THANEDAR, Ms. GARCIA of Texas, Ms.
WILSON of Florida, and Mr. DAVIS of
Illinois):
H.R. 7032. A bill to ensure that paraprofessionals and education support staff are paid
a living wage; to the Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Mr. GOLDMAN of New York (for
Mr.
himself,
Ms.
GOODLANDER,
BRESNAHAN, Mrs. TRAHAN, Mr. BACON,
Mr. FITZPATRICK, Mr. BOYLE of Pennsylvania, Mr. LALOTA, Mr. MCGOVERN, Mr. CISCOMANI, Mr. DELUZIO, Mr.
LAWLER, Mr. RILEY of New York, Mr.
MACKENZIE, Mr. NEGUSE, Mr. MEUSER,
Mr. PAPPAS, Mr. MOULTON, Mr. STANTON, and Ms. GILLEN):
H.R. 7033. A bill to amend title 5, United
States Code, to improve recruitment and retention of Federal correctional officers, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
By Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas:
H.R. 7034. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to eliminate the dollar limitations on the exclusion of gain from sales
of principal residences, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mr. GOODEN (for himself and Ms.
LOFGREN):
H.R. 7035. A bill to amend the Electronic
Fund Transfer Act to require the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve system to
prescribe regulations relating to network
competition in credit card transactions, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.

PO 00000

Frm 00055

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

By Mr. HUIZENGA:
H.R. 7036. A bill to increase collaboration
within the Department of State between the
Office of Opinion Research of the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research and the Bureau of
Global Public Affairs; to the Committee on
Foreign Affairs.
By Mrs. KIM (for herself, Mr. BERA, Mr.
MAST, Mr. HUIZENGA, Mr. OLSZEWSKI,
Mr. SHREVE, Mr. WITTMAN, Mr. STANTON, Mr. LAWLER, Mr. PANETTA, Ms.
TITUS, Mr. MOORE of North Carolina,
Mr. CASTRO of Texas, and Mrs.
RADEWAGEN):
H.R. 7037. A bill to promote United States
and allied energy and mineral security, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. LEVIN (for himself, Ms.
ESCOBAR, Mr. DOGGETT, Mr. CASTEN,
Mr. STANTON, Mr. VARGAS, Mr. MIN,
Ms. FRIEDMAN, Mr. LICCARDO, Ms.
NORTON, Ms. MATSUI, Mrs. FOUSHEE,
and Mr. RUIZ):
H.R. 7038. A bill to prohibit the United
States Government from funding Venezuela’s
oil infrastructure, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY (for herself, Ms. NORTON, Mr. IVEY, Ms.
ELFRETH, Mr. WALKINSHAW, Mr.
THANEDAR, and Mr. BOYLE of Pennsylvania):
H.R. 7039. A bill to prohibit the naming, renaming, designating, or redesignating of any
Federal building, land, or other asset in the
name of a sitting President, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, and in addition to
the Committees on Natural Resources, and
Oversight and Government Reform, for a period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. MOORE of Utah (for himself,
Mr. MOOLENAAR, Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia, Mr. ADERHOLT, Mr. DUNN of
Florida, Mr. MORAN, Mr. GOSAR, Mrs.
HARSHBARGER, Mr. MCCORMICK, Mr.
RULLI, Mr. MCDOWELL, Mr. KENNEDY
of Utah, Mr. MCGUIRE, Mr. SESSIONS,
Mr. SHREVE, Mr. ROSE, and Mr.
OWENS):
H.R. 7040. A bill to prevent citizens of foreign adversarial nations from entering into
or enforcing surrogacy contracts in the
United States; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. NORMAN (for himself and Mr.
CLYDE):
H.R. 7041. A bill to prohibit the consideration in the House of Representatives of any
legislation containing an earmark; to the
Committee on Rules.
By Mr. PAPPAS:
H.R. 7042. A bill to expand the Weatherization Assistance Program for activities related to active duty and reserve military
households, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. PAPPAS (for himself and Mr.
MOYLAN):
H.R. 7043. A bill to amend the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act to reauthorize
the transmission facilitation program; to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. PAPPAS (for himself and Mr.
LAWLER):
H.R. 7044. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to establish the energy burden credit; to the Committee on Ways and
Means.
By Mr. PATRONIS:
H.R. 7045. A bill to repeal section 230 of the
Communications Act of 1934, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.033

H13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H718

By Ms. PRESSLEY (for herself, Ms.
OMAR, and Ms. SIMON):
H.R. 7046. A bill to amend the Revised
Statutes to remove the defense of qualified
immunity in the case of any action under
section 1979, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. RUIZ:
H.R. 7047. A bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to expand eligibility for, and
make permanent, certain programs for
homeless veterans; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. TAKANO (for himself, Mr.
AMODEI of Nevada, and Mr. MAGAZINER):
H.R. 7048. A bill to increase consumer protection with respect to negative options in
all media, including on the internet, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce.
By Mr. VALADAO:
H.R. 7049. A bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to provide certain assessments
of veterans needing homeless program services, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania (for herself, Mrs. BEATTY, Ms. BROWN, Ms.
CLARKE of New York, Ms. CROCKETT,
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Mr. FIGURES,
Mrs. FOUSHEE, Mr. JACKSON of Illinois, Mr. KENNEDY of New York, Mrs.
Ms.
MCCLELLAN,
Mr.
MCBATH,
MFUME, and Ms. PLASKETT):
H. Res. 990. A resolution recognizing the
113th anniversary of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Incorporated; to the Committee on
Education and Workforce.
By Mr. LALOTA:
H. Res. 991. A resolution requesting return
of official papers on H.R. 1834; considered and
agreed to.
By Ms. ANSARI (for herself, Ms. FOXX,
Ms. ROSS, Mr. FITZPATRICK, Mr.
HIMES, Mrs. BICE, Mr. SCHNEIDER, and
Mr. CAREY):
H. Res. 993. A resolution recognizing and
expressing support for the Iranian people
protesting for a free and democratic Iran; to
the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. FOSTER (for himself, Ms.
TITUS, Mr. ESPAILLAT, Mr. VEASEY,
and Mr. CORREA):
H. Res. 994. A resolution expressing the
sense of the House of Representatives that
the Secretary of Defense should review section 504 of title 10, United States Code, for
purposes related to enlisting certain aliens
in the Armed Forces; to the Committee on
Armed Services.
By Mr. GOMEZ (for himself, Mrs. KIM,
Ms. MENG, Mr. BELL, Ms. BONAMICI,
Mr. CARTER of Louisiana, Mr. CARSON, Mr. CASE, Ms. CHU, Mr. CORREA,
Ms. DELBENE, Mrs. DINGELL, Mrs.
FLETCHER, Mr. GOTTHEIMER, Mr.
JOHNSON of Georgia, Ms. KAMLAGERMr.
KHANNA,
Mr.
DOVE,
KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mr. LIEU, Mr.
LYNCH, Mrs. MCIVER, Mr. MENENDEZ,
Mr. MIN, Mr. MULLIN, Mr. NADLER,
Ms. NORTON, Mr. PANETTA, Mr.
PETERS, Ms. ROSS, Ms. SCANLON, Ms.
SCHAKOWSKY, Ms. SEWELL, Mr. SHERMAN, Mr. SMITH of Washington, Ms.
STANSBURY, Ms. STRICKLAND, Mr.
SUBRAMANYAM, Ms. TOKUDA, Mr.
TONKO, Mr. TRAN, Mr. VARGAS, Mrs.
WATSON COLEMAN, Mr. WILSON of
South Carolina, Ms. WILSON of Florida, Ms. SÁNCHEZ, Mr. GOLDMAN of
New York, Mr. SWALWELL, Ms.
BARRAGÁN, Mr. COSTA, Mr. SCOTT of
Virginia, Mr. GREEN of Texas, Mr.
KENNEDY of New York, Ms. MATSUI,
Ms. MCCLELLAN, Ms. WILLIAMS of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

Georgia, Mr. CISNEROS, Mr. LATIMER,
Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY, Mr. DAVIS of
Illinois, Mrs. TORRES of California,
and Ms. GARCIA of Texas):
H. Res. 995. A resolution supporting the
goals and ideals of Korean American Day; to
the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
f

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers
granted to Congress in the Constitution to enact the accompanying bill or
joint resolution.
By Mr. BAIRD:
H.R. 7024.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 3 (Commerce
Clause)
By Mr. YAKYM:
H.R. 7025.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mr. BARR:
H.R. 7026.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Congress has the authority to enact this
legislation pursuant to Article I, Section 8 of
the Constitution, including its powers over
the federal budget, oversight of the executive
branch, and the authority to make all laws
necessary and proper for carrying out those
powers.
By Mr. BILIRAKIS:
H.R. 7027.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
The Constitutional authority of Congress
to enact this legislation is provided by Article 1, Section 8 of the United States Constitution.
By Mr. BURCHETT:
H.R. 7028.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8.
By Mrs. DINGELL:
H.R. 7029.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
The constitutional authority of Congress
to enact this legislation is provided by Article I, section 8 of the United States Constitution.
By Mr. EMMER:
H.R. 7030.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. FULCHER:
H.R. 7031.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
clause 18 of section 8 of article 1 of the
Constitution
By Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois:
H.R. 7032.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to Article 1, Section 8, of the
U.S. Constitution.
By Mr. GOLDMAN of New York:
H.R. 7033.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Under Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution, Congress has the power ‘‘to make all

PO 00000

Frm 00056

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Laws which shall be necessary and proper for
carrying into the Execution for the foregoing
Powers, and all other Powers vested by this
Constitution in the Government of the
United States, or any Department or Officer
thereof.’’
By Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas:
H.R. 7034.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. GOODEN:
H.R. 7035.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
The Constitutional authority on which
this bill rests is the power of Congress to lay
and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises to pay the debts and provide for the
common Defefense and general welfare of the
United States, as enumerated in Article I,
Section 8, Clause 1. Thus, Congress has the
authority not only to increase taxes, but
also, to reduce taxes to promote the general
welfare of the United States of America and
her citizens. Additionally, Congress has the
By Mr. HUIZENGA:
H.R. 7036.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, section 8.
By Mrs. KIM:
H.R. 7037.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8.
By Mr. LEVIN:
H.R. 7038.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8.
By Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY:
H.R. 7039.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article IV, Section 3, clause 2 (Property
Clause)
By Mr. MOORE of Utah:
H.R. 7040.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
By Mr. NORMAN:
H.R. 7041.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I
By Mr. PAPPAS:
H.R. 7042.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18
By Mr. PAPPAS:
H.R. 7043.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18
By Mr. PAPPAS:
H.R. 7044.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18
By Mr. PATRONIS:
H.R. 7045.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 3 of the United
States Constitution
By Ms. PRESSLEY:
H.R. 7046.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18
By Mr. RUIZ:
H.R. 7047.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, section 8, Clauses 1 and 18 of the
United States Constitution, to provide for

E:\CR\FM\L13JA7.100

H13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

the general welfare and make all laws necessary and proper to carry out the powers of
Congress.
By Mr. TAKANO:
H.R. 7048.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Section 8 of Article I of the Constitution
By Mr. VALADAO:
H.R. 7049.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H.R. 231: Ms. BOEBERT.
H.R. 485: Ms. SALAZAR.
H.R. 576: Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 645: Mr. GROTHMAN.
H.R. 991: Mr. MOORE of Utah.
H.R. 1061: Mr. LATIMER and Mr. STANTON.
H.R. 1065: Mr. HURD of Colorado.
H.R. 1197: Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI.
H.R. 1227: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 1229: Mr. WALKINSHAW.
H.R. 1232: Ms. VAN DUYNE.
H.R. 1254: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 1291: Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.R. 1330: Mr. TORRES of New York.
H.R. 1380: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 1415: Mr. BERGMAN.
H.R. 1422: Mr. NUNN of Iowa.
H.R. 1477: Mr. CISNEROS.
H.R. 1530: Mr. HAMADEH of Arizona.
H.R. 1628: Mr. JACK, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN,
Mr. BISHOP, Mr. COLE, Mr. BUCHANAN, Mr.
CARTER of Texas, Mr. MCCAUL, Mr. ELLZEY,
Mr. BARRETT, Mr. ROUZER, Mr. ALLEN, Mr.
HURD of Colorado, and Mr. VAN ORDEN.
H.R. 1672: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 1868: Mr. DUNN of Florida and Mr.
HAMADEH of Arizona.
H.R. 1941: Mr. COURTNEY.
H.R. 1958: Mr. CARTER of Georgia, Mr.
MOORE of Alabama, Mrs. MILLER of Illinois,
and Mr. TIFFANY.
H.R. 2048: Mr. RUTHERFORD.
H.R. 2089: Mr. SMUCKER and Mr. RUTHERFORD.
H.R. 2149: Ms. SALAZAR.
H.R. 2166: Mr. MOORE of Alabama.
H.R. 2402: Mr. BERA.
H.R. 2531: Mr. GOLDMAN of New York and
Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 2598: Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY.
H.R. 2727: Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 2741: Mrs. TRAHAN.
H.R. 2756: Mr. MOYLAN.
H.R. 2784: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 2837: Mrs. BEATTY.
H.R. 2902: Mr. MOORE of Utah.
H.R. 2949: Ms. CROCKETT.
H.R. 3046: Ms. CROCKETT.
H.R. 3178: Mr. RUTHERFORD.
H.R. 3184: Ms. DEXTER.
H.R. 3277: Ms. MCCOLLUM.
H.R. 3497: Mr. MOORE of North Carolina.
H.R. 3526: Mr. LIEU.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:05 Jan 14, 2026

H719

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

H.R. 3562: Mr. CAREY and Mr. HARDER of
California.
H.R. 3593: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 3604: Mr. THOMPSON of California.
H.R. 3644: Mrs. TRAHAN.
H.R. 3683: Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI.
H.R. 3699: Mr. ROGERS of Alabama.
H.R. 3773: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 3779: Mr. TRAN.
H.R. 3789: Mrs. HINSON.
H.R. 3930: Mr. BERA and Ms. BROWN.
H.R. 4093: Mr. PFLUGER.
H.R. 4176: Mr. MFUME.
H.R. 4206: Mrs. GRIJALVA and Ms. POU.
H.R. 4443: Ms. CROCKETT.
H.R. 4664: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas.
H.R. 4708: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 4740: Mr. WALKINSHAW.
H.R. 4793: Mr. MOORE of Utah.
H.R. 5064: Mrs. KIM.
H.R. 5106: Ms. STRICKLAND.
H.R. 5221: Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas.
H.R. 5267: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 5269: Mr. LAWLER and Ms. VAN DUYNE.
H.R. 5351: Mr. KENNEDY of Utah and Mr.
MCCORMICK.
H.R. 5403: Ms. BYNUM.
H.R. 5415: Mr. LICCARDO and Ms. LEE of Nevada.
H.R. 5434: Ms. BROWN.
H.R. 5438: Mr. CRANE, Mr. MILLS, Mr. DAVIS
of North Carolina, Mr. LAWLER, Mr.
MOSKOWITZ, Ms. BOEBERT, Mrs. HOUCHIN, Mr.
FONG, and Mr. GIMENEZ.
H.R. 5461: Mr. GROTHMAN.
H.R. 5486: Ms. RIVAS.
H.R. 5509: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 5527: Mr. BELL.
H.R. 5548: Mr. HARIDOPOLOS.
H.R. 5622: Mr. GOLDMAN of New York.
H.R. 5634: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 5653: Mr. POCAN.
H.R. 5705: Mr. NORCROSS.
H.R. 5811: Mrs. LUNA.
H.R. 5815: Mr. ROSE.
H.R. 5862: Mr. VINDMAN and Mr. PAPPAS.
H.R. 5906: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 5939: Ms. STRICKLAND.
H.R. 5973: Mr. WALKINSHAW, Mr. POCAN,
Mrs. DINGELL, and Ms. BARRAGÁN.
H.R. 6069: Mr. SWALWELL.
H.R. 6164: Mr. KILEY of California.
H.R. 6170: Mr. SHREVE.
H.R. 6176: Mr. MAGAZINER.
H.R. 6260: Mr. MOORE of North Carolina.
H.R. 6280: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 6307: Mr. GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 6366: Mr. HARIDOPOLOS and Ms. SALINAS.
H.R. 6372: Mr. OGLES.
H.R. 6390: Ms. TOKUDA, Ms. JAYAPAL, and
Ms. STANSBURY.
H.R. 6440: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6448: Mr. WIED.
H.R. 6469: Mrs. KIM and Mr. SCHNEIDER.
H.R. 6520: Mr. HARIDOPOLOS.
H.R. 6566: Mr. CARTER of Georgia.
H.R. 6574: Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas and Mr.
NADLER.
H.R. 6694: Ms. MALLIOTAKIS, Mr. MANNION,
and Mr. KENNEDY of New York.
H.R. 6709: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6725: Ms. GARCIA of Texas.

PO 00000

Frm 00057

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

H.R. 6731: Mr. MENENDEZ, Ms. DELAURO,
Ms. MCBRIDE, Mr. LATIMER, Ms. CRAIG, and
Ms. SALINAS.
H.R. 6760: Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY.
H.R. 6766: Mr. POCAN, Ms. SIMON, Mr.
LANGWORTHY, Mr. RUTHERFORD, and Mrs.
GRIJALVA.
H.R. 6771: Mr. GREEN of Texas.
H.R. 6780: Ms. BUDZINSKI.
H.R. 6797: Mr. FITZPATRICK and Mr.
WALKINSHAW.
H.R. 6806: Ms. SCHAKOWSKY and Mr. JACKSON of Illinois.
H.R. 6816: Mrs. MCBATH.
H.R. 6821: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6867: Mr. GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 6891: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6945: Mr. HARRIS of Maryland.
H.R. 6960: Ms. LOFGREN, Mr. MCGARVEY,
and Mr. KENNEDY of Utah.
H.R. 6973: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6980: Ms. TLAIB, Ms. TOKUDA, and Ms.
TITUS.
H.R. 6989: Ms. OMAR.
H.R. 6990: Ms. ROSS.
H.R. 6998: Mr. CAREY and Mr. DAVIS of
North Carolina.
H.R. 7004: Mr. GOTTHEIMER and Ms.
DELAURO.
H.R. 7008: Mr. BEGICH, Mr. CRANE, Mr.
LAHOOD, Mr. ROGERS of Alabama, Ms.
TENNEY, Mr. MAST, Mr. GOSAR, Mr. ELLZEY,
Mr. FALLON, Mr. LANGWORTHY, Mr. DOWNING,
and Mr. WEBSTER of Florida.
H.R. 7016: Mr. LATIMER, Mr. QUIGLEY, Ms.
JAYAPAL, Mr. COHEN, Mr. LARSON of Connecticut, Ms. PETTERSEN, Mr. LARSEN of
Washington, and Mr. VARGAS.
H.J. Res. 80: Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.J. Res. 122: Mr. GOLDEN of Maine.
H.J. Res. 139: Mr. BRECHEEN.
H. Con. Res. 68: Ms. UNDERWOOD, Mr. PALLONE, Mr. THOMPSON of California, Ms.
DELAURO, Mr. MENENDEZ, Ms. JAYAPAL, Ms.
ROSS, Ms. CRAIG, Mrs. FLETCHER, Mr.
MCGARVEY, Mr. LYNCH, and Ms. KELLY of Illinois.
H. Res. 578: Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania.
H. Res. 927: Mr. BERA.
H. Res. 984: Mr. RUTHERFORD.
f

CONGRESSIONAL EARMARKS, LIMITED TAX BENEFITS, OR LIMITED TARIFF BENEFITS
Under clause 9 of rule XXI, lists or
statements on congressional earmarks,
limited tax benefits, or limited tariff
benefits were submitted as follows:
OFFERED BY MR. ARRINGTON
The provisions that warranted a referral to
the Committee on the Budget in H.R. 7006,
the Financial Services and General Government and National Security, Department of
State, and Related Programs Appropriations
Act, 2026, do not contain any congressional
earmarks, limited tax benefits, or limited
tariff benefits as defined in clause 9 of rule
XXI.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA7.036

H13JAPT1

UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, TUESDAY, JANUARY 13, 2026

No. 9

Senate
The Senate met at 10 a.m. and was
called to order by the President pro
tempore (Mr. GRASSLEY).

LEGISLATIVE SESSION

f

COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE;
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026—Motion to Proceed—Resumed
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate will resume consideration of the motion to
proceed to H.R. 6938, which the clerk
will report.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:

PRAYER
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
Eternal Father, strong to save, whose
arms have bound the restless waves, we
praise You for Your magnificent love
that awakens us each day.
Thank You for lawmakers who strive
to please You. Lord, continue to guide
their feet and teach them Your wisdom.
In these turbulent times, show Yourself strong on behalf of those who love
You. Solve the riddles that confound
us. Confuse those who seek to hinder
Your providence. And give Your
strength to those who would like to
throw in the towel. Bring order to a
world that often seems to spin out of
control. Please comfort all who mourn.
We pray in Your mighty Name.
Amen.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The President pro tempore led the
Pledge of Allegiance, as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MORENO). Under the previous order, the
leadership time is reserved.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

CONCLUSION OF MORNING
BUSINESS
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Morning
business is closed.

RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY LEADER

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority leader is recognized.

Motion to proceed to Calendar No. 299,
H.R. 6938, a bill making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Iowa.
TRIBUTE TO BRENNA TEERLINCK

Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, I am
here to honor a young Iowan. I do it
during this month of January because
January is National Blood Donor
Month.
It seems hard to believe, but every 2
seconds someone in the United States
needs blood. Yet less than 10 percent of
those who can donate blood actually
donate blood. Regular blood donations
can help a family member, a neighbor,
and perhaps in most cases, a stranger.
An Iowan who can inspire us all to
donate blood is Brenna Teerlinck. Last
fall, Brenna, a St. Ambrose University
student in Davenport, IA, was inducted
into the National Blood Donation Hall
of Fame. She is the youngest person
ever to receive this honor.
At age 16, Brenna was inspired to donate blood for her cousin, who was battling a rare immune disorder. She is
now a freshman in college. Even
though she is in college, Brenna continues to donate blood regularly. Her
bravery and dedication ought to inspire
us all to donate blood.
Congratulations, Brenna.
I yield the floor.

MINNESOTA

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, recent reports suggest that widespread fraud
has taken root in the State of Minnesota. Prosecutors say that industrial-scale fraud has affected at least 14
federally funded programs in the State
and that, since 2018, $9 billion or more
may have been stolen from these programs—stolen from taxpayers and from
the people in need that these programs
are meant to help.
There have been nearly eight indictments related to just one organization
that received $250 million by claiming
to have served meals to needy people
during the pandemic. In another case,
prosecutors say that a program designed to help people at risk of homelessness was subject to widespread
fraud, with its costs ballooning to more
than $100 million in just 4 years. In yet
another case, prosecutors state that a
fraudulent provider stole $14 million
from a program to provide therapy to
children with autism, and I could go
on.
One has to wonder how this could
happen, and I hope we will soon find
out.
Last week, every Republican Senator
joined Senator CASSIDY’s letter to the
Governor of Minnesota, demanding answers about the large-scale fraud that
appears to have happened on his watch.
The Department of Justice has surged
resources to Minnesota to assist in
prosecuting these crimes, and the
Trump administration recently announced it is creating a new position in
the Department of Justice focused on
investigating instances of fraud across
the country because, unfortunately,
cases of waste, fraud, and abuse are not
confined to one State. The Government
Accountability Office estimates that as
much as $500 billion in Federal funds is
lost each year to fraud—not an inconsequential sum—and every one of those

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S141

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.000

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S142

dollars is a dollar that isn’t going to an
American in need.
Republicans have been working to
root out waste, fraud, and abuse in
Federal programs—the same type of
abuses now coming to light in Minnesota. Our landmark legislation, the
Working Families Tax Cuts, included a
number of reforms to focus Federal dollars on those most in need, guard
against abuses of taxpayer funds, and
hold States accountable for the Federal
funding that they receive.
New measures in the law prevent
noncitizens from receiving Federal
healthcare and nutrition benefits and
refocus those programs to serving
American citizens. The law also
strengthens work requirements for
able-bodied, working-age adults without young children, and it increases accountability.
The new law requires States to check
eligibility for certain Medicaid enrollees twice per year and to remove ineligible people from their Medicaid rolls
more quickly. It takes aim at duplicative enrollment in Federal healthcare
programs, which CMS estimates is
costing taxpayers as much as $14 billion per year; and it ensures deceased
individuals don’t continue receiving
payments, as happened in Colorado a
few years ago, costing taxpayers more
than $7 million.
We also took steps to hold States accountable for being good stewards of
Federal funding. We are incentivizing
States to reduce their error rates when
making SNAP payments. Significantly,
we took aim at rampant abuse of the
provider tax loophole. Use of this loophole, which sees States inflate the
price of healthcare services provided
through Medicaid in order to garner
larger reimbursement from the Federal
Government, has been a problem for
quite a while now. And thanks to waivers that the Biden administration
issued to California and other blue
States that allows them to further exploit a similar loophole, taxpayers
were on the hook for tens of billions of
dollars in new spending. So Republicans took action to rein in this abuse
and reduce the bills that States are
running up for taxpayers.
Ensuring that Federal taxpayer dollars are being spent responsibly and effectively on the people they are supposed to help ought to be a no-brainer,
and it should not—not—be a partisan
issue, but apparently it is. While Republicans were working to restore integrity to Federal programs, Democrats were panning our commonsense
measures as ‘‘cruel’’ and then voted
again and again to repeal them.
We have heard little from Democrats
condemning the fraud scandal currently engulfing the State of Minnesota, and Democrats have shown
that they are perfectly willing to allow
waste, fraud, and abuse to continue in
the Affordable Care Act exchanges.
That is right. Despite evidence of fraud
in the ACA exchanges, Democrats have
voted time and again to do nothing

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

about it and have actually tried to repeal Republican-led reforms.
There is waste, fraud, and abuse in
ObamaCare, and it seems that the
Biden COVID subsidies were especially
susceptible to fraud. A recent report
from the Government Accountability
Office revealed that the ACA exchanges
continue to enroll fake individuals, improperly pay out taxpayer-subsidized
health insurance, and fail to ensure
payment accuracy. The GAO tested 24
fake accounts on the ACA exchanges,
and 23 of them were enrolled with false
or no documentation to verify Social
Security numbers, citizenship, or reported income.
Then there is the growing number of
enrollees in the exchanges who filed
zero claims. In 2024, 40 percent of people who got fully subsidized insurance
coverage through the exchanges never
filed a claim—40 percent. Now, there
might be some good reasons for that,
but it might also be because insurance
companies are incentivized to sign people up, and these individuals may be
signed up and not even know they have
coverage. But Democrats have shown
they are perfectly fine with the status
quo. They voted numerous times to extend the enhanced subsidies without a
single reform. They even shut down the
government to try and extend them.
These are just the beginning of the
issues with ObamaCare.
Work continues to investigate and
prosecute criminals engaged in fraud
and to, hopefully, recover the tax dollars that have been stolen. I certainly
hope the individuals of Minnesota and
other criminals around the country are
prosecuted to the fullest extent of the
law. But we can’t just hope to prosecute fraud; we need to prevent it. We
need to be responsible stewards of taxpayer dollars and place guardrails on
Federal programs to protect against
nefarious schemes and bad actors. We
need to ensure, when we commit taxpayer dollars to a particular program,
that the money actually goes to the
people that program is designed to
help.
Republicans have made progress on
restoring integrity to Federal programs this past year, but we have more
work to do, and we will continue our
efforts to be good stewards of taxpayer
dollars and ensure that Federal programs are serving the American people
as intended.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, when
government wastes taxpayer money,
taxpayers have a right to know what
happened. And when emboldened criminals steal money intended to help sin-

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

gle moms and children in need, taxpayers have a right to be angry.
Americans—and I am hearing it in
Wyoming, and I am sure you are hearing it, Mr. President, in your home
State of Ohio—Americans are infuriated with the staggering amount of
fraud unfolding today in the State of
Minnesota. The past few weeks have
shown just how deep the corruption in
Minnesota has turned out to be.
Investigators have now uncovered
fraud schemes across 14 different Minnesota Medicaid Programs. Most people don’t even know there are 14 different Medicaid Programs. There is
fraud in all of them in Minnesota.
Joe Thompson, U.S. attorney in Minnesota, has spent his career prosecuting fraud, and based on his extensive investigation, he believes criminals have now stolen at least $9 billion—billion with a ‘‘b’’—from those
Minnesota Medicaid Programs. That is
half of the total amount of money Minnesota spends for Medicaid Programs
in the State. Today, the fraud is so
prevalent that Thompson says the
State has ‘‘developed a fraud tourism’’—tourism—‘‘industry.’’ Can you
imagine that—‘‘a fraud tourism industry.’’
Here is how these schemes work.
Criminals, fraudsters, set up fake businesses for nonprofit organizations. The
criminals then claim to provide services—services such as housing, food,
and healthcare assistance. Then they
bill Medicaid. They bill them for services never provided. They use the
names of children and enroll them into
the programs. Sometimes the children
don’t exist. Sometimes the children
exist, and they are signed up by parents who are getting paid fraudulently
to let them use their children’s names.
In 2021, taxpayers paid $4.6 million
for something called Minnesota’s Integrated Community Support Medicaid
Program. It is a mouthful. In 2021, $4.6
million. Then the fraudsters hit. Three
years later, due to criminal fraud,
spending for that program ballooned to
more than $170 million. From $4 million to $170 million—that is 37 times as
much in just 3 years. Money completely stolen as the Governor and others in Minnesota, the Democrat elected
officials, looked the other way.
Taxpayers similarly paid $21 million
in 2021 for something called Minnesota’s Housing Stabilization Services. In the first 6 months of last year,
due to criminal fraud, Democrats looking the other way, taxpayers paid nearly three times that amount.
A Medicaid Program claiming to help
Minnesota children with autism cost $6
million in 2018. By 2023, due to criminal
fraud, it went from $6 million to $192
million.
Daycare fraud is just one of these
brazen schemes where the Democrats
in Minnesota look the other way. Last
month, an independent journalist visited 10 State-funded daycare sites in
the Twin Cities, Minneapolis-Saint
Paul. He found no children at the

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.002

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 13, 2026

daycare centers—middle of the day, not
a single child was there.
One year ago, a local reporter visited
several of those same sites. The reporter found no children at the daycare
centers. They are supposed to be
daycare centers, and getting paid to
take care of children.
Here is one of those sites. This is a
sign from one of the sites. It is called—
you can’t make this stuff up—Quality
‘‘Learing’’ Center. It is supposed to be
a learning center. They can’t even spell
‘‘learning’’ right. But that doesn’t stop
the Democrats in Minnesota who keep
shoveling money right to these programs, stealing money from the taxpayers—from the Democrats, going to
Democrats who are running these
things.
It is appalling. The people of the
United States are appalled and are furious. This ought to be a red flag for
fraud. Why aren’t the Democrats who
run the place doing anything about it?
There were 95 violations for this
‘‘learing’’ center alone between 2019
and 2023. Violations occurred. No
records on the children. But Minnesota’s—run by the Democrats—taxpayer money continued to flow. It is
disgraceful.
These aren’t just one-off abuses. We
now know that the fraud schemes used
in the State’s childcare programs have
been used to defraud other social programs as well.
Even the New York Times has pointed to this. They say the fraud in Minnesota, run by the Democrats, is ‘‘staggering in its scale and brazenness.’’
I don’t see any Democrats coming to
the floor here today to point out the
fraud, talk about what is happening
there, how the money has been stolen
from people that need it, the services
that are needed by people. That means
they are not getting it.
The Department of Justice has
charged 98 defendants in Minnesota
Medicaid fraud-related cases. So far, 64
of these have been convicted.
Last month, one defendant was found
guilty of stealing $14 million from Medicaid. Yes, she did. She stole $14 million from Medicaid. You don’t hear a
word from the Minnesota Democrats
coming to the floor here to talk about
it. Nope.
She also stole nearly half a million
dollars from child nutrition programs.
The Democrats come to the floor and
say: Oh, we need more money for child
nutrition and more money for child
healthcare. Why aren’t they looking at
where the money is being taken from
the mouths of the children?
For fraudsters, how much money was
taken? Let’s put this into perspective.
The stolen money was supposed to be
used to provide 200,000 meals for hungry children who did not get fed. Democrats must think that is fine. The defendant instead sent the hundreds of
thousands of dollars overseas, and she
bought real estate in Kenya, in Africa.
Apparently, that is how business goes
in Minnesota with the Democrats who
are running that State.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S143

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

This organized, systemic theft has
gone on for years under Democrat leadership, and it really exploded under Joe
Biden, Kamala Harris, and Minnesota
Governor Tim Walz.
The
Democrats
have
permitted
schemes stacked upon schemes to drain
money meant for those in need. Republicans are not going to allow this massive theft of taxpayer dollars to be ignored. Democrats want us to just look
the other way. We are talking about a
comprehensive approach to root out
the fraud in Minnesota and across the
country.
Now, our Working Families Tax Cuts
law fights fraud. We strengthened eligibility requirements for Medicaid. We
ensured that illegal immigrants don’t
receive taxpayer-funded healthcare. We
put in place work requirements for
Medicaid and for food stamps. These
policies will protect taxpayers and will
increase accountability.
Additionally, Republicans are conducting aggressive congressional oversight. On Friday, the entire Senate Republican conference demanded Governor Walz explain his actions. We
asked nine specific, detailed questions—questions such as why Minnesota failed to adopt key fraud prevention measures. Why aren’t they trying to prevent the fraud? Why do they
keep looking the other way?
These are measures that the Department of Health and Human Services
recommended to Minnesota back in
May. Nope. Governor Walz wants nothing to do with it. He knew about this
widespread fraud. He refused to do anything about it.
Senate Republicans are ready to give
the Trump administration the manpower it needs to tackle this fraud in
Minnesota and wherever else it appears
and occurs.
The Trump administration has asked
the Senate to confirm a new Assistant
Attorney General position—a position
that will be focused on the fraud—and
the Senate will get that person in place
and on the job quickly.
The Trump administration has taken
other bold and decisive actions to stop
fraud. To further strengthen enforcement efforts, the Department of Justice has doubled the number of attorneys handling these fraud cases. The
Treasury Department is cracking down
on businesses in Minnesota for alleged
money laundering because that is what
is happening. The Department of
Health and Human Services under
President Trump froze Federal funding
for fraud-prone programs in Minnesota.
If Senate Democrats care about stopping fraud, why are they preparing to
vote today to loosen eligibility and income verifications for ObamaCare subsidies? They ought to want to be tightening these things up. But that is what
the Congressional Review Act resolution from Senator MARK WARNER of
Virginia does, and we are going to vote
on it today. Eliminating these vital
protections invites more fraud. It
means subsidies go to individuals who
don’t qualify for them.

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Congress shouldn’t make it easier to
defraud the American taxpayers. This
is the wrong direction to take after the
biggest fraud scandal in Minnesota history. Protecting taxpayer dollars
should not be a partisan issue. The
fraud scandal in Minnesota should be a
wake-up call for every American taxpayer.
Our Federal Government spends
nearly $1.5 trillion each and every year
to try to help feed and house and treat
and care for vulnerable families and
children. Those programs are there for
a reason, but Democrats seem to think
they are there to be a piggy bank for
people who want to steal from the government.
Medicaid, food stamps, and other social programs have been called a lifeline. Years of waste, fraud, abuse, and
corruption have pushed those who
truly need the help away from the lifeline and to the back of the line. That is
what Democrats have been enabling
and continue to enable.
Republicans aren’t going to stop
until the depth of this fraud is uncovered and prosecuted, and Republicans
are committed to preventing it from
happening again.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
Democratic whip.
f

DISRUPT EXPLICIT FORGED IMAGES
AND
NON-CONSENSUAL
EDITS ACT OF 2025
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, it has
been my good fortune and honor to
serve in this Chamber for many years
and to represent my home State of Illinois. I can reflect for a moment about
the changes in the Senate Chamber in
the time that I have been here. I am
afraid it would take me too long to express my thoughts on that at the expense of the regular business of this
Chamber. But we have reached a point
where there are few and far between
moments where we come together and
agree on something the American people think is important.
A year ago, I was chairman of the
Senate Judiciary Committee—for 4
years. We considered many judicial
nominees and many pieces of legislation in that committee. We were evenly divided or closely divided during the
entire period of time. I think we
achieved quite a few things despite
those divisions.
We approved more judicial nominees
for Federal judgeships in that 4-year
period of time than any 4-year period
in the history of the U.S. Senate. It
took 80 percent of the votes to be bipartisan for that to happen. So I tried
as chairman to always find something
we just might agree on, Democrats and
Republicans would agree. The issue
which I am going to address very briefly this morning is one of those issues.
There was a time when the Senate
Judiciary Committee was so equally
and evenly divided that people thought
we would accomplish nothing, but

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.003

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S144

there came an issue where there was a
consensus among Democrats and Republicans, and it is one that every parent and grandparent—I think every individual—will understand.
Have you seen your kids or grandkids
lately? Have you noticed what they are
doing? They are looking at this virtually all day long if you let them.
It is a concern for many conscientious parents that what is being broadcast on those cell phones could be lifealtering and -changing for young people, and that is one of the issues I will
address this morning.
You see, during the period of time
when I chaired the Senate Judiciary
Committee, we considered the negative
impact that these cell phones and
laptops have on children. It is frightening.
Parents came and testified before us
that their kids—normal, happy, productive, good students—in a short period of time were captivated by laptops
and cell phones into changes in attitude, changes in conduct. Sadly, some
of the children took their own lives because of their exposure to what happened on these devices. It is heartbreaking.
I recall one in particular: a young,
African-American, high school student—a track star at his school—who
got swept into some sort of broadcast
on social media and in the span of 19
hours became so despondent and excited and emotional, he harmed himself and took his own life. The parents
couldn’t understand it. They didn’t see
it coming. And when they reflected on
what was being done, it was an outrage.
There is another thing going on
which everyone should be aware of, and
if you look closely on television, you
might just spot warnings. It is this
whole issue of deepfakes, AI, taking
what looks to be real and broadcasting
it as reality when, in fact, it is not.
Last Congress, we considered a measure which I introduced and would like
to ask for passage today. There will be
a unanimous consent request made at
the end of my statement. If that unanimous consent request passes, and I
hope it does with bipartisan support, it
will go to the House of Representatives
for their consideration. It will be miraculous. We just might pass a bill. We
just might create a law. Stay tuned.
Let me tell you what it is all about.
I rise today to ask the Senate to pass
the DEFIANCE Act—bipartisan legislation that gives victims of nonconsensual, sexually explicit deepfakes the
tools to fight back against those who
would exploit them.
I want to thank the Senate sponsors
of this legislation, including my Republican colleague Senator LINDSEY
GRAHAM, Republican of South Carolina.
I told you it was bipartisan; it is.
I have been proud to partner with a
person I don’t know well on a personal
basis, but I certainly have seen her
work. Her name is Representative
OCASIO-CORTEZ. She represents the city

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

of New York. She introduced legislation in the House with seven Republicans and six Democratic cosponsors.
So her measure was bipartisan as it
passed the House of Representatives.
Congresswoman OCASIO-CORTEZ herself is a publicly confessed and admitted victim of explicit deepfakes. I commend her for working to create tools
for victims in the fight against this
despicable crime. She has been an innocent victim, and she has spoken out to
spare others what she has been
through.
In 2025, the TAKE IT DOWN Act was
signed into law. This bipartisan legislation makes it a Federal crime to knowingly publish or threaten to publish
nonconsensual intimate images on social media. The DEFIANCE Act, which
provides victims with a civil remedy—
a remedy in court—builds on the
progress of the TAKE IT DOWN Act.
The vast majority of American people support prohibiting nonconsensual,
sexually explicit, deepfake images,
with one survey finding that 85 percent
of Republicans and Democrats support
this measure. That is why I am hopeful
it will pass today and be considered favorably by the House, and that is why,
last Congress, the Senate unanimously
passed this measure. We didn’t get it
done then, and we are returning to it
now.
The Senate should pass this bill
again, and the House should take it up
quickly as the problem of nonconsensual, sexually explicit, deepfake images
continues to spread. With the push of a
button, generative AI can swap someone’s face onto another person’s body,
remove that person’s clothing so they
appear nude, or undress someone to
show them in lingerie or other exposed
positions.
Recent reporting details how users of
X, the social media platform formerly
known as Twitter, can ask its AI
chatbot Grok to undress women and
underage girls in photos. Grok will
comply with requests to show subjects
in various states of undress with images which I won’t repeat for the
record, but they are horrible.
Even after these reports, X still has
not prevented Grok from creating
these exploitative images. Let me
make sure you understand what I just
said.
Even
after
these
terrible,
deepfake, harming images are pointed
out to Grok and to X, formerly Twitter, they do not respond. They don’t
take the images off the internet. They
don’t come to the rescue of people who
are victims. That is why this legislation is critical, because this legislation
says that if they are guilty of such
reckless misconduct, they can be sued
for it and held civilly liable for the
damages.
Imagine losing control of your own
likeness and identity. Imagine that
happening to you when you are in high
school. Imagine how powerless victims
feel when they cannot remove illicit
conduct, cannot prevent it from being
reproduced repeatedly, and cannot pre-

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

vent new images from being created.
The consequences can be profound.
Victims may endure threats to their
employment, education, or reputation
or suffer additional criminal activity,
such as extortion and stalking. Many
experience depression, anxiety, and
fear of being in public, and in the worst
cases, victims have been driven to suicide.
Congresswoman OCASIO-CORTEZ described her own reaction being depicted
this way without her consent. She said:
There’s a shock to seeing images of yourself that someone could think are real.

While prominent women are often
the target for nonconsensual, sexual
deepfakes, sadly, the victims can be
virtually anyone.
There are distressing reports of high
school students struggling to respond
to this crisis. In March 2024, at least 22
students at a high school in McHenry
County, in my home State of Illinois,
learned
they
were
depicted
in
deepfakes circulating online. One was a
doctored version of two female students taken at the school prom. I will
not describe in detail what that
deepfake did, but it had to be crushing
for these young women and their families.
Sadly, we are seeing an explosion of
these images. One researcher found
that the number of nonconsensual pornographic deepfake videos available
online has increased 900 percent—900
percent—since 2019. Such videos have
been viewed almost 4 billion times—4
billion. According to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children,
the number of AI-generated child sexual abuse images increased from 5,000
in 2023 to over 485,000 in the first 6
months of 2025.
Tragically, currently, victims have
no civil legal remedy to pursue justice.
The DEFIANCE Act changes that and
gives victims their day in court. The
bill would permit victims to bring civil
cases against those who produce, disclose, solicit, or possess with intent to
disclose sexually explicit deepfakes,
while knowingly or recklessly disregarding that the person depicted did
not consent to the content.
I am proud to have collaborated with
survivor advocates on this bill. Their
lived experience and leadership have
shaped this legislation. Congress needs
to act. It is past time to give victims of
nonconsensual,
sexually
explicit
deepfakes the tools they need to fight
back.
I am going to make a unanimous consent request on this bipartisan legislation. Senator GRAHAM could not join
me on the floor today, but he is a cosponsor and supporter of this bipartisan bill.
I make the following unanimous consent: Notwithstanding rule XXII, I ask
unanimous consent that the Committee on the Judiciary be discharged
from further consideration of S. 1837
and the Senate proceed to its immediate consideration.

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.005

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SHEEHY). The clerk will report the bill
by title.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
A bill (S. 1837) to improve rights to relief
for individuals affected by non-consensual
activities involving intimate digital forgeries, and for other purposes.

There being no objection, the committee was discharged, and the Senate
proceeded to consider the bill.
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the bill be
considered read a third time and passed
and that the motion to reconsider be
considered made and laid upon the
table.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The bill (S. 1837) was ordered to be
engrossed for a third reading, was read
the third time, and passed as follows:
S. 1837
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Disrupt Explicit Forged Images And Non-Consensual
Edits Act of 2025’’ or the ‘‘DEFIANCE Act of
2025’’.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

Congress finds the following:
(1)
Digital
forgeries,
often
called
deepfakes, are synthetic images and videos
that look realistic. The technology to create
digital forgeries is now ubiquitous and easy
to use. Hundreds of apps are available that
can quickly generate digital forgeries without the need for any technical expertise.
(2) Digital forgeries can be wholly fictitious but can also manipulate images of real
people to depict sexually intimate conduct
that did not occur. For example, some digital forgeries will paste the face of an individual onto the body of a real or fictitious
individual who is nude or who is engaging in
sexual activity. Another example is a photograph of an individual that is manipulated to
digitally remove the clothing of the individual so that the person appears to be nude.
(3) The individuals depicted in such digital
forgeries are profoundly harmed when the
content is produced with intent to disclose,
disclosed, or obtained without the consent of
those individuals. These harms are not mitigated through labels or other information
that indicates that the depiction is fake.
(4) It can be destabilizing to victims whenever those victims are depicted in intimate
digital forgeries against their will, as the
privacy of those victims is violated and the
victims lose control over their likeness and
identity.
(5) Victims can feel helpless because the
victims—
(A) may not be able to determine who has
created the content; and
(B) do not know how to prevent further disclosure of the intimate digital forgery or
how to prevent more forgeries from being
made.
(6) Victims may be fearful of being in public out of concern that individuals the victims encounter have seen the digital forgeries. This leads to social rupture through
the loss of the ability to trust, stigmatization, and isolation.
(7) Victims of non-consensual, sexually intimate digital forgeries may experience depression, anxiety, and suicidal ideation.
These victims may also experience the ‘‘silencing effect’’ in which the victims with-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S145

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

draw from online spaces and public discourse
to avoid further abuse.
(8) Digital forgeries are often used to—
(A) harass victims, interfering with their
employment, education, reputation, or sense
of safety; or
(B) commit extortion, sexual assault, domestic violence, and other crimes.
(9) Because of the harms caused by nonconsensual, sexually intimate digital forgeries, such digital forgeries are considered
to be a form of image-based sexual abuse.
SEC. 3. CIVIL ACTION RELATING TO DISCLOSURE
OF INTIMATE IMAGES.
(a) DEFINITIONS.—Section 1309 of the Con-

solidated Appropriations Act, 2022 (15 U.S.C.
6851) is amended—
(1) in the section heading, by inserting ‘‘OR
NONCONSENSUAL ACTIVITY INVOLVING DIGITAL
FORGERIES’’ after ‘‘INTIMATE IMAGES’’; and

(2) in subsection (a)—
(A) in paragraph (2), by inserting ‘‘competent,’’ after ‘‘conscious,’’;
(B) by striking paragraph (3);
(C) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3);
(D) by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6)
as paragraphs (6) and (7), respectively;
(E) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
‘‘(4) IDENTIFIABLE INDIVIDUAL.—The term
‘identifiable individual’ means an individual
whose body appears in whole or in part in an
intimate visual depiction or intimate digital
forgery and who is identifiable by virtue of
the individual’s face, likeness, or other distinguishing characteristic, such as a unique
birthmark or other recognizable feature, or
from information displayed in connection
with the intimate visual depiction or intimate digital forgery.
‘‘(5) INTIMATE DIGITAL FORGERY.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘intimate digital forgery’ means any intimate visual depiction of an identifiable individual that—
‘‘(i) falsely represents, in whole or in
part—
‘‘(I) the identifiable individual; or
‘‘(II) the conduct or content that makes
the visual depiction intimate;
‘‘(ii) is created through the use of software,
machine learning, artificial intelligence, or
any other computer-generated or technological means, including by adapting, modifying, manipulating, or altering an authentic
visual depiction; and
‘‘(iii) is indistinguishable from an authentic visual depiction of the identifiable individual when viewed as a whole by a reasonable person.
‘‘(B) LABELS, DISCLOSURE, AND CONTEXT.—
Any visual depiction described in subparagraph (A) constitutes an intimate digital forgery for purposes of this paragraph regardless of whether a label, information disclosed
with the visual depiction, or the context or
setting in which the visual depiction is disclosed states or implies that the visual depiction is not authentic.’’; and
(F) in paragraph (6)(A), as so redesignated—
(i) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘or’’ at the
end;
(ii) in clause (ii)—
(I) in subclause (I), by striking ‘‘individual;’’ and inserting ‘‘individual; or’’; and
(II) by striking subclause (III); and
(iii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(iii) an identifiable individual engaging in
sexually explicit conduct; and’’.
(b) CIVIL ACTION.—Section 1309(b) of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2022 (15
U.S.C. 6851(b)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)—
(A) by striking subparagraph (A) and inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in
paragraph (5)—

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(i) an identifiable individual whose intimate visual depiction is disclosed, in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce or
using any means or facility of interstate or
foreign commerce, without the consent of
the identifiable individual, where such disclosure was made by a person who knows or
recklessly disregards that the identifiable
individual has not consented to such disclosure, may bring a civil action against that
person in an appropriate district court of the
United States for relief as set forth in paragraph (3);
‘‘(ii) an identifiable individual who is the
subject of an intimate digital forgery may
bring a civil action in an appropriate district
court of the United States for relief as set
forth in paragraph (3) against any person
that knowingly produced or possessed the intimate digital forgery with intent to disclose
it, knowingly disclosed the intimate digital
forgery, or knowingly solicited and received
the intimate digital forgery, if—
‘‘(I) the identifiable individual did not consent to such production or possession with
intent to disclose, disclosure, or solicitation
and receipt;
‘‘(II) the person knew or recklessly disregarded that the identifiable individual did
not consent to such production or possession
with intent to disclose, disclosure, or solicitation and receipt; and
‘‘(III) such production or possession with
intent to disclose, disclosure, or solicitation
and receipt, is in or affects interstate or foreign commerce or uses any means or facility
of interstate or foreign commerce; and
‘‘(iii) an identifiable individual who is the
subject of an intimate digital forgery may
bring a civil action in an appropriate district
court of the United States for relief as set
forth in paragraph (3) against any person
that knowingly produced the intimate digital forgery if—
‘‘(I) the identifiable individual did not consent to such production;
‘‘(II) the person knew or recklessly disregarded that the identifiable individual—
‘‘(aa) did not consent to such production;
and
‘‘(bb) was harmed, or was reasonably likely
to be harmed, by the production; and
‘‘(III) such production is in or affects interstate or foreign commerce or uses any means
or facility of interstate or foreign commerce.’’; and
(B) in subparagraph (B)—
(i) in the subparagraph heading, by inserting ‘‘IDENTIFIABLE’’ before ‘‘INDIVIDUALS’’;
and
(ii) by striking ‘‘an individual who is under
18 years of age, incompetent, incapacitated,
or deceased, the legal guardian of the individual’’ and inserting ‘‘an identifiable individual who is under 18 years of age, incompetent, incapacitated, or deceased, the legal
guardian of the identifiable individual’’;
(2) in paragraph (2)—
(A) in subparagraph (A)—
(i) by inserting ‘‘identifiable’’ before ‘‘individual’’;
(ii) by striking ‘‘depiction’’ and inserting
‘‘intimate visual depiction or intimate digital forgery’’; and
(iii) by striking ‘‘distribution’’ and inserting ‘‘disclosure, solicitation, or possession’’;
and
(B) in subparagraph (B)—
(i) by inserting ‘‘identifiable’’ before ‘‘individual’’;
(ii) by inserting ‘‘or intimate digital forgery’’ after ‘‘depiction’’ each place it appears; and
(iii) by inserting ‘‘, solicitation, or possession’’ after ‘‘disclosure’’;
(3) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5);

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.006

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S146

(4) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting
the following:
‘‘(3) RELIEF.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In a civil action filed
under this section, an identifiable individual
may recover—
‘‘(i) damages as provided under subparagraph (C); and
‘‘(ii) the cost of the action, including reasonable attorney fees and other litigation
costs reasonably incurred.
‘‘(B) PUNITIVE DAMAGES AND OTHER RELIEF.—The court may, in addition to any
other relief available at law, award punitive
damages or order equitable relief, including
a temporary restraining order, a preliminary
injunction, or a permanent injunction ordering the defendant to delete, destroy, or cease
to display or disclose the intimate visual depiction or intimate digital forgery.
‘‘(C) DAMAGES.—For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i), the identifiable individual may
recover—
‘‘(i) liquidated damages in the amount of—
‘‘(I) $150,000; or
‘‘(II) $250,000 if the conduct at issue in the
claim was—
‘‘(aa) committed in relation to actual or
attempted sexual assault, stalking, or harassment of the identifiable individual by the
defendant; or
‘‘(bb) the direct and proximate cause of actual or attempted sexual assault, stalking,
or harassment of the identifiable individual
by any person; or
‘‘(ii) actual damages sustained by the individual, which shall include any profits of the
defendant that are attributable to the conduct at issue in the claim that are not otherwise taken into account in computing the
actual damages.
‘‘(D) CALCULATION OF DEFENDANT’S PROFIT.—For purposes of subparagraph (C)(ii), to
establish the defendant’s profits, the identifiable individual shall be required to present
proof only of the gross revenue of the defendant, and the defendant shall be required to
prove the deductible expenses of the defendant and the elements of profit attributable
to factors other than the conduct at issue in
the claim.
‘‘(4) PRESERVATION OF PRIVACY.—In a civil
action filed under this section, the court
may issue an order to protect the privacy of
a plaintiff, including by—
‘‘(A) permitting the plaintiff to use a pseudonym;
‘‘(B) requiring the parties to redact the
personal identifying information of the
plaintiff from any public filing, or to file
such documents under seal; and
‘‘(C) issuing a protective order for purposes
of discovery, which may include an order indicating that any intimate visual depiction
or intimate digital forgery shall remain in
the care, custody, and control of the court.’’;
(5) in paragraph (5)(A), as so redesignated—
(A) by striking ‘‘image’’ and inserting ‘‘visual depiction or intimate digital forgery’’;
and
(B) by striking ‘‘depicted’’ and inserting
‘‘identifiable’’; and
(6) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(6) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.—Any action
commenced under this section shall be
barred unless the complaint is filed not later
than 10 years from the later of—
‘‘(A) the date on which the identifiable individual reasonably discovers the violation
that forms the basis for the claim; or
‘‘(B) the date on which the identifiable individual reaches 18 years of age.
‘‘(7) DUPLICATIVE RECOVERY BARRED.—No
relief may be ordered under paragraph (3)
against a person who is subject to a judgment under section 2255 of title 18, United
States Code, for the same conduct involving
the same identifiable individual and the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

same intimate visual depiction or intimate
digital forgery.’’.
(c) CONTINUED APPLICABILITY OF FEDERAL,
STATE, AND TRIBAL LAW.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—This Act shall not be construed to impair, supersede, or limit a provision of Federal, State, or Tribal law.
(2) NO PREEMPTION.—Nothing in this Act
shall prohibit a State or Tribal government
from adopting and enforcing a provision of
law governing disclosure of intimate images
or nonconsensual activity involving an intimate digital forgery, as defined in section
1309(a) of the Consolidated Appropriations
Act, 2022 (15 U.S.C. 6851(a)), as amended by
this Act, that is at least as protective of the
rights of a victim as this Act.
SEC. 4. SEVERABILITY; RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.
(a) SEVERABILITY.—If any provision of this

Act, an amendment made by this Act, or the
application of such a provision or amendment to any person or circumstance, is held
to be unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of and amendments made by this Act,
and the application of the provision or
amendment held to be unconstitutional to
any other person or circumstance, shall not
be affected thereby.
(b) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this Act, or an amendment made by this Act,
shall be construed to limit or expand any law
pertaining to intellectual property.

Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, it feels
good. It feels good to see the Senate actually passing legislation. It is rare. It
doesn’t happen a lot. With a measure of
this importance, it is critically important that we come together, both political parties.
I want to thank Congresswoman
OCASIO-CORTEZ for her leadership on
this issue and her bravery on this issue
throughout this debate.
Now, let’s pass this in the House and
make it the law of the land. Give to the
victims their day in court to hold those
responsible and continue to publish
these images at their expense.
The Senate voted to unanimously
pass this important legislation. The
victims of this horrible crime deserve
their day in court and, today, we are
one step closer to making that a reality.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Louisiana.
S.J. RES. 84

Mr. CASSIDY. Mr. President, sometimes, in Washington, you feel like
there is nothing anyone can agree on.
But one thing we can all agree on, no
matter what your party, healthcare is
too expensive.
I am a doctor who worked at a hospital in the public hospital system for
the working uninsured and poorly insured. And it is not just the poor but
middle-income Americans who have a
really hard time right now affording
their healthcare.
There is a little bit of irony here.
ObamaCare came into existence, and it
was supposed to decrease premiums by
$2,400 a year. Since then, premiums
have probably risen an aggregate of 100
percent since that law was passed. Part
of this—part of this—is waste, fraud,
and abuse of taxpayer dollars. So we
pay higher premiums, and the taxpayer
is getting ripped off as well.

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Here are just some recent examples.
In November, a Federal jury in West
Palm Beach convicted two individuals
in a $233 million ObamaCare fraudulent
enrollment scheme. Earlier this year,
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services identified 2.8 million duplicate
enrollments
across
Medicaid
and
ObamaCare, which wastes an estimated
$14 billion annually.
Just a few weeks ago, the Government Accountability Office released a
report highlighting likely significant
fraud in the ObamaCare Marketplace
due to lack of proper verification. In
this report, by the way, the GAO put
up shoddy data on purpose to see if it
would be accepted, and it was accepted
across the board, even though they
came nowhere close to providing the
information they were supposed to provide.
The American people want lower
healthcare costs. They also want us to
protect their taxpayer dollars from
fraud and abuse. So we need a
healthcare system that protects patients and families but doesn’t reward
a ‘‘get rich quick by any means’’
fraudster looking to get an extra buck
from the Federal taxpayer.
That is why Republicans have focused on a way forward on healthcare
that actually lowers costs, fights fraud,
and gives power to the patient, not
profit to the insurance company, not
ill-gotten gains to the criminal.
My Democratic colleagues are about
to put up a resolution that would do a
Congressional Review Act on a recent
rule put out by the administration to
fight waste, fraud, and abuse. For
whatever reason, this resolution wants
to fight fighting waste, fraud, and
abuse. And if the CRA passes, it will
eliminate commonsense measures for
waste, fraud, and abuse—to eliminate
them, to at least address them—as well
as safeguards ensuring that subsidies
go to patients who qualify, those who
need it to afford coverage.
By the way, the resolution being offered by my Democratic colleagues will
raise insurance premiums by 5 percent.
They are offering a CRA that raises
premiums, the effect of, by 5 percent.
That is money that a family could use
to pay their car note, their flood insurance note, their grocery bill—you name
it—rent for their apartment, and, instead, it is going to insurance companies.
I don’t quite know why my Democratic colleagues are so entrenched in
protecting a broken system. They are
willing to raise premiums by 5 percent
to protect the status quo.
All that said, I am a doctor who
worked in the public hospital system
for over 20 years, trying to bring
healthcare to people who otherwise
couldn’t afford it. Let’s work together.
Let’s find a solution that actually lowers costs, doesn’t increase premiums.
Let’s find a solution that squeezes out
waste, eliminates and prosecutes fraud,
not a system in which they are rewarded.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.001

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

As a doctor, as a conservative, as an
American, as a steward of the Federal
taxpayer—when I say Federal taxpayer, I mean you and me and everybody watching and everyone in the
Gallery—let’s steward that money correctly. I urge my colleagues to reject
this resolution and continue with bipartisan, important work to make
healthcare more affordable.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Virginia.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONGRESSIONAL
DISAPPROVAL UNDER CHAPTER
8 OF TITLE 5, UNITED STATES
CODE, OF THE RULE SUBMITTED
BY THE CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES RELATING TO ‘‘PATIENT PROTECTION AND AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT; MARKETPLACE INTEGRITY
AND AFFORDABILITY’’—Motion to
Proceed
Mr. WARNER. Mr. President, I move
to proceed to Calendar No. 293, S.J. Res
84.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report.
The legislative clerk read as follows:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Motion to proceed to Calendar No. 293, S.J.
Res. 84, a joint resolution providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of
title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services relating to ‘‘Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; Marketplace
Integrity and Affordability’’.

Mr. WARNER. Mr. President, I rise
today because I think it is painfully
clear that we need to do something to
address the growing healthcare crisis
in this country.
Let me be clear at the outset that
when we talk about the CRA that the
clerk just reported, it is not directly
related—it is not the tax credit issue
that has been the subject of an enormous amount of other debate and,
frankly, action in the House but a CRA
that will be voted on later today that
will overturn a rule that the Trump administration has put forward that will
result in 1.8 million Americans being
thrown off their health insurance.
It is beyond the tax credit issue. It is
beyond the Medicaid changes. This is a
rule that the administration set forward last year that adds enormous
amounts of regulatory burden for any
American who chooses to access the socalled ObamaCare Marketplace.
The truth is, this administration’s
attack
on
the
Marketplace,
ObamaCare, the Affordable Care Act
didn’t start with this rule. As we all
know in this Chamber, this is just another step in a now close to 15-year
crusade by many of my Republican colleagues to undermine the ACA, which,
at the end of the day, is just going to—
as we have seen already—is going to increase healthcare costs for everybody.
We know that at the end of last year,
as the expiration of the ACA enhanced
premium
tax
credits
approached,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S147

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Democrats in Congress worked hard to
try to extend them. We put forward a
strong, compromised proposal to extend the credits and keep health insurance affordable for the close to 24 million Americans who access their
healthcare through the Marketplace.
Unfortunately, time and again, Republicans voted against it, ensuring
that when the clock struck midnight
on January 1, millions of Americans
were priced out of that coverage. Families across the country have now been
hit with premium increases of $800,
$900, and even over $1,000 per month.
Somebody in my State of Virginia—
Kathleen, a mother of two and a small
business owner living in Newport News,
saw her premium for her family of four
increase from 544 bucks a month to
over $1,500 a month. That is a yearly
increase of about $11,500 a year—a
pricetag that her family just can’t afford. She told me she came up to the
Hill before New Year’s hit and that she
hoped and prayed for a solution.
Frankly, I wish all of my Republican
colleagues who helped block that solution could have explained to her why
blocking that solution, which we offered as a straightforward extension of
the ACA premium tax credits—why
they blocked that, because Kathleen
and so many other families desperately
needed it.
I will have to say I have to give some
rare congratulations to at least 17
Members of the House, Republican
Members of the House, which had actually taken action recently to address
this crisis. Seventeen House Republicans finally said enough is enough
and voted with Democrats in the House
to extend the credits, which will again
lower the costs for millions.
I hope that we can get a similar type
of compromise through in the Senate. I
know there are colleagues on both
sides of the aisle working hard on that
issue right now.
While the credits have taken up most
of the space around the debate, what I
rise today on—the CRA that will be
voted on this afternoon—will provide
an even more immediate solution to at
least take away another barrier to
healthcare accessibility and affordability.
I am asking my colleagues—and I
will be joined by other colleagues to
talk about this over the next hour or
so—I am asking my colleagues to join
me in disapproving a harmful rule that
the Trump administration finalized
last year that was set to kick in at the
end of 2025. As I mentioned, that would
take about 1.8 to 2 million people off
their healthcare because of the enormous administrative burdens that are
put in place by this administrative rule
to try to get access to the Marketplace.
This is at least a chance today—not
at some future date—to come together
to do the bare minimum and address at
least a small part of the emergency
straining our healthcare system.
Now, I will acknowledge that because
this administrative burden is so bur-

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

densome, the courts have paused its enactment, but at any moment, that
pause could be taken away.
So let’s just use the CRA, which has
been used by both sides of the aisle repeatedly, to get rid of this additional
burden because, simply put, this harmful Trump rule makes it harder to enroll in a Marketplace plan, harder to
stay on a Marketplace plan, and harder
and more expensive for States to run a
Marketplace.
The rule requires increased paperwork for families, reduces open and
special enrollment periods, and allows
insurers to push more healthcare costs
on Americans by allowing plans to
cover less care. That also adds a ton
more paperwork and burdens on the
marketplaces all across the country.
Again, according to the Trump administration’s own document, these
added barriers and higher premiums
will lead to that estimate of at least 1.8
million people losing coverage if this
rule—which is, again, scheduled to go
into effect but has only not gone into
effect in 2026 because of a current pause
by the courts.
But I think we ought to avoid this
cliff and just act today as a Senate and
say: Let’s not have this rule take effect.
I think most of us would agree that
2025 was not a great year for healthcare
in this country. Medicaid cuts, which
are going to be enormous, which,
frankly, were not scheduled to kick in
until after the 2026 elections, interestingly enough—although I can tell you
we have already seen rural healthcare
clinics close in Virginia because of that
expectation—and my colleagues’ refusal to extend the enhanced premium
tax credits are all weighing down on
our healthcare system, and we are seeing
rural
hospitals
and
rural
healthcare centers really bear the
brunt of this.
The truth is, the Trump administration and congressional Republicans
have jammed through healthcare policies that, combined with the rule and
the tax premiums—minimum, looks
like about 15 million Americans will
get kicked off their health insurance.
So let’s go back. My Republican colleagues and the President won in 2024
because they said they are going to
lower costs. We can actually take action on lowering costs today. So let’s
join together, use the CRA tool, and
end this policy. All you have to do is
vote for the Congressional Review Act
resolution making sure the number—
not my number; the Trump administration’s number—the 1.8 million Americans will actually get to keep their
healthcare. All you have to do is vote
for this CRA resolution so that folks
don’t have to deal with enormously
burdensome paperwork and the higher
costs that result.
Now, I think we can get this done.
We have seen my Republican colleagues stand up to the President on
the Epstein files, on war powers, and
just in the last day or so, the attack on

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.007

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S148

the independence of the Federal Reserve. Let’s have that pushback extend
now to healthcare costs. Let’s help millions keep their healthcare today and
then work together toward a longterm,
sustainable
plan
to
keep
healthcare costs stable for the next
decade.
Before I yield the floor, I want to
also acknowledge—this is something a
lot of us have been working on. Senator KLOBUCHAR does such a great job
on so many issues. Senator WYDEN, the
leader on the Finance Committee—
they and others will come today to
speak on this issue as well.
I hope my colleagues are listening,
and I hope they will actually acknowledge that we have to bring healthcare
costs down today. This isn’t a full solution, but at least it is an action that
we can take today.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Minnesota.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Mr. President, I
want to thank Senator WARNER for his
tremendous leadership on this important issue that is just really tormenting so many Americans right
now—as well as Senator WYDEN.
This involves tens of millions of
Americans who are facing a healthcare
crisis. Their premiums are doubling or
tripling, and it is completely in our
hands to do something about it.
Open enrollment is ending in 2 days.
Americans across the country are looking at their budgets and facing this difficult choice of whether to pay double
or triple for coverage or go uninsured.
Why are tens of millions of Americans facing this reality? Well, because
congressional Republicans failed to
act, to come to the table to negotiate
an extension of the enhanced Affordable Care Act tax credits before the end
of last year.
Last Thursday, the House passed legislation to extend these healthcare tax
credits for 3 years. Seventeen Republicans joined Democrats. You think
about it, they could have done that
months ago—months ago. We were
willing to negotiate with them 3 years,
2 years, 1 year at the time. They
wouldn’t do anything. And now they
have realized—I guess they didn’t understand what was happening to their
constituents when 20-some percent of
farmers and ranchers are on these
kinds of policies and 75 percent of them
are in red States.
The legislation that Senator WARNER
and Senator WYDEN proposed is simple
and reasonable. We are simply saying:
Let’s make sure the same tax credits
that made care more accessible for
tens of millions of Americans yesterday and last year and the year before
that continue to be there for families
this year. Americans are looking for us
to act, and the time to act is now.
I have heard from people across my
State in what is a very, very difficult
time right now in the State of Minnesota. With the arrival of ICE on our
streets, with people terrified, with the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

chaos that has ensued, we are still
hearing from people about healthcare
all the time.
Nicci from Waseca wrote to me that
the healthcare premium for her and her
husband almost tripled from $862 a
month to $2,344, which, over the course
of the year, is more than her annual
salary. She called the increase ‘‘insufferable.’’
Nadine from Sartell, a 53-year-old
single mom, shared that she has a master’s degree in social work but lives
nearly paycheck to paycheck now because her housing and utility costs eat
up over half of her monthly income,
and unless Congress renews the
healthcare tax credits, she is not going
to be able to purchase healthcare because there are only 2 days left. And
here is the kicker: Just 4 months ago,
she was diagnosed with breast cancer.
She has already used up nearly all she
has in savings for the copays and coinsurance to get a diagnosis and receive
treatment.
Another constituent, a schoolbus
driver named David, saw his premiums
double. He is now spending 12 percent
of his total pretax income on health insurance. David wrote:
It’s difficult and frustrating to see life
crumble before your eyes. Just trying to get
ahead and just to find setbacks waiting for
you. I would like Congress to actually sit in
real life people’s shoes for just a while to see
how it feels. I hope we can get something
changed.

That is a busdriver in Minnesota begging our colleagues on the other side of
the aisle to stand and sit in his shoes,
because if Congress can’t fix this,
David shared with me that even though
he works full time, he will have to give
up his health insurance entirely.
The rules that Senator WARNER and
Senator WYDEN and others of us have
suggested do away with the caps that
limit how much of their income people
like David must spend on health insurance, and so as we work to extend the
healthcare tax credits, it is critical
that we stop the administration from
further undermining the Affordable
Care Act and raising costs.
And this just isn’t happening in my
State. As I know, three-quarters of the
people who get their health coverage
on this ACA Marketplace live in States
that President Trump won. We know
the stakes, and we must come together
to solve this affordability crisis. And I
will note that the amount of money
given to Argentina was approximately
the same amount it would take to fix
this for 1 year.
There is a lot more work to be done
to lower healthcare costs: Medicare
drug price negotiations that I have led
for years and making sure that is really happening under this administration, reforming prior authorization,
making improvements, public option.
We can go on and on and on.
But, right now, we have one crisis
that is hitting so many Americans, and
we have a way to fix it. So I urge my
Republican colleagues to join us to

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

stop Americans’ healthcare premiums
from skyrocketing, and simply bring to
the Senate floor and pass the bipartisan House-passed bill to extend the
healthcare tax credits that Americans
rely on, and, of course, to vote for S.J.
Res. 84, which is in front of us today.
And we thank Senator WARNER and
Senator WYDEN for leading the effort.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon.
Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, before
she leaves the floor, I just want to say
that the Senator from Minnesota has
been relentless in terms of standing up
for folks who are just trying to get a
fair shake on their premiums. I have
been doing this since my days with the
Gray Panthers, and I know what it
means to be persistent. That defines
Senator KLOBUCHAR, and I thank her.
I am pleased to be working with Senator WARNER and Senator OSSOFF—and
I see Senator KAINE here—because all
of us want to make sure we lower
healthcare costs for American families.
Today, the Senate is going to vote to
repeal a host of damaging policies that
Donald Trump, Robert Kennedy, and
Dr. Oz have unleashed on Americans
who are unsuspecting. People are just
trying to get by in tough times and are
going to get hammered, and from the
day Donald Trump was sworn in, this
administration made attacking Americans’ healthcare their top priority.
Last summer, Republicans in Congress rammed through a massive bill to
give tax breaks to billionaires and
giant corporations, while making the
largest healthcare cuts in American
history.
At the same time, the Trump administration used the Byzantine Federal
rulemaking process to double down on
these efforts by finalizing the rule that
all of us on this side of the aisle are
working to repeal today. The harmful
changes made by the Trump administration come down to one proposition:
It is OK to have more redtape, and it is
just fine to increase healthcare costs.
That is the exact opposite of our
agenda, which is to focus on affordability and making the American
healthcare system simpler.
I am going to just tick through a
couple of the worst examples to illustrate why these rules need to be
junked.
First, the Trump rules will increase
what American families have to pay
out of pocket each year by nearly
$1,000. So the question becomes: What
is the purpose behind that change,
other than to take money from Americans who are already struggling?
The rule adds new fees, such as a new
reenrollment fee that applies to low-income workers. To be clear, that means,
if you want to keep your health insurance, you have got to pay a fee to the
government just for the right to keep
what you have got. Even by Washington, DC, standards—I say to my
friend from Montana—that just defies
common sense.

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.009

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 13, 2026

They also create mandatory minimum premiums that are going to
cause millions to lose their coverage.
Now, Republicans say that these fees
are aimed at reducing fraud. There is
just no evidence to back it up. My view
has been, ever since my days with the
Gray Panthers, and my friend from
Virginia knows about this—I say any
fraud—any fraud—is too much. But the
numbers are clear. The vast majority
of fraud in healthcare is conducted by
shady insurance brokers who are looking to make a fast buck through commissions from phony enrollments, not
working Americans looking to buy
healthcare.
So I have introduced legislation to
create tough, criminal penalties for
these insurance brokers. So make no
mistake about it, Senator KAINE, there
is something we ought to be doing to
root out fraud. Let’s go after these insurance brokers with tough criminal
penalties.
I have been talking to Republicans to
ask them to join as cosponsors, and
they haven’t been willing, really, to
give us the time of day. Instead of
going after fraud where it exists, Donald Trump and Republicans create barriers that are going to trip up Americans trying to navigate a healthcare
system that is just too complicated.
Beyond fees and higher premiums,
the Trump rule also adds new verification checks and enrollment rules that
amount to an enormous heap of redtape. These redtape measures, according to authorities who have analyzed
them, are going to create 15 million
hours of paperwork, and 1.8 million
people are going to lose their coverage
as they try to navigate this nevernever land of a maze of healthcare
rules.
These types of changes are right out
of the playbook of Big Insurance because they create barriers and bureaucratic hurdles so they can keep more of
your money while denying working
families basic healthcare.
It is no secret that Americans are fed
up with a healthcare system that gets
in their way at every turn. It is time
for Republicans to do the right thing
and join with Democrats to lower
Americans’ healthcare costs, instead of
creating new cost barriers and redtape
restrictions. They can help those families by voting with us today.
I urge my colleagues to support Senator WARNER, Senator OSSOFF, Senator
KLOBUCHAR, and Senator KAINE. We are
all here for one purpose: less bureaucracy, less redtape, lowering premiums
for families.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Virginia.
Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, I am glad
to join my colleagues to talk about the
upcoming vote on S.J. Res. 84, the use
of the Congressional Review Act to
strike down a recent regulatory attack
on the Affordable Care Act launched by
the Trump administration.
I think my colleagues have done a
pretty good job of explaining what is at

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S149

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

stake. Even the Trump administration’s own experts at CMS, the Centers
for Medicaid and Medicare Services,
say that implementation of this rule
could lead up to 1.8 million people to
lose health insurance just this year,
2026. That would be devastating.
On top of the premium increases that
people have seen because the Affordable Care Act extended tax credits were
not extended when tax cuts for the
wealthiest were extended, this additional burden on this 1.8 million-person
population is unacceptable, and the
vote we will cast today gives us all an
opportunity to sort of shore up the
healthcare network for those nearly 2
million people.
I wanted to focus, in particular, on
the kind of person who is really going
to be affected by the Trump rule if we
do not affirmatively embrace this Congressional Review Act resolution, and
that is self-employed entrepreneurs
and gig workers.
You know, one of the challenges
about the American healthcare system
before the Affordable Care Act was it
was very, very difficult to buy health
insurance if you were an individual entrepreneur, if you had a very small
business.
Without exchanges and the offering
of policies on the exchanges with premium support for those who were lower
or middle income, you had a lot of people who were self-employed entrepreneurs who couldn’t buy insurance at
all, and then you also had a huge group
of people working with companies that
had insurance that had this great
American dream of an idea to start
their own business, but they couldn’t
do it because if they were to leave their
large employer to go off and follow
their dream, they couldn’t get health
insurance.
And one of the very salutary effects
of the ACA, through the creation of exchanges with premium support, has
been to enable people to pursue their
dream and become innovators or entrepreneurs or gig workers and work in
the way and in the flexible circumstance they choose. And I speak
from experience because two of my
three kids fit into this category.
The rule that has been put in place
by the Trump administration isn’t
going to make it particularly hard for
large group plans to just re-up insurance, but it will make it very hard for
those individuals that don’t have an
HR department fighting for them, that
have to figure it out all on their own.
It will make it very hard for them to
negotiate the marketplace and buy insurance.
And, sometimes, their income is up,
and, sometimes, their income is down.
And, sometimes, they want to enroll,
and, at other times, they don’t. It is
precisely this kind of person that is
going to be hit the hardest by the
Trump rule and why I am so strongly
in support of my colleagues’ efforts to
repeal it.
You know, we often say—and I will
conclude—that small businesses and

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

startups are the backbones of the
American economy, and they are. I
grew up in a house with a dad who
worked for a huge company, and it was
his dream to start his own business.
And he bought a little iron working
shop that, at the time that he bought
it, had like four employees. And during
the entire growing-up period when I
worked in my Dad’s shop, in a good
year, it would be seven employees, and
in a bad year, it would be four, plus my
mom and my two brothers and me.
So many American businesses are
just like this. They are one or two employees. They are somebody who even
has another gig, maybe as an artist,
and they are moonlighting in some
area where they can make just enough
to afford to buy health insurance on
the exchange, if we don’t crush them
with high premiums and if we don’t
make the paperwork burdens so substantial.
The CRA that my colleagues are offering will be directly responsive to the
needs of this very, very important
group of American innovators and entrepreneurs. And that is why I so
strongly support it and urge my colleagues to do the same.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. CURTIS). The clerk will call the roll.
The bill clerk proceeded to call the
roll.
Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
STOP ILLEGAL ALIENS DRUNK DRIVING ACT

Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, my Republican colleagues and I spent a great
deal of time this Congress focused on
securing justice for victims of crimes
committed by illegal aliens.
Unfortunately, during the last administration, the Biden administration
was completely what I would call willfully blind to the threat posed by people coming unvetted across our borders.
From Laken Riley, to Kayla Hamilton, to Jocelyn Nungaray, the victims of illegal aliens are numerous and
must not be forgotten. What makes
these tragedies so heartbreaking is the
knowledge that many of these victims
could have lived but for the Biden administration’s open border policies and
its failure to act responsibly and enforce the law. These good Americans
died at the hands of criminal aliens
who should never have set foot in our
country.
But there is another category of illegal alien criminals who perhaps are not
so widely known, largely because the
mainstream media outlets refuse to report on the many heinous crimes committed by illegal aliens each year.
These are individuals who have endangered Americans by drunk driving.
Every 42 minutes, someone dies in a
crash involving alcohol. As we have
seen in the news, many of these crashes

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.011

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S150

have been caused by illegal aliens who
jeopardize the safety of law-abiding
Americans. They have killed or severely maimed U.S. citizens and other
lawful residents, depriving families of
their loved ones and causing untold
human misery. Some of these aliens
have driven with expired licenses, suspended licenses, or no license at all and
have shown complete disregard for the
danger this may pose.
Last January, two college students
in Illinois named Katie Abraham and
Chloe Polzin were killed in a hit-andrun crash involving an illegal alien
who was drunk driving. Their killer, an
illegal alien from Guatemala, was
charged with leaving the scene of a
crash resulting in death, aggravated
driving under the influence of alcohol,
and reckless homicide.
Last October, Secretary Noem highlighted more than 140 illegal alien
truckdrivers who were arrested in
Northwest Indiana during Operation
Midway Blitz. These aliens were found
guilty of numerous crimes, including
driving under the influence, drug trafficking, theft, burglary, assault, child
abuse, domestic battery, prostitution,
and fraud. More than 40 of them had
been issued a commercial driver’s license by States like California, Illinois, and New York. It is clear that
these States are not conducting due
diligence if they are issuing commercial driver’s licenses to illegal aliens
who threaten the safety of American
citizens on our roads and highways.
Of course, Texans have not been
spared the harm committed by such
aliens, as we saw in the case of Arturo
Cruz-Badillo. Cruz-Badillo is a Mexican
national who had seven—seven—DWI
convictions, a conviction for battery,
and was removed from the United
States three separate times. But despite all of these criminal convictions
and removal for illegal entry in the
United States, he was once again found
reentering illegally last August, hiding
in a commercial cargo trailer. He was
sentenced to jail earlier this year for
his crimes.
On top of the revolving door of removals because of how different States
treat DUI and DWI offenses, some
aliens are convicted multiple times but
never removed from the United States.
As recently as last month, ICE arrested 118 illegal aliens in California,
including pedophiles, burglars, domestic abusers, and serial drunk drivers.
One of these offenders had four separate DUI convictions, including one
that caused bodily injury. He was also
convicted of driving with a suspended
driver’s license. Another was convicted
of a DUI, a hit-and-run, and driving
without a license. Yet another was convicted of causing injury to a child, a
hit-and-run causing property damage,
and two DUIs, driving under the influence. Finally, one of these criminals
was convicted of DUI causing great
bodily injury, a hit-and-run causing
property damage, and a separate DUI.
Consider how devastating a car accident can be even if there are no phys-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

ical injuries. These accidents cause not
only bodily injury but property damage
to a person’s car, and it must either be
repaired or replaced, often costing hundreds or even thousands of dollars.
In the case of a hit-and-run, the situation is even more difficult because the
victim cannot get the insurance information, if it exists, from the driver at
fault in order to have the damage paid
for.
For the one in four American households who lives paycheck to paycheck,
an unexpected car accident might
mean having to choose between repairing their car or paying their rent.
Of course, if the driver at fault is an
illegal alien, it is more likely to be a
hit-and-run because they don’t want to
be detained or deported. And even if
they are caught, they are not likely to
have insurance.
As a father of two daughters, I believe the danger illegal aliens pose to
the safety of Americans is simply unacceptable. It ought to be unacceptable
to all of us and not tolerated. For this
reason, I am introducing the Stop Illegal Aliens Drunk Driving Act to address this discrepancy in Federal law
where these DUIs—repetitive driving
under the influence, driving while intoxicated—are simply winked at or ignored.
This bill would make DUI and DWI
offenses that result in death or bodily
injury an aggravated felony under the
Immigration and Nationality Act. Aggravated felons are subject to mandatory detention. They are also ineligible
for most immigration benefits.
Furthermore, this bill would ensure
that any illegal alien removed from the
United States as an aggravated felon
due to a DUI or DWI who attempts to
reenter illegally is subject to a penalty
of up to 20 years in prison.
Americans deserve to be safe while
driving on our roads. Parents should
not have to worry, when they give
their 16-year-old the keys to the car—
who has learned how to drive or is just
getting their first driver’s license—
they shouldn’t have to worry whether
an illegal alien driving under the influence of alcohol is going to cause them
bodily harm or kill them outright.
We simply cannot continue the status quo of allowing aliens who entered
our country illegally or were allowed
by the Biden administration’s open
border policies and who decide to drive
drunk or under the influence—we can’t
allow them to continue to endanger the
American public in this way. For this
reason, I hope all of my colleagues will
join me and support the Stop Illegal
Aliens Drunk Driving Act.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The bill clerk proceeded to call the
roll.
Ms. BALDWIN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Ms. BALDWIN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent to be able to complete my remarks before the scheduled
recess.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
HEALTHCARE

Ms. BALDWIN. Mr. President, I rise
today because this President is poised
to strip away healthcare from American families again. If Congress doesn’t
act to pass this measure, Americans
will be forced to jump through more
hoops just to get health insurance, and
1.8 million Americans will lose their
coverage.
This is just more of the same from
Republicans and the President. Donald
Trump and Republicans have spent
over a decade trying to repeal the Affordable Care Act entirely, with no
plan to replace it. When they haven’t
been able to repeal it wholesale, Republicans have looked for ways to attack and weaken the Affordable Care
Act from the inside out.
And this is just what the administration did with this rule. They are chipping away at the Affordable Care Act
and taking away healthcare from Wisconsin families.
While President Trump works out his
concept of a plan, Republicans still
have no real proposal on healthcare.
Even if they could repeal the Affordable Care Act, they have nothing to
protect the 24 million Americans who
got coverage on healthcare.gov from
being simply kicked off their insurance.
‘‘Concepts of a plan’’ simply are not
good enough for the people that I represent. They deserve better. In fact,
they need some breathing room and
lower costs.
Instead of meeting families where
they are and lowering costs, Republicans are taking us in the wrong direction. At the start of this year, 22 million Americans saw their premiums go
up in 2026 because Republicans refused
to extend tax breaks to help families
afford their healthcare.
Behind every 1 of those 22 million
Americans is a story—a family forced
to make impossible choices about finances, their health, and their future. I
am talking about folks like Nancy and
John from Park Falls, WI, whose premiums were set to increase by over
$2,000 each month in 2026.
Nancy wrote to me:
This is absolutely unaffordable!! Literally
we cannot pay this. We would have to sell
our home and our vehicles in order to just
come up with the money to do that.

Another constituent from Barron
County, WI, wrote to me sharing that
without the tax breaks, he would have
to spend over 40 percent—get that: 40
percent—of his income on health insurance alone just to ensure his wife could
continue to get her treatment for her
breast cancer.
I also heard from Eric and his wife in
Menomonie, WI. They both retired
from teaching after 30 years and are
still not yet eligible for Medicare. He

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.012

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

wrote to me that they were seriously
considering going without any health
insurance since paying close to $3,000 a
month on a fixed income might just
break the bank.
Republicans ran out the clock on
helping families like these, and the
final window to get coverage for this
year ends in just 2 days on January 15.
How many Americans like Eric or
Nancy are being forced to give up their
health insurance this year? How many
more will consider selling their houses
or their cars just to make sure that
they can afford sometimes lifesaving
care?
Now, on top of this, the Trump administration is pushing a rule to kick
even more families off of their
healthcare. The rule we are talking
about today would shorten the open enrollment periods and introduce much
more redtape, locking eligible families
out of getting their health insurance.
We should be making it easier, not
harder, for Americans to see a doctor.
We should be making healthcare more
affordable, not more expensive.
Over the past year, I have talked to
countless constituents who are sick
and tired of Republicans’ constant attacks on their healthcare.
Instead of spending time coming up
with new ways to kick Americans off
Affordable Care Act plans, I urge my
Republican colleagues to help us reverse this disastrous rule and actually
start working with us to fix our broken
healthcare system.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Alabama.
Mr. TUBERVILLE. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent to complete my
remarks prior to the scheduled recess.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS

Mr. TUBERVILLE. Mr. President, for
months, I have been raising the alarm
over radical Islam infiltrating the
greatest country on the face of the
Earth, the United States of America.
Some Americans see what is happening in Europe, and they think,
would that ever happen in our country?
The reality is, yes. It is happening
right now, right before our very eyes.
The enemy is now inside the gates.
There are plenty of Muslims that
come here, love this country, assimilate into American culture, and they
have a duty to join in the fight and
speak out against the mainstream
media and elected officials who are empowering radical Islam to take a foothold in the United States of America.
Governor Kathy Hochul of New York
welcomed in the new year by declaring
January as Muslim American Heritage
Month. To red-blooded American patriots’ dismay, Hochul directed State
landmarks, including the iconic skyline of New York City, to be lit in the
color Islamic green.
What makes the situation even worse
is that One World Trade Center was
also lit up in Islamic green, as you see

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S151

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

here—the exact location where Islamic
terrorists flew planes into the Twin
Towers on September 11, 2001, killing
thousands of innocent Americans. You
know, this was a slap in the face of the
families of the nearly 3,000 victims who
were murdered and the thousands injured on that very, very tragic day.
I never thought I would see something like this in my lifetime. But for
years, the radical left, the globalists,
and the deep state have colluded to destroy this country and have found a
way to flood our communities with
third-world Muslims whose only goal is
not to assimilate but to destroy the
West and create a worldwide caliphate.
If you don’t understand what that
looks like, just take a look at Europe.
Under Barack Obama and Joe Biden,
our Federal Government imported millions of foreigners who hate America,
enabling them to live on welfare and
forcing American taxpayers to pay the
bills.
New York City’s recent mayoral election reveals how easily a Muslim communist can come to power in our Nation’s most iconic city. You know, foreign-born, communist mayor Zohran
Mamdani polled 62 percent of support
from foreign-born voters in New York.
They weren’t born in the State of New
York. They weren’t born in our country. Sixty-two percent of them supported him. Only 30 percent of American-born voters voted for him.
Under Joe Biden, millions of illegal
aliens, including terrorists, murders,
and rapists, were planted there to completely destroy the freedom-loving
voter base, all on purpose. As a result,
a foreign-born, Muslim communist who
hates the greatest Nation on Earth and
wants to change it is now in power.
During his inaugural ceremony, commie Mamdani used two Qurans for his
swearing-in ceremony, not the Bible.
He used a book that advocates for the
killing of all who don’t believe in Islam
or refuse to follow Islamic teachings.
He was also sworn in at an abandoned
subway—a subway station symbolizing
what New York City will soon look like
when freedom-loving Americans flee
for their lives and Sharia law becomes
the rule of law in the five boroughs in
New York City.
New York City, the symbol of liberty
and freedom in the new world, is now
turning into the same oppressive
hellhole freedom-loving immigrants
have fled from for centuries. They have
been running from it. But now we are
changing into that same situation.
The deep state hasn’t wasted any
time in 2026 to accelerate its globalist
agenda to destroy this country. And if
we don’t do something to stop this Islamic takeover of our country, we will
soon be called the United Caliphate of
America. That means Christians, Jews,
and anyone else who doesn’t convert to
Islam will be prosecuted and persecuted. It will be acceptable for young
girls and women to be raped, and Islamic terrorism and violence will become the norm.

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Thankfully, President Trump and his
administration are working day and
night to save this country through
mass deportation, revoking immigrant
visas, and implementing travel bans on
majority-Muslim countries that support the radical Islam crowds who
chant ‘‘Death to America.’’
We continue to see more evidence
come out of Muslim third world foreigners defrauding American people of
their hard-earned tax dollars. Thanks
to independent journalist Nick Shirley,
more and more fraud from Somali immigrants in Minnesota who are pretending to use the money to feed children or help people with autism is
being exposed every day now.
In a recent hearing in the House
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
testimony from a Minnesota State representative claimed that U.S. attorney
Joe Thompson estimates that the total
amount of criminal fraud to this point,
after 5 years, has reached $9 billion.
That is billion with a ‘‘b.’’
Minnesota’s attorney general said
this weekend on CNN in an interview
that, you know, the fraud estimation is
not a serious thing and that is just political theater.
That is expensive political theater.
A statement like that is not only an
insult to many, many Minnesotans, but
it is also a slap in the face to the hardworking taxpayers of this country.
What is taking place in Minnesota is
pure evil, and it is straight from the
pit of Hell.
It is impressive to me that a 23-yearold independent journalist did more to
serve the American people with investigative reporting than the so-called
experts in the legacy media. Where are
they?
The fake news is complicit with the
radical Islamic takeover of the United
States, and they are in on the scam on
the American taxpayers.
Thanks to Nick Shirley’s efforts,
more fraud is being exposed in other
States.
FOX News recently reported that Somalia’s Permanent Representative to
the United Nations, now serving as
President of the U.N. Security Council,
is linked to an Ohio home healthcare
agency that has previously been punished for its ties to massive fraud.
There are other reports surfacing
about Somalia’s Minister of Foreign
Affairs running a healthcare company
in Toledo, OH, who has a business partner that works for a Somali money
transfer service which has been accused
of financing Islamic terrorism.
You can’t make this up. It goes on
and on. So here is more. For months, a
new publication in the State of Maine
known as the Maine Wire reported on a
similar event taking place in Lewiston,
ME, also known today as Little
Mogadishu. Gateway Community Services, founded by a Somalian refugee,
received $28.8 million in MaineCare
payments between 2019 and 2024—$28
million. Last year, a whistleblower
came forward alleging that the organization systematically defrauded the

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.014

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S152

MaineCare Program for the last 5
years. Thanks to the hard work of the
Trump administration, funding has
stopped, and the organization is under
severe investigation.
As more of this comes to light, a couple facts are becoming more and more
apparent. No. 1, third world foreigners
from predominantly Muslim countries
are coming here and stealing American
tax dollars while they spew anti-American rhetoric. No. 2, Democratic elected officials seem to be complicit in
helping foreigners who hate this country steal from their own constituents,
their own people who vote for them.
The enemies of our country are robbing American citizens in broad daylight, while the cost-of-living standards
in our country skyrocket higher than
they should be, and healthcare premiums go up year after year. That
should make every single American’s
blood boil.
But Democrats have invited terrorists from countries that hate us. They
steal our benefits. They enjoy our
schools, overrun our hospitals, vote in
our elections, and then steal our tax
dollars and send them back to the
country they came from, where they
can fund terrorism.
Thankfully, we have a President who
loves this country and is going to
change it. President Trump and his administration are working around the
clock to halt immigration and to stop
fraudulent schemes that were allowed
to take place under Joe Biden.
Patriotic Americans are thankful for
the work of DHS and ICE and what
they are doing to clean up our streets—
at a cost. DHS and ICE agents have
been targeted by radicals because they
are enforcing the law—what a thought.
And I will continue to support law enforcement until every single illegal is
out of this country and comes here the
right way.
If you are going to interfere in law
enforcement’s ability to do their jobs,
folks, in any way, don’t be surprised if
you are arrested and thrown into jail—
and you should be.
Thanks to investigative reporters
like Nick Shirley and folks at the
Maine Wire, we are slowly turning the
tide on fraud and corruption. Deep
state and the fake news media and
third-world Islamists are eroding our
country from within.
We need to wake up. American citizens need to recognize what is going on
and say: Enough is enough.
As long as I am alive, I will fight to
ensure that my granddaughter Rosie
Grace can grow up in the same country
that I and a lot of people had the
chance to grow up in—the greatest
country on the face of the Earth. And
what I am telling people across this
country and what should have happened in Europe years ago: Folks, wake
up. They are here. The enemy is inside
the gate. We are in bad trouble. And if
we don’t stop it, we will lose this country that has been built for 250 years.
I yield the floor.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

RECESS
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate stands
in recess until 2:15.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 12:47 p.m.
recessed until 2:15 p.m. and reassembled when called to order by the Presiding Officer (Mrs. BRITT).
f

PROVIDING FOR CONGRESSIONAL
DISAPPROVAL UNDER CHAPTER
8 OF TITLE 5, UNITED STATES
CODE, OF THE RULE SUBMITTED
BY THE CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES RELATING TO ‘‘PATIENT PROTECTION AND AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT; MARKETPLACE INTEGRITY
AND AFFORDABILITY’’—Motion to
Proceed—Continued
VOTE ON MOTION

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
question occurs on the motion to proceed.
Mrs. BLACKBURN. I ask for the yeas
and nays.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
called the roll.
Mr. BARRASSO. The following Senator is necessarily absent: the Senator
from Kansas (Mr. MORAN).
The result was announced—yeas 47,
nays 52, as follows:
[Rollcall Vote No. 8 Leg.]
YEAS—47
Alsobrooks
Baldwin
Bennet
Blumenthal
Blunt Rochester
Booker
Cantwell
Coons
Cortez Masto
Duckworth
Durbin
Fetterman
Gallego
Gillibrand
Hassan
Heinrich

Hickenlooper
Hirono
Kaine
Kelly
Kim
King
Klobuchar
Luján
Markey
Merkley
Murphy
Murray
Ossoff
Padilla
Peters
Reed

Banks
Barrasso
Blackburn
Boozman
Britt
Budd
Capito
Cassidy
Collins
Cornyn
Cotton
Cramer
Crapo
Cruz
Curtis
Daines
Ernst
Fischer

Graham
Grassley
Hagerty
Hawley
Hoeven
Husted
Hyde-Smith
Johnson
Justice
Kennedy
Lankford
Lee
Lummis
Marshall
McConnell
McCormick
Moody
Moreno

Rosen
Sanders
Schatz
Schiff
Schumer
Shaheen
Slotkin
Smith
Van Hollen
Warner
Warnock
Warren
Welch
Whitehouse
Wyden

NAYS—52
Mullin
Murkowski
Paul
Ricketts
Risch
Rounds
Schmitt
Scott (FL)
Scott (SC)
Sheehy
Sullivan
Thune
Tillis
Tuberville
Wicker
Young

NOT VOTING—1
Moran

The motion was rejected.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
BANKS). The Senator from Delaware.

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

HONORING CORPORAL GRADE ONE MATTHEW
‘‘TY’’ SNOOK

Mr. COONS. Mr. President, I rise
today to pay my respects and to honor
the memory of an incredible Delawarean and a genuine hero.
‘‘I am anxious,’’ he wrote, ‘‘to begin a
life of service and commitment to
making Delaware a safer place’’—a
safer place ‘‘to live, [to] work, [to]
visit, and raise a family.’’
Delaware State Police Corporal Ty
Snook wrote those words before he left
the police academy, and it laid out his
hope, his vision for service.
I am anxious to begin a life of service and
commitment to making Delaware a safer
place to live, work, and raise a family.

Delaware State Police Corporal
Grade One Ty Snook wrote those words
as a cadet late in his time in the police
academy, and it laid out his vision for
the life he lived committed to protecting and serving the people of my
home State.
Two days before Christmas, Corporal
Snook volunteered to work an extra
shift at the DMV. He was working to
make some extra money for his wife
and young daughter, and he was volunteering to protect people so that they
could make it home to their families in
the rush before Christmas. He never
made it home to his. A gunman walked
into the DMV and, from a blind angle,
shot and killed Corporal Snook—his
last act, pushing a DMV employee behind him, shielding their life with his
own.
What makes a hero? Someone whose
instinct is protection. Someone whose
service is about loving others, even
when faced with mortal pain and fear.
Corporal Snook’s family and friends
knew a hero, but his last actions were
not all that he was. He was a father to
Letty, a husband to Lauren, a big
brother to his brother Josh, a big
brother to his sister Kassi, a son to
Matthew and Karen, a friend to so
many.
He was a person with a big heart and
a big personality who was always the
center of attention and fun but who
dedicated his time to celebrating the
successes of others and mentoring others. A standout athlete, he was a Delaware wrestling champion. At Saint
Mark’s, he improved and improved and
improved in his wrestling and then
went to the University of Maryland on
a wrestling scholarship, a D1 school, a
great program.
He knew how to make everyone feel
at ease and to laugh, how to help others by showing them the way. He stood
out for his mentorship of others, celebrating his teammates’ victories and
successes and improvement as much as
his own.
His sister Kassi said: Ty always did
the right thing.
And his brother Josh said: All I ever
wanted was to be more like him.
His brother Josh also serves in the
Delaware State Police.
Corporal Snook is from a remarkable
family, a family driven by service and

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.015

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

love and courage, and they are today
suffering through pain no one should
know or endure. But they are so like
every other law enforcement family in
our Nation, for when a member of law
enforcement puts on their badge and
their gun and goes out to serve, the
heart of those who love them goes with
them. Their children, their spouse,
their parents, they wait anxiously to
hear that they have returned home safe
at the end of the shift.
Corporal Snook also saw and built
strength in his second families: brothers and sisters in the Delaware State
Police. He was an FTO. He was a field
training officer for 20 State troopers, a
remarkable number. Because he was
such a good mentor, he was committed
to the next generation of our State’s
troopers.
In our State of neighbors, a loss of
one is a loss to all. But at his funeral
service, his memorial at the University
of Delaware, there must have been a
thousand people present—law enforcement officers from every State in our
country, hundreds and hundreds from
all of our major agencies, in our State,
in our region, and hundreds of us honored just to be in the room from our
community.
In what was a powerful and moving
service, nothing struck home as much
as the powerful words of Lauren, his
widow. Lauren said:
God does not waste suffering.

And she had one ask of all of us who
heard her words:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Tell the people you love that you love
them. Say the words. Make the call. Leave
the voicemail. Because you never know when
it will be your last chance to say that.

Lauren’s words were incredible and
powerful. Anyone seeking to hear the
strength and the heart and the conviction of the law enforcement community—and in particular spouses—should
go and watch Lauren’s words. They
were incredible.
Lauren, your words found a home in
my heart and in the hearts of all who
heard them, and I wanted to just bring
Ty’s memory—Corporal Snook’s memory—to this floor of this Senate and to
reference your incredible service and
sacrifice and remarks today so that
your love, your determination to support and remember and celebrate your
hero could travel further, could touch
the lives of more who need and deserve
to hear about you, about Ty, about
your family.
Senator BLUNT ROCHESTER and I have
introduced a resolution in the Senate
honoring Corporal Snook’s life and
bravery so that we can do our small
part to ensure his legacy remains and
travels further.
To Corporal Snook: I want to come
back to those words you wrote so many
years ago as a cadet, and I hope you
know that you succeeded, that you fulfilled your mission and your dream,
that you made Delaware safer, that
you served with honor, that our State
was blessed to have you for the time we
did. Better to live your life as a hero,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S153

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

better to live your life honorably, better to live your life loving and being
loved by others than to live a long and
peaceful life that amounts to little.
I want to leave you with some words
from the Gospel according to John, the
14th Chapter, 27th verse:
Peace. Peace I leave with you; my peace I
give you. I do not give to you as the world
gives you. Do not let your hearts be troubled
and do not let them be afraid.

I am so grateful for the service and
sacrifice of Corporal Ty Snook of the
Delaware State Police—a peacemaker,
a hero, someone who deserves to be a
legend in our national law enforcement
community.
May the God of love welcome you
into His arms.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Louisiana.
APPROPRIATIONS

Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, I want
to speak first for a moment about the
Energy and Water Development bill
that the Senate will shortly be considering.
As the Presiding Officer knows, our
budget is so large that we divide our
appropriations bill into 12 separate
bills—many bills, if you will—and
Members in some cases are assigned
and in some cases choose to serve on
these subcommittees to draft a portion
of the appropriations bill. I have the
privilege of serving as the chair of the
Energy and Water Development portion of the larger appropriations bill.
My ranking member—in other words,
the ranking Democrat—is my friend
Senator PATTY MURRAY from Washington State.
We have conferenced that bill. What
does that mean? Well, that means that
all the Democratic members and all
the Republican members of the Energy
and Water Development Subcommittee
have worked out our differences. It
doesn’t mean we are all happy, but we
have worked them all out. We also
worked out our differences with the
House—the Republicans and the Democrats in the House who sit on what we
call Energy and Water. I am not saying
everybody is happy, but they have accepted the bill. We have reached an
agreement, and, in fact, the House has
already passed it. We are going to be
considering that bill, the Energy and
Water bill, here in a couple of days. I
just wanted to quickly—I will speak
more later, perhaps—I just wanted to
quickly highlight what we are going to
be voting on here in the next couple
days.
The bill is $58 billion. That is less
than the current budget. I am very
proud of that. I said at the very beginning of this process that I was not
going to approve a budget that did anything but spend less. We have done
that. Nominally, it is a $27 million reduction. Non-nominally, which means
if you factor in inflation, it is a 2.8-percent reduction over the current Energy
and Water bill. So in the new fiscal
year, fiscal year 2026, we will be spend-

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ing 2.8 percent less than we are spending on the Energy and Water bill right
now. I am very proud of that.
We increased defense spending. As
the Presiding Officer knows, the Energy and Water bill is divided into a defense portion and a nondefense portion.
We increased spending dramatically for
defense. In fact, we are spending $912
million extra on defense in the Energy
and Water bill over the current budget—a 2.7-percent increase even though
overall the bill is 2.8 percent less.
Well, obviously, we had to cut something. We did. We are cutting nondefense spending, the nondefense portion of the bill, by 3.8 percent. We took
a meat ax to the Green New Deal provisions in the current Energy and Water
budget. Now, not everybody is happy
about it. I get it. But we have already
spent a lot—a lot—of money on the
Green New Deal—too much, in my
judgment—so we reduced it in the new
Energy and Water bill.
Moving back just for a second on defense spending, what are we spending
that extra money on in defense? Well, I
am not going to read everything to
you, but suffice it to say we plussed up
or increased nuclear weapons development, nuclear weapons sustainment.
We are strengthening our nuclear
weapons stockpile testing. We are
strengthening its certification. We are
continuing to provide money for a new
nuclear warhead, for a sea-launched
cruise missile. We are going to spend
more money on plutonium pits and special explosive nuclear materials.
The final two points I will make
about our bill: We have substantially
increased spending for the Corps of Engineers—substantially. In the new Energy and Water bill, we are spending
$1.7 billion more on Corps of Engineers
projects. That is a 19-percent increase.
And we are also doubling our spending
on the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
So to sum up, the Energy and Water
bill vis-a-vis the current budget cuts
spending by 2.8 percent. We increased
defense spending by 2.7 percent. We
paid for that increase and accommodated the decrease in overall spending
by cutting nondefense, mostly green
energy, 3.8 percent. We have increased
spending for the Corps of Engineers
dramatically—$1.7 billion. That is a 19percent increase. And we have doubled
the amount of money for the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve.
I will be happy, when the time comes
when we take up the bill, to answer
questions.
HOUSING

Mr. President, let me talk about another subject: housing. You can’t talk
about housing if you don’t start with
supply and demand and the cost of
housing. What determines prices in
America? In a free enterprise system,
what determines the price of housing?
A lot of things, but basically it is supply and demand. In a free enterprise
system, supply and demand determines
price.
Now, no free enterprise system is perfect. Ours is about as perfect as you

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.018

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S154

can get. In some economies that say
they are free enterprise, they are really
not. For example, the government will
come in and put its thumb on the scale
and affect supply and demand. The government might come in—China does
this all the time—and say: We are
going to favor or subsidize, either with
direct money or special loans, solar
panels. China does that. They wanted
to dominate the world in solar panels.
They do. The Communist Party in
China went in and gave especially good
treatment to the manufacturers of
solar panels. I don’t much like that. It
is China’s business. I don’t like it when
that sort of thing happens in America
because it interferes with free enterprise. It is an illegitimate manipulating of price and supply and demand.
How else can prices be affected besides supply and demand? Well, you can
have antitrust violations. If all the
makers of microwave ovens get together in a back room over cigars and
a sip of whiskey and say they are going
to fix prices at a certain price, they
can run the price of microwave ovens
up. That is a crime too. It is illegal
under the Sherman Antitrust Act. You
can go to the pokey for that.
So it is supply and demand. Well,
what causes prices—specifically, the
cost of housing—to go up? Well, it is
when demand for housing is greater
than the supply of housing. Duh. It is
not complicated.
Remember when we had 9 percent inflation under President Biden—not just
in housing but in everything else? I
will tell you how that happened. President Biden used the pandemic as an excuse, but we were past the pandemic.
He and my Democratic friends appropriated billions and billions and billions of dollars, in many cases directly
to the American people, and people got
that money and said ‘‘Thank you very
much,’’ and they went out and spent it.
They spent it on goods, and they spent
it on services. The problem was the
people who produced the services and
made the goods were not prepared.
Many of them had had supply lines during the pandemic that were affected.
So you had this huge amount of demand with the American people having
a huge amount of money, and they
wanted to buy, but the supply wasn’t
there. So what happened? Prices went
up. At one point, prices went up to—inflation reached 9 percent.
Now, the good news is that it has
come down. So we are better, but we
are not well. Inflation—I think new
numbers came out today. They are at
about 2.7 percent. That means prices
are still going up. Many of them have
come down. Prices are still going up;
they are just not going up as quickly
as they were going up under President
Biden, thanks to the new economic
policies adopted by the Trump administration and the Republican Congress.
One of the things, though, that
hasn’t come down in price is housing. I
don’t need to tell the American people.
It is just breathtaking. The average

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

first-time home buyer in America
today—let’s just think about this. To
buy a home, you have to save up a
downpayment, and you have got to
have enough income so they will loan
you the money, so you can comfortably
pay the mortgage. The average person
today, first-time home buyer, doesn’t
reach those parameters until they are
40 years old—40 years old.
Owning a home is the American
dream, and housing has gone up everywhere. It has gone up in my State. It
has gone up in the Northeast, the
Southwest. It has certainly gone up in
California. Hell, a refrigerator box behind an Outback costs $500,000 in California.
Nobody can afford homes anymore;
they just can’t. Why is that? Well, you
can hear a lot of experts talk about it.
Some of them will say: Well, it is interest rates; interest rates went up. They
did go up. And some will say it is this,
and some will say it is that. But I will
tell you the main reason housing has
gone up so much and hasn’t come
down: because the demand for a house
is greater than the supply. We don’t
have enough houses; we just don’t.
You are probably thinking to yourself, boy, then why doesn’t somebody
build some? Well, the private sector is
trying, but in many States—not all,
but in many States and many cities,
they are being stopped by local government.
And you say: Whoa. Why? Why would
a councilwoman or a councilman in a
city of 100,000 people in Colorado not
want to see more houses built?
I will tell you why: because that city
councilperson—man or woman—controls the zoning laws and controls, for
rules and regulations, housing starts.
A lot of the people—I am not just
picking on Colorado; this is true in
every State—a lot of the people don’t
want more houses built. Why? Because
they already own a house, and it is
worth a lot of money, and it is a big
part of their nest egg. They know that
if, in their area, more houses start
being built, then the price of their
home is going to go down and they are
going to lose money.
Now, again, I am not picking on Colorado. That is true in Colorado. It is
true in every State in our wonderful
Union. It is called NIMBY—not in my
backyard. It is especially true in California, the most liberal State God ever
put breath in. That is why we are not
building more residential housing.
That is why housing starts are not
going up.
Now, what is Congress’s usual reaction to that? Well, we start passing
bills telling the folks in local government how to do their job. You won’t
find housing starts in the U.S. Constitution. You won’t find the subject of
housing in the U.S. Constitution. It is
a State but it is really more of a local
issue.
Zoning laws are local. Some States
may have a statewide zoning law, but
most zoning laws, which determine

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

housing starts—who can build houses
and who can’t and what size they have
to be and how big the lot is and what
the streets look like—that is up to the
local governments, OK?
Usually, what happens is Congress
lectures our friends in local government and says: You have got to do this.
You have got to do that. We are going
to mandate this. We are going to mandate that.
The truth is, we are not housing experts. We are not there in the community. That is why God created members
of city councils and mayors. They are
closest to the people. They should be in
charge of housing. They should be in
charge of zoning. They should be in
charge of deciding what size the streets
and the lots are.
But it is undeniable—and some are
trying, but it is undeniable that a lot
of them are saying, under political
pressure from their constituents: We
don’t want new houses because it
might affect the price of the existing
houses, and the people whose houses go
down in price won’t vote for me.
That is the way a lot of local folks
think—not all of them but a lot of
them.
So what can we do about that? Short
of us getting in the middle of the business of our cities and telling them
what zoning laws should look like, here
is what we can do. We could use a carrot and a stick.
Every year, we send between $2 and
$3 billion to cities across America.
Every city gets a little bit of it. Some
get a lot of it. But every year, just like
clockwork, we appropriate—it is really
more like $3 to $4 billion. We send that
money through the Department of
Housing and Urban Development, and
based on the population in a city, they
determine who gets what portion.
The local governments love what we
call community development block
grant money, CDBG funds. You say
‘‘CDBG’’ to a person in local government, and they will start salivating.
They love this money like the Devil
loves sin. Why is that? Because it is
free money, and they have a lot of discretion—‘‘they’’ meaning our friends in
local government—they have a lot of
discretion in how they spend it. They
can rehab public housing. They can
build streets. They can use it for code
enforcement without the Federal Government staring them down.
So I came up with this idea, convinced Senator ELIZABETH WARREN to
join me, and we drafted and indeed
passed—I will talk about that in a second—a bill called the Build Now Act. It
is really very simple. It says that we
are not going to tell local governments
how to increase housing starts; we are
just going to tell them that if they do
increase housing starts, we are going
to reward them with more CDBG
money. If they don’t increase housing
starts, we are going to take some of
their money away. Carrot; stick.
Here is how it would work. Every
year, we look at all of our cities—I

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.020

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 13, 2026

think the cut off is 50,000 people or
more—and we look at the housing
starts percentage-wise in each of our
cities across America. After we look at
all of them—it will be a bunch of them,
but we have got computers—we look
for the median point, not the average.
We don’t add them up and divide; we
look for the median point. The median
point is the city right smack dab
square in the middle. Half of the cities
have increased housing starts more,
and half of the cities below the median
have increased housing starts less.
So that is our starting point—the
median. Let’s call it 4 percent. If our
bill were in effect and next year the
median—you can call it average if you
want—the median is 4 percent, if you
are a local government and you meet 4
percent, you get all of your CDBG
money. Good for you. You get a gold
star. Maybe, if the median is 4 percent,
you did even better. Not only did you
reach the median level—4 percent increase on housing starts—you got 6
percent. Guess what. You are going to
get extra CDBG money. You get extra
money. That is the carrot.
Now, if you are thinking to yourself:
‘‘There is a catch here somewhere,’’
OK; there is no free lunch. Anytime
someone tells you something is free,
uh-uh. Anything that is free, somebody
had to pay for.
Here is the catch: We are going to
take that extra money to reward the
cities that increased housing starts
above the median—we are going to
take it from the cities that don’t, up to
10 percent.
Now, what does that mean? That
means we are not going to tell our
friends in local government whether to
increase housing starts or decrease,
and we are sure not going to tell them
how to do it. They don’t have to do a
damn thing if they don’t want to. But
if they do increase housing starts, they
are going to get extra money from the
Federal Government, and if they don’t,
they are going to get less.
It will work. Others agree with me.
Senator WARREN and I passed the Build
Now Act unanimously out of the Banking Committee. Every Democrat and
every Republican voted for it.
Then it came to the Senate floor.
Every Member of the Senate—every
Democrat, every Republican—said: We
like it. We will take a dozen of these.
They liked it so much—my colleagues liked it so much that they
made it a part of the NDAA, the National Defense Authorization Act,
which, as you know, is a bill we have to
pass every year. And housing is not directly relevant to the NDAA. But
under the rules, my colleagues liked
ELIZABETH’s and my bill so much they
said: Let’s put it on the NDAA. And we
did; flew out of here.
Then it went over to the House, and
we started negotiating the NDAA because the House passed its version of
the NDAA, and we had passed our
version of the NDAA, and they weren’t
the same. So the people in charge of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S155

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

the NDAA from the Senate sat down
with the people in charge of the NDAA
in the House and started negotiating
the final product.
I will use my words carefully here.
There were a couple of folks on the
House side who for whatever reason decided to take our Build Now Act out,
and they did, despite the fact that
every Member of the Senate was for it
and a lot of House Members.
I am not going to kid you, I was
upset. I called that person and those
handful of people every—well, I called
them an epithet that ends with the
word ‘‘hole.’’ I did. I swallowed it. I
took it. I just said: That is the legislative process. I took it full in the face,
went home, had a beer, petted my dog,
tried to get over it, and lived to fight
another day. It was stupid, but they did
it. But we live to fight another day.
Now, when moms and dads lie down
to sleep at night and can’t in America
today, I can tell you one of the things
they are worried about is the cost of
living, and part of the cost of living is
the cost of housing.
This bill will work, and it would have
worked, and it would be law right now.
But that was then. You have to look to
the future.
Mr. President, if you are listening,
please endorse this bill.
To my friends in the House, please
bring this bill up and vote for it. It will
work. We have been jawboning and
talking about ‘‘Oh, you know, the cost
of living is’’—some say it is fake. Some
say it is not. Some say we are doing
better than we are. Well, things are
better, but they are still not well. This
bill will lower the cost of housing in
America, and it will do it under the
basic principles of free enterprise. You
can write this down and take it home
to Momma: All things being equal, if
you increase supply and demand stays
the same, the price is going to go down.
It will work. So I hope my friends in
the House will take these comments in
the spirit in which they were meant
and that they will pass Senator WARREN’s and my Build Now Act.
I hope that the President is listening
and that he will endorse it because—I
am going to repeat it again—this is
America. Owning a home is the American dream. A satisfactory home is not
a refrigerator box behind Outback. The
American people deserve better.
Mr. President, what would you like
me to do next? I think I will ask for a
quorum.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the order
for the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The Senator from Alaska.
APPROPRIATIONS

Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, I
come to the floor this afternoon to

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

speak in strong support of the appropriations package that will soon be
pending on the Senate floor. We overwhelmingly voted to invoke cloture on
the motion to proceed last night, and
so we are in a good place with these appropriations bills. As we were talking
yesterday on the floor, we are appropriating again. This will be the second
package of bills. As colleagues have
noted in their statements before me,
this package includes three bills for
the rest of fiscal year 2026.
This is for Commerce, Justice, and
Science; for Energy and Water Development; and for Interior, Environment,
and Related Agencies. And as chairman
of the Interior and Environment Subcommittee, I am really pleased to be
able to share with colleagues the good
work that our subcommittee has produced. I am proud of the bill that we
have in this package.
Ours is not an easy one to write.
Within the Interior bill, we not only
have management of our public lands,
but we have oversight of the EPA, we
have the arts, and we have the Indian
health and Tribal programs. It is a
challenge. It is complex. There are a
lot of matters that reside under the Department of the Interior and the EPA.
And, oftentimes, we don’t always see
eye to eye on the issues that are within
this jurisdiction, and that certainly
would extend to funding.
There are some years that the Interior bill has proven absolutely elusive,
where we simply could not overcome
our differences, and we couldn’t complete our work. But, fortunately, that
is not the case this year.
I worked closely with our full committee leadership, Chairman COLLINS
and Ranking Member MURRAY, and I
want to thank them for their leadership. They have kept us all to task, and
their leadership—and I particularly
commend my colleague from Maine,
Senator COLLINS, for her just constant
effort to keep us to task and really
working so well with members of the
committee.
I also want to recognize and thank
my
ranking
member,
Senator
MERKLEY. He has been a partner to
work with on this committee. Again,
we don’t always see eye to eye on the
issues, and one wouldn’t expect us to.
But we are able to work through those
areas.
And I also want to acknowledge and
thank the other colleagues on the committee, as well as our counterparts in
the House. I think we built a good bipartisan bill, and I think that the support that we have seen by way of the
votes is proof positive of that.
We had a 26-to-2 vote in committee
last summer, and then, after weeks of
bicameral negotiation, our colleagues
in the House passed this minibus last
week by a resounding vote of 397 to 28—
so pretty strong; actually pretty powerful. And then, to have received the
endorsement from the President with
his statement of position endorsing
this three-package bill was also very
much appreciated.

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.021

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S156

And, as I say, I absolutely appreciate
the work that went into the CJS and
the Energy and Water bills. I certainly
support them.
But, this afternoon, I want to direct
my comments to the Interior bill, as
we begin the debate.
Overall, we prioritized fiscal responsibility, cutting a total of $1.9 billion.
This is about 4.7 percent of our bill.
That is substantive. And while we met
that goal to cut our spending, we also
met the needs and met Members’ requests across its many accounts.
We also reformatted. As we updated
our priorities for this fiscal year, reflecting a new administration and the
majorities here in Congress, I think
that we restored balance in some of the
key areas of our bill. And the result is
we have a measure that will strengthen
our energy security, our mineral security, and our national security.
It will continue to facilitate clean
and safe drinking water. This is a priority that so many of our colleagues
have emphasized.
It will protect our public lands, and
it will ensure that we are as ready as
we can be for the upcoming fire season.
For example, we provide funding so
that Agencies like the Bureau of Land
Management, BLM, have greater capacity to issue permits for energy
projects. We have included robust funding from mapping and minerals-related
work at the USGS.
We have also provided funds to bolster development and staffing out in
our U.S. Territories. They are a long
way away, most in the Pacific. They
are very crucial, very key, but, oftentimes, they are overlooked or are possibly ignored. And so making sure that
we have got the critical staffing that
we need out there and the folks to
make sure that we are poised in our
quest to counter China.
But I mentioned the cuts that we had
made to this bill. Even as we cut back,
we were able to do some important
work when it comes to the priorities,
like fully funding wildland fire management.
We prioritized the removal of hazardous fuels. We took care of the firefighters who risk their lives to protect
their communities, property, and the
environment. As we have seen, year
over year, that threat of fire from one
end of the country to another is very
real. So the effort here is a very important one.
We continued to address the threats
that are posed by natural hazards, like
volcanoes—we just saw another eruption in Hawaii—earthquakes, landslides, and tsunamis. My State has
been particularly hard hit in recent
years with deadly landslides.
But there are other natural hazards
that threaten lives and landscapes, and
we worked to address them in this bill.
When it comes to the Payments in
Lieu of Taxes Program, or PILT, we
fully funded it. This accounts for the
Federal lands that reduce the tax base
of counties and boroughs across the
country.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

We also included substantial resources for our Agencies to manage and
maintain our national parks. We hear
from so many who love and embrace
our national parks. We all love them.
Sometimes, we love them so much that
we forget that their care and their upkeep is also important. So we made
sure we addressed the resources for our
national parks, our wildlife refuges,
and, really, all of our Federal lands.
One area of the bill that perhaps gets
a little more parochial—but, obviously,
an issue of very real concern—is a
focus on invasive species.
We don’t happen to have Asian carp
in Alaska. We want to keep it that
way. I know that, in many parts of the
South, Asian carp is a threat, an
invasive species that needs to be dealt
with.
Up on the west coast, in Washington
State and, now, unfortunately, in Alaska, we are seeing growing threats from
this European green crab. We want to
be able to knock those out.
There is the spruce budworm that
threatens landscapes everywhere, from
Florida to Maine, to Washington, to
Alaska.
Whether it is green crab, Asian carp,
or budworms, the reality is we are impacted in different ways. So being able
to direct resources to push back on
these invasive species is important.
We also upheld our commitment to
Native peoples. We have provided robust funding for the Bureau of Indian
Affairs, for the Indian Health Service,
and for similar Agencies.
I think we did really good work within the bill to advance some of the public safety and justice initiatives. We
strengthened Tribal colleges and universities. We addressed the scourge of
missing and murdered indigenous
women and children. A focus on ensuring the safety of our Native peoples
was a priority—but, really, not just the
justice and safety, but so many of the
other aspects of the well-being of Native people around the country.
As it relates to the EPA, I think,
again, we have a good story to tell
here. We did scale back the overall
budget, but we kept the priorities in
the right place. We fully funded the
Clean Water and the Safe Drinking
Water State Revolving Funds. That is
a priority across the country.
We provided robust funding for EPA’s
efforts in science and technology, in
environmental programs and management, with Superfund issues, and, especially, for State and Tribal assistance
grant programs.
Overall, we addressed the priorities
of dozens of Members of the Senate,
whether it was programmatic requests
for more parochial matters, like
stream gages on the Ohio River, to the
distribution of revenues from development off the gulf coast.
We did instruct Agencies not to undertake certain activities that would
waste taxpayer dollars and impose burdens, like the regulation of lead tackle
and greenhouse gas reporting require-

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ments for farmers and livestock producers.
We
also
provided
funds
for
America250. I mentioned that the Interior Subcommittee has oversight of the
arts, whether it is the national humanities or an element of the arts. In our
account, we also provided funds for
America250. We recognize the importance of the 250th anniversary of the
signing of the Declaration of Independence and the founding of our Nation.
We want this to be an anniversary that
really brings us together, that celebrates the best of our Nation and reminds us that we are just so blessed to
be Americans.
I have spoken about so many of the
broad national impacts of this bill, but
for folks back home that may be listening: OK, what about Alaska? No surprise, Alaska is always first and foremost for me, and we paid attention to
Alaska within this bill. In addition to
the many things I have mentioned,
from wildfire to natural hazards, to
PILT, we were able to provide for the
restoration of vital fish habitat. We
were able to scrounge up some funding
for my colleague from Alaska’s Save
Our Seas Act. This is very important
legislation for us.
We also added funds for the cleanup
of contaminated lands, for airshed
grants that will improve air quality in
places like Fairbanks, for healthcare
facilities and staffing in Native communities, and to begin to address the
impending crisis of leaking aboveground fuel storage tanks. This is a
matter for so many of our communities
that rely for their power generation
from just fuel that is brought upriver
by barge. You have to have a place to
store it. These storage tanks have been
there for decades and need to be attended to.
We also recognize that there is a
staggering backlog in BIA’s probate
courts. This needs to be addressed, and
we were able to make some incremental gains in that area as well.
So there are many good provisions in
the bill that add up to what I think is
a good bill. It is certainly not everything that I wanted. They never are. I
wish—I wish—we could have reached
bicameral agreement to include some
of the naming conventions that we
were batting back and forth. We were
not able to, in this bill, call Denali by
its rightful name. This is North America’s largest peak. ‘‘Denali,’’ in the
Koyukon-Athabascan language, means
‘‘the great one,’’ and that is absolutely,
positively, 100-percent fitting for this
magnificent mountain. We are going to
live to fight another day on that because nobody is going to take that
mountain from us. I am certainly not
standing down here.
For today, I would urge the Senate to
recognize the important bipartisan
work that we have done with balance,
with common sense, and with fiscal restraint as really our guiding principles
here. I don’t take for granted anything
in this Interior bill. But we would not

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.023

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

be at this place today without the
members not only on my team but on
Senator MERKLEY’s team, and the
broader Interior Appropriations staff.
They have worked extraordinarily hard
and extraordinarily well together.
I want to thank the members of my
team, led by Daniel Mencher, Sarah
Jorgenson, and Anna Smith; and their
counterparts on the minority side, Melissa Zimmerman, Ryan Hunt, Rishi
Sahgal, and Anthony Sedillo. These
folks worked day and night, around the
clock, through Christmas, through New
Year’s, and they have produced a very,
very strong bill.
We overcame some long odds—again,
some really long nights—to move this
forward and to fund the Department of
the Interior, the Forest Service, EPA,
and related Agencies. But what we
agreed to is going to help our people,
our communities, our economy, our security, and our lands and our wildlife.
It is something we should all be proud
to support.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. CURTIS). Without objection, it is so ordered.
VOTE ON MOTION TO PROCEED

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I know of
no further debate on the motion to proceed.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there
further debate?
The motion was agreed to.
f

COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE;
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
A bill (H.R. 6938) making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30th, 2026, and for other purposes.
AMENDMENT NO. 4208

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I call up
my amendment No. 4208 and ask that it
be reported by number.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the amendment by
number.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
The Senator from South Dakota [Mr.
THUNE] proposes an amendment numbered
4208.
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

The amendment is as follows:
(Purpose: To improve the bill)
At the end add the following.
‘‘This Act shall take effect 1 day after the
date of enactment.’’

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
that the reading be dispensed with.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S157

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Mr. THUNE. I ask for the yeas and
nays on the amendment.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The yeas and nays are ordered.
AMENDMENT NO. 4209 TO AMENDMENT NO. 4208

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I have a
second-degree amendment at the desk.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
The Senator from South Dakota [Mr.
THUNE] proposes an amendment numbered
4209 to amendment No. 4208.

The amendment is as follows:
(Purpose: To improve the bill)
Strike ‘‘1 day’’ and insert ‘‘2 days’’

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
that the reading be dispensed with.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
MOTION TO COMMIT WITH AMENDMENT NO. 4210

Mr. THUNE. I move to commit the
bill to the Committee on Appropriations with instructions.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
The Senator from South Dakota [Mr.
THUNE] moves to commit the bill to the
Committee on Appropriations with instructions to report back forthwith with an
amendment numbered 4210.

The amendment is as follows:
(Purpose: To improve the bill)
At the end add the following.
‘‘This Act shall take effect 5 days after the
date of enactment.’’

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
that the reading be dispensed with.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. THUNE. I ask for the yeas and
nays on the motion to commit with instructions.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The yeas and nays are ordered.
AMENDMENT NO. 4211

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I have an
amendment to the instructions.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
The Senator from South Dakota [Mr.
THUNE] proposes an amendment numbered
4211 to the instructions of the motion to
commit H.R. 6938.

The amendment is as follows:
(Purpose: To improve the bill)
Strike ‘‘5 days’’ and insert ‘‘6 days’’

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
consent the reading be waived.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. THUNE. I ask for the yeas and
nays on my amendment.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The yeas and nays are ordered.
AMENDMENT NO. 4212 TO AMENDMENT NO. 4211

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I have a
second-degree amendment at the desk.

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
The Senator from South Dakota [Mr.
THUNE] proposes an amendment numbered
4212 to amendment No. 4211.

The amendment is as follows:
(Purpose: To improve the bill)
Strike ‘‘6 days’’ and insert ‘‘7 days’’

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
consent the reading be waived.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
CLOTURE MOTION

Mr. THUNE. I send a cloture motion
to the desk with respect to Calendar
No. 299, H.R. 6938.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The cloture motion having been presented
under rule XXII, the Chair directs the
clerk to read the motion.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
CLOTURE MOTION
We, the undersigned Senators, in accordance with the provisions of rule XXII of the
Standing Rules of the Senate, do hereby
move to bring to a close debate on Calendar
No. 299, H.R. 6938, a bill making consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
John Thune, Susan M. Collins, Tom Cotton, Mike Rounds, Mike Crapo, Katie
Boyd Britt, Jim Banks, Tommy
Tuberville, David McCormick, Steve
Daines, Markwayne Mullin, John Barrasso, John R. Curtis, Roger F. Wicker,
Deb
Fischer,
Jon
Husted,
Pete
Ricketts.
f

MORNING BUSINESS
ARMS SALES NOTIFICATION
Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, section
36(b) of the Arms Export Control Act
requires that Congress receive prior notification of certain proposed arms
sales as defined by that statute. Upon
such notification, the Congress has 30
calendar days during which the sale
may be reviewed. The provision stipulates that, in the Senate, the notification of proposed sales shall be sent to
the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee.
In keeping with the committee’s intention to see that relevant information is still available to the full Senate, I ask unanimous consent to have
printed in the RECORD the notifications
that have been received. If the cover
letter references a classified annex,
then such an annex is available to all
Senators in the office of the Foreign
Relations Committee, room SD–423.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. SPEAKER: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
wee are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
25–101, concerning the Navy’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Denmark for defense articles and

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.024

S13JAPT1

S158

services estimated to cost $45 million. We
will issue a news release to notify the public
of this proposed sale upon delivery of this
letter to your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. JAMES E. RISCH,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relations,
U.S. Senate, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
wee are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
25–101, concerning the Navy’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Denmark for defense articles and
services estimated to cost $45 million. We
will issue a news release to notify the public
of this proposed sale upon delivery of this
letter to your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. BRIAN MAST,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs,
House of Representatives, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
25–101, concerning the Navy’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Denmark for defense articles and
services estimated to cost $45 million. We
will issue a news release to notify the public
of this proposed sale upon delivery of this
letter to your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 25–101
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act, as amended
(i) Prospective Purchaser: Government of
Denmark.
(ii) Total Estimated Value:
Major Defense Equipment* $42 million.
Other $3 million.
Total $45 million.
(iii) Description and Quantity or Quantities of Articles or Services under Consideration for Purchase:
Major Defense Equipment (MDE):
One Hundred (100) AGM–114R Hellfire missiles.
Three (3) AGM–114R Captive Air Training
Missile units.
Six (6) M299 launchers.
Two (2) MHU–191 A/M trailers.
Three (3) BRU–14 bomb racks.
Non-Major Defense Equipment: The following non-MDE items will also be included:
containers, training aids, weapon software,
training, support equipment, spare and repair parts, publications and technical documentation, and transportation; U.S. Government and contractor engineering, technical,
and logistical support services; and other related elements of logistical and program support.
(iv) Military Department: Navy (DE–P–
AEJ).
(v) Prior Related Cases, if any: None.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

(vi) Sales Commission, Fee, etc., Paid, Offered, or Agreed to be Paid: None known at
this time.
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology Contained
in the Defense Article or Defense Services
Proposed to be Sold: See Attached Annex.
(viii) Date Report Delivered to Congress:
January 8, 2026.
* As defined in Section 47(6) of the Arms
Export Control Act.
POLICY JUSTIFICATION

Denmark—AGM–114R Hellfire Missiles
The Government of Denmark has requested
to buy up to one hundred (100) AGM–114R
Hellfire missiles; three (3) AGM–114R Captive
Air Test Missiles; six (6) Hellfire (Longbow)
M299 Hellfire Launchers; two (2) MHU–191/M
trailers; and three (3) BRU–14 bomb racks.
The following non-MDE items will be included: containers, training aids, weapon
software, training, support equipment, spare
and repair parts, publications and technical
documentation, and transportation; U.S.
Government and contractor engineering,
technical, and logistical support services;
and other related elements of logistical and
program support. The estimated total cost is
$45 million.
This proposed sale will support the foreign
policy goals and national security objectives
of the United States by improving the security of a NATO Ally that is a force for political stability and economic progress in Europe.
The proposed sale will improve Denmark’s
capability to meet current and future
threats by ensuring aviation forces’ interoperability with United States and other allied forces as well as their ability to contribute to missions of mutual interest by delivering follow-on support and sustainment.
By operating the AGM–114R Hellfire missiles, Denmark contributes to global readiness and enhances the capability for the U.S.
forces operating globally alongside them.
Denmark will have no difficulty absorbing
these articles and services into its armed
forces.
The proposed sale of this equipment and
support will not alter the basic military balance in the region.
The principal contractor will be Lockheed
Martin Missile and Defense, Ocala, FL. At
this time, the U.S. Government is not aware
of any offset agreement proposed in connection with this potential sale. Any offset
agreement with be defined in negotiations.
Implementation of the proposed sale will
not require the assignment of U.S. Government and contractor representatives to Denmark on a temporary basis in conjunction
with program technical oversight and support requirements.
There will be no adverse impact on U.S. defense readiness as a result of this proposed
sale.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 25–101
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act
Annex Item No. vii
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology:
1. The Hellfire missile is a precision air-toground missile primarily used to target a variety of threats including tanks, armored vehicles, bunkers, and even other aircraft. The
AGM–114R provides a semi-active laser guidance system and a multi-purpose warhead,
allowing it to effectively engage a wide
range of targets, including armored vehicles,
fortified positions, and soft targets.
2. The highest level of classification of defense articles, components, and services included in this potential sale is SECRET.
3. If a technologically advanced adversary
were to obtain knowledge of the specific

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

hardware and software elements, the information could be used to develop countermeasures that might reduce system effectiveness or be used in the development of a
system with similar or advanced capabilities.
4. A determination has been made that
Denmark can provide substantially the same
degree of protection for the sensitive technology being released as the U.S. Government. This sale is necessary in furtherance
of the U.S. foreign policy and national security objectives outlined in the Policy Justification.
5. All defense articles and services listed in
this transmittal have been authorized for release and export to the Government of Denmark.
f

RECOGNIZING AMERICAN POSTAL
WORKERS CHICAGO LOCAL 0001
Ms. DUCKWORTH. Mr. President, I
rise today to commemorate the recent
250th anniversary of the U.S. Postal
Service, USPS, and the 120th anniversary of the American Postal Workers
Union, APWU, Chicago Local 0001.
Our Nation’s Postal Service, first established by the Second Continental
Congress on July 26, 1775, and later
modernized by Congress to become the
U.S. Postal Service on July 1, 1971, was
created to connect individuals and
communities across the country.
Today, USPS continues to serve communities and is relied on for its ability
to conduct last-mile deliveries that
have rapidly increased in the era of ecommerce. As USPS passes this incredible milestone, we must ensure that
USPS continues to grow by improving
its on-time performance, seeking new
business to grow mail volumes, and investing in the Postal Service’s most
valuable asset, its dedicated workforce.
In my home State of Illinois, APWU
Chicago Local 0001 and other unions
began organizing to strengthen worker
rights and protections over 100 years
ago, when labor protections barely existed. The leadership, dedication, and
great sacrifices made by APWU Chicago Local 0001 empowered postal
workers to negotiate fairer wages, establish safer workplaces, and secure far
better health benefits. Simply put,
APWU Chicago Local 0001 has been instrumental in advancing postal workers’ rights, safety and dignity.
I ask my colleagues in the Senate to
join me in commemorating the USPS’s
250th Anniversary and commending
and thanking the dedicated postal
workers—past and present—of APWU
Chicago Local 0001, who have served
their fellow APWU sisters and brothers
over the past 120 years, and helped connect communities throughout Illinois
and across our great Nation.
f

HONORING CORPORAL GRADE ONE
MATTHEW ‘‘TY’’ SNOOK
Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER. Mr. President, today I rise to honor the life of
Corporal Grade One Matthew ‘‘Ty’’
Snook.
Corporal Grade One Snook was killed
in the line of duty on December 23,

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.015

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

2025, in a senseless act of violence. He
had taken an overtime shift at a Wilmington DMV, when a shooter approached him from a blind angle and
fired.
Corporal Grade One Snook’s final act
was one of bravery. In the words of his
wife Lauren, ‘‘He chose duty, he chose
responsibility, and he chose to stand
where others could be protected.’’
Corporal Grade One Snook was a
dedicated law enforcement officer. He
loved to serve as a mentor and field
trainer, and he was committed to ensuring the next generation of troopers
were equipped with the knowledge and
skillset to keep our community safe.
But most importantly, Ty was a father,
a husband, a son, a brother, an uncle,
and a friend.
Born and raised in Delaware, Ty was
a loyal neighbor, an authentic friend,
and a courageous member of the First
State community. Last week, he
should have been on a vacation with
his family. Instead, his family and
friends were joined by hundreds of law
enforcement officers, local, State, and
Federal officials and broader community members to mourn his life.
His is a legacy of love and putting
others before self, a legacy that will
live on in the officers he trained, in his
wife Lauren, in his daughter Letty, in
his friends and family, in every life he
touched.
To the Snook family, know we all
grieve with you over this tremendous
loss and that we will join you in remembering Ty for the compassionate
and courageous man he was.
f

MESSAGES FROM THE PRESIDENT
Messages from the President of the
United States were communicated to
the Senate by Ms. Holstead, one of his
secretaries.
f

EXECUTIVE MESSAGES REFERRED
As in executive session the Presiding
Officer laid before the Senate messages
from the President of the United
States submitting sundry nominations
which were referred to the appropriate
committees.
(The messages received today are
printed at the end of the Senate proceedings.)
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

PRESIDENTIAL MESSAGE
REPORT OF THE CONTINUATION
OF THE NATIONAL EMERGENCY
THAT
WAS
ORIGINALLY
DECLARED IN EXECUTIVE ORDER
14156 OF JANUARY 20, 2025, WITH
RESPECT TO ENERGY—PM 46
The PRESIDING OFFICER laid before the Senate the following message
from the President of the United
States which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S159

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

To the Congress of the United States:
Section 202(d) of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622(d)) provides
for the automatic termination of a national emergency unless, within 90
days prior to the anniversary date of
its declaration, the President publishes
in the Federal Register and transmits to
the Congress a notice stating that the
emergency is to continue in effect beyond the anniversary date. In accordance with this provision, I have sent to
the Federal Register for publication the
enclosed notice stating that the national emergency with respect to energy declared in Executive Order 14156
of January 20, 2025, is to continue in effect beyond January 20, 2026.
The United States continues to need
a reliable, diversified, and affordable
supply of energy to drive our Nation’s
manufacturing, transportation, agriculture, and defense industries, and to
sustain the basics of modern life and
military preparedness. However, our
Nation faces inadequate energy supply
and infrastructure, due not only to the
harmful and shortsighted policies of
the previous administration, but also
to many harmful State and local policies, especially in our Nation’s Northeast and West Coast. These policies
worsened high energy prices that devastate Americans and undermined grid
reliability with insufficient development of our Nation’s domestic supply
of energy. Without robust development
of domestic energy resources, we further risk leaving our Nation vulnerable
to hostile foreign actors, jeopardizing
our Nation’s core national defense and
security needs, stalling technological
innovation, and deteriorating grid reliability.
The circumstances related to this
emergency continue to pose an unusual
and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and
economy of the United States. Therefore, I have determined that it is necessary to continue the national emergency declared in Executive Order 14156
with respect to energy.
DONALD J. TRUMP.
THE WHITE HOUSE, January 12, 2026.
f

REPORT OF THE CONTINUATION
OF
THE
NATIONAL
EMERGENCIES ORIGINALLY DECLARED
OR EXPANDED IN PROCLAMATION 10886 OF JANUARY 20, 2025,
EXECUTIVE ORDER 14157 OF JANUARY 20, 2025, EXECUTIVE ORDER
14193 OF FEBRUARY 1, 2025, EXECUTIVE ORDER 14194 OF FEBRUARY 1, 2025, AND EXECUTIVE
ORDER 14195 OF FEBRUARY 1,
2025, WITH RESPECT TO THE
SOUTHERN
BORDER
OF
THE
UNITED STATES AND CARTELS
AND
OTHER
TRANSNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS—PM 47
The PRESIDING OFFICER laid before the Senate the following message
from the President of the United
States, together with an accompanying
report; which was referred to the Committee on Finance:

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

To the Congress of the United States:
Section 202(d) of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622(d)) provides
for the automatic termination of a national emergency unless, within 90
days prior to the anniversary date of
its declaration, the President publishes
in the Federal Register and transmits to
the Congress a notice stating that the
emergency is to continue in effect beyond the anniversary date. In accordance with this provision, I have sent to
the Federal Register for publication the
enclosed notice stating that the national emergencies declared or expanded in Proclamation 10886 of January 20, 2025, Executive Order 14157 of
January 20, 2025, Executive Order 14193
of February 1, 2025, Executive Order
14194 of February 1, 2025, and Executive
Order 14195 of February 1, 2025, are to
continue in effect beyond their applicable anniversary date(s).
The circumstances related to these
emergencies continue to pose unusual
and extraordinary threats to the national security, foreign policy, or economy of the United States. Therefore, I
have determined that it is necessary to
continue the national emergencies declared or expanded in Proclamation
10886, Executive Order 14157, Executive
Order 14193, Executive Order 14194, and
Executive Order 14195.
DONALD J. TRUMP.
THE WHITE HOUSE, January 12, 2026.
f

MESSAGES FROM THE HOUSE
At 2:16 p.m., a message from the
House of Representatives, delivered by
Mrs. Alli, one of its reading clerks, announced that the House has passed the
following bills, in which it requests the
concurrence of the Senate:
H.R. 909. An act to temporarily provide additional deposits into the Crime Victims
Fund.
H.R. 2683. An act to provide for control of
remote access of items under the Export
Control Reform Act of 2018.
H.R. 6500. An act to extend duty-free treatment provided with respect to imports from
certain countries in Africa under the African
Growth and Opportunity Act, to extend customs user fees, and for other purposes.
H.R. 6504. An act to extend duty-free treatment provided with respect to imports from
Haiti under the Caribbean Basin Economic
Recovery Act, and for other purposes.
H.R. 6715. An act to prohibit sexual exploitation and sexually explicit depictions of minors, and for other purposes.
H.R. 6719. An act to prohibit threats to a
minor, and for other purposes.
H.R. 6732. An act to prohibit unlawful coercion of a minor, and for other purposes.

At 4:05 p.m., a message from the
House of Representatives, delivered by
Mrs. Alli, one of its reading clerks, announced that the House has passed the
following bill, without amendment:
S. 269. An act to improve coordination between Federal and State agencies and the Do
Not Pay working system.

At 6:56 p.m., a message from the
House of Representatives, delivered by
Mrs. Alli, one of its reading clerks, announced that the Clerk be directed to

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.025

S13JAPT1

S160

request the Senate to return to the
House of Representatives the bill (H.R.
1834) to advance policy priorities that
will break the gridlock.
f

MEASURES REFERRED
The following bills were read the first
and the second times by unanimous
consent, and referred as indicated:
H.R. 909. An act to temporarily provide additional deposits into the Crime Victims
Fund; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
H.R. 2683. An act to provide for control of
remote access of items under the Export
Control Reform Act of 2018; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
H.R. 6504. An act to extend duty-free treatment provided with respect to imports from
Haiti under the Caribbean Basin Economic
Recovery Act, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Finance.
H.R. 6715. An act to prohibit sexual exploitation and sexually explicit depictions of minors, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
H.R. 6719. An act to prohibit threats to a
minor, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
H.R. 6732. An act to prohibit unlawful coercion of a minor, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on the Judiciary.
f

MEASURES READ THE FIRST TIME
The following bill was read the first
time:
S. 3627. A bill to require institutions of
higher education to disseminate information
on the rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for other
purposes.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

PETITIONS AND MEMORIALS
The following petitions and memorials were laid before the Senate and
were referred or ordered to lie on the
table as indicated:
POM–27. A joint resolution adopted by the
General Assembly of the State of Connecticut rescinding previous applications of
the General Assembly that called for an Article V Convention to propose amendments
to the Constitution of the United States and
directing transmission of such resolution to
Congress for printing in the Congressional
Record; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
SUBSTITUTE HOUSE JOINT RESOLUTION NO. 49
Whereas, Article V of the United States
Constitution requires the United States Congress, upon application of two-thirds of the
legislatures of the several states, to call a
convention for the purpose of proposing
amendments to the United States Constitution; and
Whereas, the Connecticut General Assembly, pursuant to said Article V, previously
made application to the United States Congress to call such a convention for the purpose of proposing such an amendment or
amendments concerning participation in a
world federal government, through the adoption of Senate Joint Resolution 15 of the 1949
January regular session; and
Whereas, the Connecticut General Assembly, pursuant to said Article V, also previously made application to the United
States Congress to call such a convention for
the purpose of proposing such an amendment
or amendments concerning taxation of income of residents of one state by another

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

state, through the adoption of Senate Joint
Resolution 9 of the 1958 March special session; and
Whereas, the Connecticut General Assembly no longer wishes the United States Congress to consider said previous applications
to call such conventions. Now, therefore, be
it
Resolved, That Senate Joint Resolution 15
of the 1949 January regular session and Senate Joint Resolution 9 of the 1958 March special session are rescinded, canceled, voided,
nullified and superseded upon passage of this
resolution; and be it further
Resolved, That the Secretary of the State
transmit certified copies of this resolution
to the Archivist of the United States, to the
Speaker and Clerk of the United States
House of Representatives, to the President
and Secretary of the United States Senate
and to each member of the Connecticut congressional delegation, with the respectful request that the full and complete text of this
resolution be printed in the Congressional
Record.
POM–28. A joint resolution adopted by the
Legislature of the State of South Dakota applying to the United States Congress under
Article V of the United States Constitution
to call for a convention for proposing an
amendment to the Constitution establishing
congressional term limits; to the Committee
on the Judiciary.
HOUSE JOINT RESOLUTION 5002
Section 1. Whereas, the framers of the Constitution empowered state legislatures to be
guardians of Liberty against future abuses of
power by the federal government; and
Section 2. Whereas, the framers of the Constitution envisioned a part-time federal legislature comprised of citizen legislators who
would retain and return to some other profession when not occupied by the business of
the people; and
Section 3. Whereas, the United States Supreme Court ruled in U.S Term Limits, Inc. v.
Thornton that the individual states may not
impose additional qualifications for prospective members of Congress that are not specified in the United States Constitution; and
Section 4. Whereas, it is the solemn duty of
the states to protect the liberty of the people
by proposing amendments to the United
States Constitution through a convention of
states authorized by Article V of the United
States Constitution;
Section 5. Now, therefore, be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of the One
Hundredth Legislature of the State of South
Dakota, the Senate concurring therein, that
an application is hereby made to the Congress of the United States, as provided by
Article V of the United States Constitution,
to call a convention solely for the purpose of
proposing an amendment to the United
States Constitution establishing a limit on
the number of terms to which an individual
may be elected to serve as a member of the
United States House of Representatives or
the United States Senate; and
Section 6. Be it further resolved that the
secretary of state shall transmit copies of
this application to the President and Secretary of the United States Senate; to the
Speaker and Clerk of the United States
House of Representatives; and to the chairmen of the Judiciary Committee of the
United States House of Representatives and
the Judiciary Committee of the United
States Senate. The secretary of state is directed to transmit copies of this application
to the presiding officers of each of the legislative houses in the several states, requesting their cooperation; and
Section 7. Be it further resolved, that this
application constitutes a continuing application in accordance with Article V of the

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

United States Constitution until the legislatures of two-thirds of the several states have
made applications to Congress to call a convention to establish a limit to the number of
terms to which an individual may be elected
as a member of the United States House of
Representatives or the United States Senate.
This application must be aggregated with
the applications of the other states for the
purpose of attaining the applications from
the legislatures of two-thirds of the several
states necessary to require Congress to call a
convention solely for the purpose of establishing term limits for members of the
United States House or Representatives and
the United States Senate. This application
may not be aggregated with any other applications that seek a convention to address
any other issue.
POM–29. A joint resolution adopted by the
Legislature of the State of South Dakota applying to the United States Congress under
Article V of the United States Constitution
to call for a convention for proposing an
amendment to the Constitution establishing
congressional term limits; to the Committee
on the Judiciary.
HOUSE JOINT RESOLUTION 5002
Section 1. Whereas, the framers of the Constitution empowered state legislatures to be
guardians of liberty against future abuses of
power by the federal government; and
Section 2. Whereas, the framers of the Constitution envisioned a part-time federal legislature comprised of citizen legislators who
would retain and return to some other profession when not occupied by the business of
the people; and
Section 3. Whereas, the United States Supreme Court ruled in U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v.
Thornton that the individual states may not
impose additional qualifications for prospective members of Congress that are not specified in the United States Constitution; and
Section 4, Whereas, it is the solemn duty of
the states to protect the liberty of the people
by proposing amendments to the United
States Constitution through a convention of
states authorized by Article V of the United
States Constitution;
Section 5. Now, therefore, be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of the One
Hundredth Legislature of the State of South
Dakota, the Senate concurring therein, that
an application is hereby made to the Congress of the United States, as provided by
Article V of the United States Constitution,
to call a convention solely for the purpose of
proposing an amendment to the United
States Constitution establishing a limit on
the number of terms to which an individual
may be elected to serve as a member of the
United States House of Representatives or
the United States Senate; and
Section 6. Be it further resolved that the
secretary of state shall transmit copies of
this application to the President and Secretary of the United States Senate; to the
Speaker and Clerk of the United States
House of Representatives; and to the chairmen of the Judiciary Committee of the
United States House of Representatives and
the Judiciary Committee of the United
States Senate. The secretary of state is directed to transmit copies of this application
to the presiding officers of each of the legislative houses in the several states, requesting their cooperation; and
Section 7. Be it further resolved that this
application constitutes a continuing application in accordance with Article V of the
United States Constitution until the legislatures of two-thirds of the several states have
made applications to Congress to call a convention to establish a limit to the number of
terms to which an individual may be elected
as a member of the United States House of

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.020

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 13, 2026

Representatives or the United States Senate.
This application must be aggregated with
the applications of the other states for the
purpose of attaining the applications from
the legislatures of two-thirds of the several
states necessary to require Congress to call a
convention solely for the purpose of establishing term limits for members of the
United States House of Representatives and
the United States Senate. This application
may not be aggregated with any other applications that seek a convention to address
any other issue.
POM–30. Resolutions adopted by the General Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts rescinding previous Article V Convention applications; to the Committee on
the Judiciary.
HOUSE RESOLUTION 4692 AND SENATE
RESOLUTION 2684
Whereas, the General Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts has previously
made applications to the Congress of the
United States to call a convention for the
purpose of proposing certain amendments to
the United States Constitution pursuant to
Article V of the United States Constitution;
and
Whereas, such prior applications made to
Congress by the General Court pursuant to
Article V include, but may not be limited to:
(I) House, No. 5984 (1977); (II) House, No. 1273
(1974); (III) House, No. 5005 (1971); (IV) Senate, No. 805 (1964); (V) Senate, No. 658 (1941);
and (VI) House, No. 1367 (1931); and
Whereas, certain prior applications made
to Congress by the General Court pursuant
to Article V contain language providing that
the application shall continue in effect unless otherwise rescinded by the General
Court and certain other applications do not
contain a specific termination date or sunset
provision; and
Whereas, the General Court has not made
an application to Congress pursuant to Article V in nearly 50 years, and the policy reforms advanced by such prior applications
may no longer be necessary or supported by
the General Court or the people of the Commonwealth; now therefore be it
Resolved, that the General Court of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts hereby rescinds, repeals, cancels, nullifies and supersedes any and all prior applications of the
General Court to the Congress of the United
States to call for a convention for the purpose of proposing amendments to the United
States Constitution pursuant to Article V of
the United States Constitution, regardless of
when such applications were adopted and regardless of whether such applications were
for a more limited convention to propose 1 or
more amendments regarding 1 or more specific subjects and purposes or for a general
convention to propose an unlimited number
of amendments upon an unlimited number of
subjects, and regardless of whether the applications are expressly identified in this resolution or confirmed by the historical records
maintained by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the Library of Congress; and be it
further
Resolved, that the General Court of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts requests
that the resolution be published in the Congressional Record and listed in the official
tally of state legislative applications relating to applications to Congress of the United
States to call a convention to propose
amendments to the United States Constitution pursuant to Article V of the United
States Constitution and the clerks of the
Massachusetts House of Representatives and
Senate shall immediately transmit copies of
this resolution to the clerk of the United
States House of Representatives and to the
Secretary of the United States Senate.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S161

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

POM–31. A resolution adopted by the House
of Representatives of the State of Ohio requesting the Secretary of the Air Force select the 121st Air Refueling Wing at the
Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base in
Columbus, Ohio, as the preferred main operating base for the KC–46 Pegasus refueling
aircraft; to the Committee on Armed Services.
HOUSE RESOLUTION NO. 243
Whereas, The Rickenbacker Air National
Guard Base has a host of assets that will provide the Air Force and its guard component
with unmatched benefits for basing the KC–
46; and
Whereas, Rickenbacker, unmatched in capabilities, features two 12,000-foot runways
rated for unrestricted heavy aircraft use.
The Columbus Regional Airport Authority,
the civilian local airport agency that hosts
the 121st ARW, has invested more than $62.9
million in airport infrastructure since 2017,
including runway upgrades; and
Whereas, Rickenbacker contains ramps
and taxiways that are KC–46 capable at an
airfield with unmatched air-road-rail intermodal capabilities positioning Rickenbacker
to be a strategic aerial port of embarkation;
and
Whereas, Rickenbacker is located within
four hours of 60% of all Department of Defense customers and six to eight hours of
nearly 80% of potential customers; and
Whereas, Rickenbacker features a new
squadron flying operations facility as well as
a modern weapons system simulator facility
capable of housing KC–46 simulators; and
Whereas, Rickenbacker has a location adjacent to new facilities for passenger and
cargo movement that could accommodate
planned or future needs of the Department of
Defense; and
Whereas, Rickenbacker sits in a geographic location that enjoys a very low risk
for natural disasters and weather issues in
comparison to all of the other candidate
sites; and
Whereas, Rickenbacker is the home of the
121st Air Refueling Wing; and
Whereas, The men and women of the 121 st
Air Refueling Wing have demonstrated that
they are top-notch experienced performers,
recognized in 2024 as the Air National
Guard’s top KC–135 wing with over 3,290
flight hours of loading over 17 million pounds
of fuel to over 3,600 contacts, and is the only
one of two assessed wings that is aligned
with KC–46 manpower requirements; and
Whereas, The 121st Air Refueling Wing flew
126% of programmed flying hours in 2023, exceeding its commitment, and allowing the
Air National Guard to achieve its flying
hours target, and has overall wing manning
at 109% placing the 121st at number four
among 90 Air National Guard wings and
number two among 16 KC–135 wings. Aircrew
manning is 114%, and maintenance manning
is 126%; and
Whereas, The 121st Air Refueling Wing executed eight major overseas deployments
while supporting 24 major exercises worldwide over the past five years; and
Whereas, The 121st Air Refueling Wing is
leading other locations in standing up a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility
(SCIF) (operational in 2026) to increase its
ability to fulfill more missions and roles;
and
Whereas, The 121st Air Refueling Wing is a
critical support element for the Nuclear
Triad; now therefore be it
Resolved, That we, the members of the
House of Representatives of the 136th General Assembly of the State of Ohio, request
the Secretary of the Air Force select the
121st Air Refueling Wing at the Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base in Colum-

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

bus, Ohio, as the preferred main operating
base for the KC–46 Pegasus refueling aircraft;
and be it further
Resolved, That the Clerk of the House of
Representatives transmit duly authenticated
copies of this resolution to the President Pro
Tempore and Secretary of the United States
Senate, Speaker and Clerk of the United
States House of Representatives, the members of Ohio’s Congressional delegation, Dr.
Troy E. Meink, Secretary of the Air Force,
and the news media of Ohio.
f

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND
JOINT RESOLUTIONS
The following bills and joint resolutions were introduced, read the first
and second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated:
By Ms. CORTEZ MASTO (for herself
and Mr. CRAMER):
S. 3616. A bill to provide the National Credit Union Administration Board flexibility to
increase Federal credit union loan maturities, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Mr. KELLY (for himself and Mr.
GALLEGO):
S. 3617. A bill to approve the settlement of
water rights claims of the Yavapai-Apache
Nation in the State of Arizona, to authorize
construction of a water project relating to
those water rights claims, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Indian Affairs.
By Mr. HUSTED (for himself, Ms. KLOBUCHAR, Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER, and
Mr. CASSIDY):
S. 3618. A bill to require the Federal Trade
Commission to submit to Congress a report
on the ability of minors to access fentanyl
through social media platforms, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
By Mr. PETERS (for himself and Mr.
ROUNDS):
S. 3619. A bill to require the Secretary of
Defense to develop a cyber workforce strategy for the Department of Defense, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Armed
Services.
By Mr. SCHIFF (for himself and Mr.
HUSTED):
S. 3620. A bill to amend the Consolidated
Farm and Rural Development Act to expand
eligibility for grants related to emergency
water assistance, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition,
and Forestry.
By Mr. MERKLEY (for himself, Mr.
KAINE, Mr. SANDERS, Mr. WYDEN, Mr.
VAN HOLLEN, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, and
Mr. WELCH):
S. 3621. A bill to prohibit the United States
Government from funding Venezuela’s oil
and petroleum infrastructure, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
By Mr. SANDERS (for himself, Mr. VAN
HOLLEN, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, Mr. BOOKER, Mr. SCHIFF, Mr. WYDEN, Mr.
SCHUMER, Mr. LUJÁN, and Mr. REED):
S. 3622. A bill to prohibit the naming, renaming, designating, or redesignating of any
Federal building, land, or other asset in the
name of a sitting President, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mr. MARSHALL (for himself, Mr.
DURBIN, and Mr. WELCH):
S. 3623. A bill to amend the Electronic
Fund Transfer Act to require the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve system to
prescribe regulations relating to network
competition in credit card transactions, and

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.028

S13JAPT1

S162

for other purposes; to the Committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Mrs. SHAHEEN (for herself and Ms.
MURKOWSKI):
S. 3624. A bill to limit the use of funds to
assert control over the sovereign territory of
a NATO member state, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
By Mr. MARKEY:
S. 3625. A bill to amend the Revised Statutes to remove the defense of qualified immunity in the case of any action under section 1979, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mrs. SHAHEEN (for herself and Mr.
MCCORMICK):
S. 3626. A bill to amend title 5, United
States Code, to improve recruitment and retention of Federal correctional officers, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mrs. MOODY (for herself, Mrs.
BLACKBURN, Mr. BUDD, Mrs. HYDESMITH, Mr. LANKFORD, Mr. CASSIDY,
Mr. BANKS, Mr. DAINES, Mr. SCOTT of
Florida, Mr. GRASSLEY, and Mr.
WICKER):
S. 3627. A bill to require institutions of
higher education to disseminate information
on the rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for other
purposes; read the first time.
By Mr. BLUMENTHAL (for himself,
Mr. SCHIFF, Mr. SANDERS, Mrs. GILLIBRAND, Ms. KLOBUCHAR, Mr. WELCH,
Mr. MARKEY, Ms. DUCKWORTH, Mr.
WYDEN, Ms. WARREN, and Mr.
FETTERMAN):
S. 3628. A bill to ensure that older adults
and individuals with disabilities are prepared
for disasters, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions.
By Ms. ALSOBROOKS (for herself and
Ms. KLOBUCHAR):
S. 3629. A bill to amend title 23, United
States Code, to require States to make publicly available information on the selection
of certain projects, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Environment and Public
Works.
f

SUBMISSION OF CONCURRENT AND
SENATE RESOLUTIONS
The following concurrent resolutions
and Senate resolutions were read, and
referred (or acted upon), as indicated:
By Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER (for herself and Mr. COONS):
S. Res. 581. A resolution honoring the life
of Corporal Grade One Matthew T. ‘‘Ty’’
Snook of the Delaware State Police; to the
Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. CORNYN (for himself, Mr.
CRUZ, and Mr. CRAMER):
S. Res. 582. A resolution expressing the
sense of the Senate in support of Operation
Absolute Resolve; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
f

ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S. 272

At the request of Mr. PETERS, the
name of the Senator from Wisconsin
(Ms. BALDWIN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 272, a bill to improve the safety of infant formula through testing of
infant formula for microorganisms and
toxic elements, and for other purposes.
S. 561

At the request of Mr. LEE, the name
of the Senator from Florida (Mrs.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

MOODY) was added as a cosponsor of S.
561, a bill to amend the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 to require the Secretary to designate food and food products to be made available under the
supplemental nutrition assistance program, and for other purposes.
S. 1202

At the request of Mr. BENNET, the
name of the Senator from Michigan
(Ms. SLOTKIN) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 1202, a bill to amend the Food and
Nutrition Act of 2008 to permit supplemental nutrition assistance program
benefits to be used to purchase additional types of food items.
S. 1650

At the request of Ms. DUCKWORTH,
the name of the Senator from Oregon
(Mr. MERKLEY) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1650, a bill to amend title 38,
United States Code, to modify authorities relating to the collective bargaining of employees in the Veterans
Health Administration.
S. 1808

At the request of Mr. MCCORMICK, the
names of the Senator from Alabama
(Mrs. BRITT) and the Senator from Colorado (Mr. HICKENLOOPER) were added
as cosponsors of S. 1808, a bill to permit
a registered investment company to
omit certain fees from the calculation
of acquired fund fees and expenses, and
for other purposes.
S. 2993

At the request of Mr. COTTON, the
names of the Senator from Oklahoma
(Mr. LANKFORD) and the Senator from
West Virginia (Mr. JUSTICE) were added
as cosponsors of S. 2993, a bill to establish appropriate rules for prosecutors
and Federal judges to carry a concealed
firearm.
S. 3100

At the request of Mr. CURTIS, the
name of the Senator from Ohio (Mr.
MORENO) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3100, a bill to direct the Director of the
Federal Protective Service to establish
processes to strengthen oversight, performance, and accountability of contract security personnel engaged in the
protection of certain buildings and
grounds, and for other purposes.
S. 3166

At the request of Ms. ERNST, the
name of the Senator from Florida (Mr.
SCOTT) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3166, a bill to rescind unused COVID
funding and reduce the deficit.
S. 3179

At the request of Mrs. MOODY, the
name of the Senator from Oklahoma
(Mr. MULLIN) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3179, a bill to amend title 18,
United States Code, to establish a
criminal penalty for obstructing immigration enforcement activities.
S. 3206

At the request of Mr. MARKEY, the
name of the Senator from Massachusetts (Ms. WARREN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3206, a bill to improve access to evidence-based, lifesaving
health care for transgender people, and
for other purposes.

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

S. 3474

At the request of Mr. WYDEN, the
name of the Senator from Minnesota
(Ms. SMITH) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3474, a bill to amend the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to provide for the regulation of cannabis and
cannabinoid products, and for other
purposes.
S. 3514

At the request of Mr. BARRASSO, the
name of the Senator from Wyoming
(Ms. LUMMIS) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3514, a bill to amend the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 to modernize the
National Firearms Act to account for
advancements in technology and lessthan-lethal weapons, and for other purposes.
S. 3589

At the request of Mr. BANKS, the
name of the Senator from Missouri
(Mr. SCHMITT) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3589, a bill to amend the Higher
Education Act of 1965 to provide students with disabilities and their families with access to critical information
needed to select the right college and
succeed once enrolled.
S. 3606

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the names of the Senator from Florida
(Mrs. MOODY) and the Senator from Indiana (Mr. BANKS) were added as cosponsors of S. 3606, a bill to subject
aliens convicted of fraud to deportation
and to bestow concurrent jurisdiction
to revoke the citizenship of any naturalized United States citizen convicted
of fraud on any court that enters such
a conviction.
S.J. RES. 84

At the request of Mr. WARNER, the
name of the Senator from Washington
(Ms. CANTWELL) was added as a cosponsor of S.J. Res. 84, a joint resolution
providing for congressional disapproval
under chapter 8 of title 5, United
States Code, of the rule submitted by
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services relating to ‘‘Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; Market
Integrity and Affordability’’.
AMENDMENT NO. 4155

At the request of Mr. PADILLA, the
names of the Senator from Maine (Mr.
KING), the Senator from Connecticut
(Mr. BLUMENTHAL), the Senator from
Oregon (Mr. MERKLEY), the Senator
from Rhode Island (Mr. REED), the Senator from Massachusetts (Mr. MARKEY), the Senator from Rhode Island
(Mr. WHITEHOUSE) and the Senator
from Maryland (Mr. VAN HOLLEN) were
added as cosponsors of amendment No.
4155 intended to be proposed to H.R.
6938, a bill making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
AMENDMENT NO. 4168

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the name of the Senator from New
Mexico (Mr. LUJÁN) was added as a cosponsor of amendment No. 4168 intended to be proposed to H.R. 6938, a

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.032

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

bill making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
AMENDMENT NO. 4179

At the request of Mr. BENNET, the
name of the Senator from Colorado
(Mr. HICKENLOOPER) was added as a cosponsor of amendment No. 4179 intended to be proposed to H.R. 6938, a
bill making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
AMENDMENT NO. 4180

At the request of Mr. MURPHY, the
names of the Senator from Massachusetts (Mr. MARKEY), the Senator from
Virginia (Mr. KAINE) and the Senator
from Oregon (Mr. MERKLEY) were added
as cosponsors of amendment No. 4180
intended to be proposed to H.R. 6938, a
bill making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
AMENDMENT NO. 4181

At the request of Mr. SANDERS, the
name of the Senator from New York
(Mr. SCHUMER) was added as a cosponsor of amendment No. 4181 intended to
be proposed to H.R. 6938, a bill making
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes.
f

SUBMITTED RESOLUTIONS

at the time of the shooting and Corporal
Grade One Snook gave directions and pushed
an employee out of harm’s way, even after
being mortally wounded himself, to save the
lives of others while giving his own;
Whereas Delawareans mourn the loss of
Corporal Grade One Snook and recognize his
extraordinary sacrifice;
Whereas the service of Corporal Grade One
Snook exemplified the highest ideals of law
enforcement and public service;
Whereas Corporal Grade One Snook is remembered as an American hero whose legacy
will endure through his family, the Delaware
State Police, and the community he served;
and
Whereas the sacrifice made by Corporal
Grade One Snook stands as a solemn reminder of the risks faced daily by law enforcement officers across the United States:
Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) honors the life and service of Corporal
Grade One Matthew T. ‘‘Ty’’ Snook of the
Delaware State Police;
(2) expresses its deepest condolences to the
family of Corporal Grade One Snook, including his wife, Lauren Snook, his daughter,
Letty Snook, his parents, Matthew and
Karen Snook, his brother, Joshua Snook, and
his sister, Kassi Dunphy;
(3) recognizes the noble acts Corporal
Grade One Snook performed in the line of
duty, sacrificing his own life on December 23,
2025, to save the lives of others; and
(4) reaffirms its support for law enforcement officers and public servants who dedicate their lives to keeping our communities
safe.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SENATE
RESOLUTION
581—HONORING THE LIFE OF CORPORAL
GRADE ONE MATTHEW T. ‘‘TY’’
SNOOK
OF
THE
DELAWARE
STATE POLICE
Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER (for herself
and Mr. COONS) submitted the following resolution; which was referred
to the Committee on the Judiciary:
S. RES. 581
Whereas Corporal Grade One Matthew T.
‘‘Ty’’ Snook was a devoted law enforcement
officer who served the State of Delaware
with honor, integrity, and courage;
Whereas Corporal Grade One Snook was a
husband, a father, a son, a brother, a coach,
and a mentor whose life reflected a deep
commitment to family, service, and community;
Whereas Corporal Grade One Snook was a
10-year veteran of the Delaware State Police
and was widely respected by his colleagues
for his professionalism and dedication;
Whereas Corporal Grade One Snook served
as a field training officer beginning in 2018,
helping to shape and mentor the next generation of Delaware State Troopers, and
trained more than 20 troopers who continue
to serve the State;
Whereas Corporal Grade One Snook was
known for his love of coaching and mentoring young people and for his steadfast
commitment to the community he served;
Whereas, on December 23, 2025, Corporal
Grade One Snook was tragically killed in the
line of duty while working an overtime assignment at a Division of Motor Vehicles (referred to in this preamble as ‘‘DMV’’) facility
near New Castle, Delaware;
Whereas Corporal Grade One Snook was
killed during an act of senseless violence
while protecting DMV employees and members of the public during the holiday season;
Whereas more than 50 employees and members of the public were present at the facility

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S163

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

SENATE
RESOLUTION
582—EXPRESSING THE SENSE OF THE
SENATE IN SUPPORT OF OPERATION ABSOLUTE RESOLVE
Mr. CORNYN (for himself, Mr. CRUZ,
and Mr. CRAMER) submitted the following resolution; which was referred
to the Committee on Foreign Relations:
S. RES. 582
Whereas, between 2000 and 2013, Nicolás
Maduro served in various offices in the Government of Venezuela, including in the National Assembly, as Minister of Foreign Affairs, and as Vice President;
Whereas, on April 14, 2013, Nicolás Maduro
came to occupy the office of President of
Venezuela following the death of former
Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, and later
through an election that was marred by
irregularities;
Whereas, on May 20, 2018, Nicolás Maduro
declared victory in a fraudulent presidential
election in which major opposition parties
and leaders were banned from participating
and of which more than 50 countries, including the United States, refused to recognize
the results;
Whereas, on January 23, 2019, the National
Assembly of Venezuela refused to recognize
Nicolás Maduro as President of Venezuela
and named, as the Interim President of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó, who was so recognized
by the United States and more than 23 other
countries;
Whereas, on July 28, 2024, Nicolás Maduro
declared victory in a second fraudulent presidential election, the results of which were
not recognized by more than 50 countries, including the United States, the European
Union, and numerous Latin American and
Caribbean nations;
Whereas, on January 10, 2025, Nicolás
Maduro held an illegitimate presidential in-

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

auguration in Venezuela, which was condemned by the Government of the United
States;
Whereas, according to a March 2020 estimate by the Government of the United
States, under Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela was
a major transit country for cocaine shipments to the United States, South America,
and Europe, accounting for 200 to 250 metric
tons annually (or 10 to 13 percent of the estimated global production of cocaine);
Whereas the Department of State found
that the Maduro regime ‘‘failed to make any
meaningful efforts to stem drug production
or trafficking and in fact created conditions
that allow drug traffickers and other
transnational criminal organizations (TCOs)
to operate with impunity’’;
Whereas drug trafficking in Venezuela enriched and empowered the family of Nicolás
Maduro, including his wife, Cilia Flores, who
took bribes to ensure safe passage of trafficked cocaine, and his son, Nicolás Ernesto
Maduro Guerra, who allowed state assets to
be used in drug trafficking;
Whereas the Cartel de los Soles is a Venezuelan drug trafficking organization comprised of high-ranking Venezuelan officials
who abused their positions in the Venezuelan
government and military to flood the United
States with cocaine and harm Americans;
Whereas, effective November 24, 2025, the
Department of State designated the Cartel
de los Soles as a foreign terrorist organization;
Whereas Nicolás Maduro helped manage
and ultimately led the Cártel de los Soles as
he rose to power in Venezuela;
Whereas Tren de Aragua is a transnational
criminal organization, originating in Venezuela, which engages in mass illegal migration to the United States and commits brutal crimes, including murder, kidnapping,
extortion, and human, drug, and weapons
trafficking, with the objective of harming
United States citizens;
Whereas numerous members and leaders of
Tren de Aragua have been indicted on murder-for-hire, drug trafficking, firearms, and
other offenses within the United States;
Whereas, effective February 20, 2025, the
Department of State designated Tren de
Aragua as a foreign terrorist organization;
Whereas Tren de Aragua coordinated with,
and operated in conjunction with, the
Maduro-led Cártel de los Soles to flood the
United States with cocaine;
Whereas, the Revolutionary Forces of Colombia (FARC) and its successor organizations, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia – People’s Army (FARC-EP) and
Segunda Marquetalia and the National Liberation Army (ELN), control drug trafficking routes in the border region between
Venezuela and Colombia;
Whereas, the FARC was designated as a
foreign terrorist organization on October 8,
1997, prior to its dissolution, its successor organizations, the FARC-EP and Segunda
Marquetalia, have been designated as foreign
terrorist organizations since November 30,
2021, and the ELN has been designated as a
foreign terrorist organization since October
8, 1997;
Whereas, the Department of State found
the FARC, FARC-EP, and ELN maintained
close ties to the de facto authorities of Venezuela and Maduro continued to give safe
haven to these organizations;
Whereas the United States has imposed individual, financial, and sectoral sanctions on
the Government of Venezuela, the Maduro
regime, and its supporters, including by—
(1) prohibiting the Government of Venezuela from accessing United States financial markets beginning on August 24, 2017;
(2) establishing a framework on November
1, 2018 to block the assets of the Government

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.034

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S164

of Venezuela in the United States in certain
economic sectors;
(3) generally freezing the assets of the Government of Venezuela in the United States
beginning on August 5, 2019;
(4) imposing Office of Foreign Assets Control sanctions on September 12, 2024, and
January 10, 2025, on numerous Venezuelan officials who enabled Maduro to maintain
power despite his 2024 election defeat;
(5) imposing Office of Foreign Assets Control sanctions on December 11, 2025 on nephews of Cilia Flores and others who engaged
in deceptive and unsafe oil-shipping practices to provide financial resources to support the Maduro regime; and
(6) imposing Office of Foreign Assets Control sanctions on December 19, 2025 on several additional family members and associates of Nicolás Maduro and Cilia Flores for
being complicit in, or directly engaging in,
transactions that supported the Maduro regime;
Whereas, on June 11, 2022, Nicolás Maduro
signed a 20-year cooperation agreement with
the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran designed to resist global sanctions
against the 2 regimes;
Whereas Iran’s terrorist proxy, Lebanese
Hezbollah, which has found safe haven in
Venezuela, engages in drug trafficking,
money laundering, and illicit smuggling to
fund its terrorist activities around the
world;
Whereas the Maduro regime was supported
by Lebanese Hezbollah as a hub for
transnational organized crime and international terrorism in the Western Hemisphere;
Whereas, beginning in 2006, the Secretary
of State has annually determined that Venezuela has failed to comply with the first
section 40A of the Arms Export Control Act
(22 U.S.C. 2781), which requires full cooperation with United States antiterrorism efforts;
Whereas the People’s Republic of China
and the Chinese Communist Party provided
critical support to empower the Maduro regime to stay in power in Venezuela through
the sale of Chinese military radar, riot control vehicles, and digital tools to control the
Venezuelan people’s access to information;
Whereas the Russian Federation helped the
Maduro regime evade United States sanctions, including through subsidiaries of the
Russian state-controlled Rosneft Oil Company, which brokered the sale and transport
of Venezuelan crude oil in 2020;
Whereas the Russian Federation both provided military equipment and sent its military personnel to lend support to the Maduro
regime in an effort to increase its footprint
in the Western Hemisphere;
Whereas the November 2025 National Security Strategy of the United States of America states, ‘‘We will deny non-Hemispheric
competitors the ability to position forces or
other threatening capabilities, or to own or
control strategically vital assets, in our
Hemisphere’’;
Whereas, in 2020, Nicolás Maduro, Cilia
Flores, and other Maduro regime officials
were indicted in the Southern District of
New York on charges including narco-terrorism, conspiracy to import cocaine, and
possession of machine guns and destructive
devices;
Whereas, in 2025, a superseding indictment
was filed in the Southern District of New
York and both Nicolás Maduro and Cilia Flores remain under indictment and will have to
answer for their crimes in a court of law;
Whereas President Trump offered multiple
diplomatic off-ramps, but was repeatedly
rebuffed by Nicolás Maduro;
Whereas, on January 3, 2026, the United
States military, in cooperation with the in-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

telligence community and law enforcement
agencies, carried out ‘‘Operation Absolute
Resolve’’, a meticulously planned operation
resulting in the successful capture of Nicolás
Maduro and his wife, Cilia Flores; and
Whereas Operation Absolute Resolve precisely targeted and neutralized Venezuelan
air defenses and the Cuban intelligence
agents responsible for Maduro’s personal protection, demonstrating the United States
military’s superior capabilities integration
and professionalism: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) supports President Trump’s decisive
military and law enforcement effort under
Operation Absolute Resolve to arrest Nicolás
Maduro and bring him to justice;
(2) commends the Trump Administration
for taking resolute action and praises the
bravery and gallantry of United States
servicemembers and law enforcement officers who participated in Operation Absolute
Resolve; and
(3) supports President Trump’s efforts to
assist the Venezuelan people in their fight
for freedom.
f

AMENDMENTS SUBMITTED AND
PROPOSED
SA 4183. Mr. BENNET (for himself and Mr.
HICKENLOOPER) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the bill H.R.
6938, making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4184. Mr. BENNET (for himself and Mr.
HICKENLOOPER) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the bill H.R.
6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the
table.
SA 4185. Mr. BENNET (for himself and Mr.
HICKENLOOPER) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the bill H.R.
6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the
table.
SA 4186. Mr. BUDD (for himself and Mr.
LANKFORD) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the bill H.R.
6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the
table.
SA 4187. Mr. BUDD submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
joint resolution S.J. Res. 98, to direct the removal of United States Armed Forces from
hostilities within or against Venezuela that
have not been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4188. Mr. SCHIFF (for himself and Mr.
BENNET) submitted an amendment intended
to be proposed by him to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to lie on
the table.
SA 4189. Mrs. BLACKBURN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by her
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4190. Mr. CRUZ (for himself and Ms.
CANTWELL) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the bill H.R.
6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the
table.
SA 4191. Mr. THUNE submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4192. Mrs. BLACKBURN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by her
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4193. Mrs. BLACKBURN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by her
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

SA 4194. Mrs. BLACKBURN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by her
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4195. Mr. CRUZ submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
joint resolution S.J. Res. 98, to direct the removal of United States Armed Forces from
hostilities within or against Venezuela that
have not been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4196. Mr. CRUZ submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
joint resolution S.J. Res. 98, supra; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4197. Mr. CRUZ submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
joint resolution S.J. Res. 98, supra; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4198. Mr. CRUZ submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
joint resolution S.J. Res. 98, supra; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4199. Mr. CRUZ submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
joint resolution S.J. Res. 98, supra; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4200. Mr. WYDEN submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; which
was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4201. Mr. LUJÁN submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4202. Mr. LUJÁN (for himself and Mr.
HEINRICH) submitted an amendment intended
to be proposed by him to the bill H.R. 6938,
supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4203. Mr. LUJÁN submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4204. Mr. LUJÁN submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4205. Mr. WHITEHOUSE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4206. Mr. WHITEHOUSE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4207. Ms. DUCKWORTH submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by her
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4208. Mr. THUNE proposed an amendment to the bill H.R. 6938, supra.
SA 4209. Mr. THUNE proposed an amendment to amendment SA 4208 proposed by Mr.
THUNE to the bill H.R. 6938, supra.
SA 4210. Mr. THUNE proposed an amendment to the bill H.R. 6938, supra.
SA 4211. Mr. THUNE proposed an amendment to amendment SA 4210 proposed by Mr.
THUNE to the bill H.R. 6938, supra.
SA 4212. Mr. THUNE proposed an amendment to amendment SA 4211 proposed by Mr.
THUNE to the amendment SA 4210 proposed
by Mr. THUNE to the bill H.R. 6938, supra.
SA 4213. Mr. WYDEN submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4214. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4215. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4216. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.039

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4217. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4218. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4219. Mr. LUJÁN (for himself, Mr.
WYDEN, and Ms. CORTEZ MASTO) submitted
an amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was
ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4220. Mr. JOHNSON submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4221. Mr. WELCH (for himself, Mr.
SANDERS, Mr. BOOKER, Mr. MERKLEY, Mr.
LUMENTHAL
, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, and Mr. BENB
NET) submitted an amendment intended to
be proposed by him to the bill H.R. 6938,
supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

TEXT OF AMENDMENTS
SA 4183. Mr. BENNET (for himself
and Mr. HICKENLOOPER) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in title IV of division C, insert the following:
ARKANSAS VALLEY CONDUIT, COLORADO
SEC. 4lll. Public Law 87–590 (76 Stat. 389;
123 Stat. 1320) is amended—
(1) in the first section—
(A) in subsection (c), in the second sentence, by striking ‘‘or in the case of the Arkansas Valley Conduit, payment in an
amount equal to 35 percent of the cost of the
conduit that is comprised of revenue generated by payments pursuant to a repayment
contract and revenue that may be derived
from contracts for the use of Fryingpan-Arkansas project excess capacity or exchange
contracts using Fryingpan-Arkansas project
facilities,’’; and
(B) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(d) ARKANSAS VALLEY CONDUIT.—
‘‘(1) REPAYMENT CONTRACT.—To provide domestic water supplies to communities and
households that do not have reliable access
to domestic water supplies, the contract for
the Arkansas Valley Conduit shall provide
for payment in an amount equal to 35 percent of the cost of the conduit, notwithstanding the reclamation laws or any other
provision of this Act. The contract payments
shall consist of—
‘‘(A) funding provided during construction
from any entity other than the Secretary;
and
‘‘(B) based on a demonstration of financial
hardship, as determined by the Secretary, repayment of the balance not covered under
subparagraph (A) for a period of not more
than 75 years with simple interest at a rate
that is equal to 50 percent of the interest
rate determined by the Secretary of the
Treasury under section 2(c), including revenue derived from contracts for the use of
excess capacity or exchange contracts using
Fryingpan-Arkansas project facilities.
‘‘(2) OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE.—The
contract for the Arkansas Valley Conduit
shall provide for the assumption by the contracting parties of the care, operation, maintenance, and replacement of the conduit.’’;
and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S165

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

(2) in section 2(b)(3)(A), by striking ‘‘this
section’’ and inserting ‘‘subsection (d) of the
first section’’.

SA 4184. Mr. BENNET (for himself
and Mr. HICKENLOOPER) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. llll. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY AWARD
CANCELLATIONS.

(a) No agency or entity funded in any division of this Act may terminate a Federal
award in whole or in part, require a renegotiation or rescoping of the Federal award, or
decide not to fund a future budget period of
a Federal award on the basis that the Federal award no longer effectuates program
goals or agency priorities, including pursuant to section 200.340(a)(4) of title 2, Code of
Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date
of enactment of this Act).
(b) Any Federal award that was terminated
after September 30, 2024, by any agency or
entity funded in any division of this Act for
no longer effectuating program goals or
agency priorities, including pursuant to section 200.340(a)(4) of title 2, Code of Federal
Regulations (as in effect on the date of enactment of this Act), shall be reinstated by
the applicable agency or entity under the
previous terms and conditions for that Federal award.

SA 4185. Mr. BENNET (for himself
and Mr. HICKENLOOPER) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. llll. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY FUND
PRESERVATION.

Each amount identified by a Disaster
Emergency Fund Code of ‘‘Z’’ as of September 30, 2025, in the Governmentwide
Treasury Account Symbol Adjusted Trial
Balance System that was obligated as of
that date with a unique award key and a
Federal award identification number shall be
made available only for the purposes associated with each applicable amount and for the
entity with the same recipient identifier to
which that amount was made, and the applicable amount shall remain available for obligation for the same period of availability as
was originally provided.

SA 4186. Mr. BUDD (for himself and
Mr. LANKFORD) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. lllll. None of the funds made
available by this division may be used to
transfer marijuana, as defined in section 102
of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C.
802), from schedule I of section 202(c) of that
Act (21 U.S.C. 812(c)) to another schedule of
that section.

SA 4187. Mr. BUDD submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

him to the joint resolution S.J. Res. 98,
to direct the removal of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
In section 2, strike subsection (b) and insert the following:
(b) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prevent the
United States from—
(1) defending itself from an armed attack
or threat of imminent armed attack; or
(2) conducting Department of Defense sensitive activities (as that term is defined in
section 130g(d) of title 10, United States
Code).

SA 4188. Mr. SCHIFF (for himself and
Mr. BENNET) submitted an amendment
intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; which was ordered to lie on the
table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. ll. PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS TO
SUPPORT CERTAIN ACTIVITIES IN
VENEZUELA.
(a) IN GENERAL.—No funds made available

by this or any other Act may be used for
United States military personnel to seize,
control access to, operate, or provide security at facilities within Venezuela involved
in the extraction, processing, or transportation of oil or other petroleum products.

SA 4189. Mrs. BLACKBURN submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by her to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. lll. (a) This section may be cited as
the ‘‘No Immigration Benefits for Hamas
Terrorists Act of 2026’’.
(b) Section 212(a)(3) of the Immigration
and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(3)) is
amended—
(1) in subparagraph (B)(i), in the matter
following subclause (IX)—
(A) by inserting ‘‘Palestinian Islamic Jihad
or Hamas’’ after ‘‘Palestine Liberation Organization’’; and
(B) by inserting ‘‘member,’’ after ‘‘representative,’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(H) PARTICIPANTS IN HAMAS TERRORISM
AGAINST ISRAEL.—Any alien who carried out,
participated in, planned, financed, afforded
material support to, or otherwise facilitated
any of the attacks against Israel initiated by
Hamas beginning on October 7, 2023, is inadmissible.’’.
(c) Section 241(b)(3) of the Immigration and
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1231(b)(3)) is
amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(D) INELIGIBILITY FOR RELIEF.—Any alien
who carried out, participated in, planned, financed, afforded material support to, or otherwise facilitated any of the attacks against
Israel initiated by Hamas beginning on October 7, 2023, shall be ineligible for any relief
under the immigration laws, including under
this section, section 208, and section 2242 of
the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency
Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1999 (and
any regulations issued pursuant to such section).’’.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.037

S13JAPT1

S166

(d) Section 237(a)(4)(B) of the Immigration
and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1227(a)(4)(B)) is
amended by striking ‘‘subparagraph (B) or
(F)’’ and inserting ‘‘subparagraph (B), (F), or
(H)’’.
(e) Beginning not later than one year after
the date of the enactment of this Act, and
each year thereafter, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit a report to Congress, including the number of aliens who
were—
(1) found to be inadmissible under section
212(a)(3)(H) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(3)(H)); and
(2) described in such section 212(a)(3)(H) of
the Immigration and Nationality Act (8
U.S.C. 1182(a)(3)(H)) and found to be removable pursuant to section 237(a)(4)(B) of the
Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C.
1227(a)(4)(B)).

SA 4190. Mr. CRUZ (for himself and
Ms. CANTWELL) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
DIVISION ll—ROTOR ACT
SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.

This division may be cited as the ‘‘Rotorcraft Operations Transparency and Oversight
Reform Act’’ or the ‘‘ROTOR Act’’.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS.

In this division:
(1) ADMINISTRATOR.—The term ‘‘Administrator’’ means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration.
(2) ADS–B IN.—The term ‘‘ADS–B In’’
means onboard avionics equipment that receives and processes Automatic Dependent
Surveillance-Broadcast transmissions that
are broadcast in accordance with sections
91.225 and 91.227 of title 14, Code of Federal
Regulations (or any successor regulations),
and other aviation advisory information
from ground stations, that provides the aircraft with awareness to the location of other
aircraft and traffic advisories.
(3) ADS–B OUT.—The term ‘‘ADS–B Out’’—
(A) has the meaning given such term in
section 91.227 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations; and
(B) broadcasts information from the aircraft in accordance with sections 91.225 and
91.227 of such title 14 (or any successor regulations).
(4) AFFECTED AIRCRAFT.—The term ‘‘affected aircraft’’ means any aircraft that is
required to operate in accordance with section 91.225 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulation.
(5) APPROPRIATE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS.—The term ‘‘appropriate committees
of Congress’’ means the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the
Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of
Representatives.
(6) CABINET MEMBER.—The term ‘‘Cabinet
Member’’ means an individual who is the
head (including an acting head) of the Department of Agriculture, the Department of
Commerce, the Department of Defense, the
Department of Education, the Department of
Energy, the Department of Health and
Human Services, the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Housing
and Urban Development, the Department of
the Interior, the Department of Justice, the
Department of Labor, the Department of
State, the Department of Transportation,
the Department of the Treasury, or the De-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

partment of Veterans Affairs, or any other
individual who occupies a position designated by the President as a Cabinet-level
position.
(7) FAA.—The term ‘‘FAA’’ means the Federal Aviation Administration.
(8) NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION; NCR.—The
terms ‘‘National Capital Region’’ and ‘‘NCR’’
mean the geographic area located within the
boundaries of—
(A) the District of Columbia;
(B) Montgomery and Prince Georges Counties in the State of Maryland;
(C) Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, and
Prince William Counties and the City of Alexandria in the Commonwealth of Virginia;
and
(D) all cities and other units of government within the geographic areas described
in subparagraphs (A) through (C).
(9) POWERED-LIFT.—The term ‘‘poweredlift’’—
(A) has the meaning given such term in
section 1.1 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation); and
(B) includes vertical-lift flight mode and
wing-borne flight mode, as such terms are
defined in section 194.103 of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation).
(10) ROTORCRAFT.—The term ‘‘rotorcraft’’
has the meaning given such term in section
1.1 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations
(or any successor regulation).
(11) TRANSPORT AIRPLANE.—The term
‘‘transport airplane’’ has the meaning given
such term in section 44741(i) of title 49,
United States Code.
(12) UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEM.—The
term ‘‘unmanned aircraft system’’ has the
meaning given such term in section 44801 of
title 49, United States Code.
SEC. 103. REVISION TO EXCEPTION FOR ADS–B
OUT TRANSMISSION.
(a) ADS–B OUT REFORMS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—
(A) SENSITIVE GOVERNMENT MISSION.—Be-

ginning on the date of enactment of this section, in applying section 91.225(f)(1) of title
14, Code of Federal Regulations, the term
‘‘sensitive government mission’’ shall be narrowly construed and shall not include routine flights, non-classified flights, proficiency flights, or flights of Federal officials
below the rank of Cabinet Member or the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
(B) NOTIFICATION.—For the purposes of interpreting section 91.225(f)(1) of title 14, Code
of Federal Regulations, the operating agency
shall—
(i) when operating a sensitive government
mission during which the aircraft will not be
transmitting ADS–B Out, notify Air Traffic
Control; and
(ii) notify the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation and the Committee on the Armed Services of the Senate
and the Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure and the Committee on the
Armed Services of the House of Representatives on a monthly basis regarding each sensitive government mission within Class B
airspace operated during such month.
(2) RULEMAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 1 year
after the date of enactment of this section,
the Administrator shall—
(i) issue or revise regulations to update
section 91.225(f) of title 14, Code of Federal
Regulations, to comply with the requirements of this section; and
(ii) revise any memorandum of agreement
between the FAA and any other Federal,
State, local, or Tribal agency to conform
with the revised regulations described in
clause (i), including any agreement pursuant
to section 1046 of the John S. McCain Na-

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

tional Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2019 (49 U.S.C. 40101 note).
(B) REPORT.—If the Administrator fails to
issue or revise regulations pursuant to subparagraph (A) or revise any memorandum of
agreement between the FAA and any other
agency pursuant to such subparagraph, the
Administrator shall, within 30 days, submit
to the appropriate committees of Congress a
report on the status of such regulations, including the reasons that the Administrator
has failed to issue or revise such regulations
within the period required under such subparagraph.
(b) GAO REVIEW AND REPORT.—Not later
than the date that is 2 years after the date
of enactment of this section, the Comptroller
General of the United States shall—
(1) review the utilization of exceptions
under section 91.225(f) of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), to
determine—
(A) whether the Department of Defense and
other relevant Federal agencies or other applicable operators have utilized such exceptions in accordance with relevant laws and
regulations; and
(B) the extent of such utilization;
(2) compare the utilization of exceptions
specified in such section 91.225(f) before and
after the issuance of revised regulations
under subsection (a); and
(3) submit to the Administrator and the
appropriate committees of Congress a report
on the findings of the review conducted
under paragraph (1) and the comparison conducted under paragraph (2).
(c) FAA REVIEW OF NON-COMPLIANT OPERATORS.—Upon submission of the report under
subsection (b)(3), the Administrator shall—
(1) determine whether any Federal agency
or other applicable operator that has been
found to have not utilized the exceptions
under section 91.225(f) of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), in
accordance with relevant laws and regulations shall be permitted to continue to utilize such exceptions; and
(2) not later than 30 days after the date on
which the Comptroller General submits the
report under subsection (b)(3), brief the appropriate committees of Congress on such
determination.
(d) REPORTS.—
(1) TO THE ADMINISTRATOR.—Not later than
90 days after the date of enactment of this
section, and on a quarterly basis thereafter,
each Federal, State, local, and Tribal agency
that performs sensitive government missions
as described in section 91.225(f)(1) of title 14,
Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), shall submit to the Administrator a report that includes—
(A) an attestation that such operations are
regularly transmitting ADS–B Out and are
conducted with proper consideration to aviation safety;
(B) a list of operations delineated by flight
in which the ADS–B Out equipment is not in
transmit mode because the aircraft was performing a sensitive government mission, including the airport, airspace location, date,
time, duration, and mission type of each
such operation; and
(C) with respect to any classified operation, a classified annex.
(2) TO CONGRESS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 180 days
after the date of enactment of this section,
and biannually thereafter, the Administrator
shall submit to the appropriate committees
of Congress a report on the frequency and
nature of the ADS–B Out exceptions granted
to Federal, State, local, and Tribal agencies
under section 91.225(f)(1) of title 14, Code of

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.041

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a). Such
report—
(i) shall include—
(I) aggregated data on the operations in
which ADS–B Out equipment is not in transmit mode by each agency described in paragraph (1); and
(II) a determination from the Administrator as to whether each operation described in paragraph (1)(B) jeopardizes aviation safety; and
(ii) may include a classified annex.
(B) SPECIAL NOTIFICATION.—If an agency described in paragraph (1) operates a flight
using an exception granted under section
91.225(f)(1) of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), 5 or more times in
a calendar month, or fails to provide to the
Administrator the attestation required
under paragraph (1)(A), the Administrator
shall notify the appropriate committees of
Congress of such use within 14 days of being
notified of such use. For the purposes of this
subparagraph, a flight shall be interpreted as
the period beginning when an aircraft moves
under its own power for the purpose of flight
and ending when the aircraft lands.
(e) ANNUAL INSPECTOR GENERAL AUDITS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Beginning on the date
that is 3 years after the date of enactment of
this section, the Inspector General of the Department of Transportation (in this section
referred to as the ‘‘Inspector General’’) shall
conduct an annual audit of FAA oversight of
all operations that utilize an exception
under section 91.225(f) of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), as revised under subsection (a), including Federal agency operations.
(2) CONSIDERATIONS.—In conducting an
audit under paragraph (1), the Inspector General shall assess the efficacy of FAA oversight related to the following:
(A) Ensuring exceptions under such section
91.225(f)(1) (or any successor regulation) are
strictly utilized by operators in accordance
with relevant laws and regulations.
(B) Ensuring exceptions under such section
91.225(f)(1) (or any successor regulation) are
not routinely used by operators.
(C) Identifying and engaging with any operator not in compliance with relevant laws
and regulations relating to exceptions under
such section 91.225(f)(1) (or any successor regulation).
(D) Any other factor determined appropriate by the Inspector General.
(3) BRIEFINGS TO CONGRESS.—The Inspector
General shall brief the appropriate committees of Congress on an annual basis after the
completion of each annual audit.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 104. ADS–B IN REQUIREMENTS.
(a) REQUIREMENT FOR ADS–B IN OPERATION.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 2 years

after the date of enactment of this section,
the Administrator shall issue a final rule in
accordance with section 553 of title 5, United
States Code, to require any person operating
an aircraft (other than an unmanned aircraft, as defined in section 44801 of title 49,
United States Code) required to be equipped
with ADS–B Out in accordance with section
91.225 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations
(or any successor regulation), to be equipped
with and operating with ADS–B In equipment that provides the aircraft with awareness to the location of other aircraft and
traffic advisories, unless otherwise authorized by air traffic control.
(2) COMPLIANCE DEADLINES.—In issuing a
final rule under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall—
(A) include an effective date of not later
than 60 days after the date on which such

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S167

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

final rule is published in the Federal Register; and
(B) require aircraft described in paragraph
(1) to be equipped with ADS-B In not later
than December 31, 2031.
(3) FINAL REGULATION REQUIREMENTS.—In
issuing a final rule under paragraph (1), the
Administrator shall, at a minimum, do the
following:
(A) PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.—The Administrator shall establish appropriate performance requirements for ADS–B In equipment
to provide integrated safety-enhancing capabilities for a pilot or other flight crew, including by increasing situational awareness
to the location of other aircraft and providing traffic advisories with alerting sufficient to provide traffic advisory indications
while airborne and on the airport surface,
such as visual and aural advisories.
(B) ALTERNATIVE EQUIPMENT OR TECHNOLOGY.—With respect to aircraft with a
maximum certificated takeoff weight of less
than 12,500 pounds when operating under part
91 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations,
and qualifying military aircraft as specified
by the Administrator in consultation with
the Secretary of Defense, the Administrator
shall establish performance requirements for
alternative equipment or technology that
the Administrator determines acceptable in
satisfying the ADS–B In requirement. The
performance requirements shall, at a minimum—
(i) provide similar or improved situational
awareness to the location of other airborne
traffic, as well as traffic advisory information; and
(ii) leverage the use of portable ADS–B In
receivers or equipment that allow display on
an existing or future electronic flight bag or
panel mounted display, provided that the installation or use of such equipment does not
adversely affect other required avionics or
the airworthiness of the aircraft.
(C) REQUIRED BRIEFING.—The Administrator shall brief the appropriate committees of Congress, the Committee on Armed
Services of the Senate, and the Committee
on Armed Services of the House of Representatives, on at least a monthly basis, regarding the alternative equipment or technology for qualifying military aircraft prior
to determining that such equipment or technology is acceptable to satisfy the ADS–B In
requirement.
(D) GUIDANCE.—The Administrator shall
issue relevant guidance for aircraft operators
and other appropriate stakeholders regarding the types of equipment that satisfy the
performance requirements described in this
paragraph.
(4) OTHER REQUIREMENTS.—In issuing a
final rule under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall include—
(A) requirements for ADS–B In equipment
and the use of such equipment;
(B) technical assistance to facilitating
ADS–B In equipage across the entire fleet of
affected aircraft, including, as appropriate,
guidance under part 26 of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations, to provide support for
affected transport airplane operators in complying with the requirements of this section;
(C) any other associated guidance necessary to assist operators and other stakeholders in identifying equipment that satisfies the ADS–B In performance standards described in paragraph (3) prior to the compliance deadline described in paragraph (2)(B);
(D) a determination of alternative equipment or technology described in subsection
(e); and
(E) a presumption, absent clear and compelling evidence to the contrary, that ADS–
B In equipment is cost beneficial and improves aviation safety.

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

(5) CONGRESSIONAL BRIEFINGS.—Not later
than 180 days after the date of enactment of
this section, and every 90 days thereafter,
the Administrator shall brief the appropriate
committees of Congress, as well as publish a
publicly available report, on the status of—
(A) the ADS–B In rulemaking required
under paragraph (1); and
(B) after the compliance deadline described
in paragraph (2)(A), the implementation and
oversight of such ADS–B In requirement.
(b) NEGOTIATED RULEMAKING COMMITTEE.—
(1) COMMITTEE.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 60 days
after the date of enactment of this section,
the Administrator may establish a negotiated rulemaking committee (in this section referred to as the ‘‘committee’’) pursuant to section 565 of title 5, United States
Code, to negotiate proposed regulations to
implement the requirements described in
subsection (a).
(B) MEMBERSHIP.—If the Administrator
elects to establish a committee under this
subsection, the committee shall be composed
of—
(i) representatives of—
(I) the FAA;
(II) air carriers;
(III) avionics manufacturers;
(IV) aircraft manufacturers; and
(V) general aviation organizations;
(ii) the exclusive bargaining representative
of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified
under section 7511 of title 5, United States
Code;
(iii) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots;
(iv) aviation safety experts outside of the
FAA; and
(v) any other representatives determined
appropriate by the Administrator.
(C) REQUIRED CONSULTATION.—In establishing a committee under this subsection,
the Administrator—
(i) shall consult with the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Homeland Security; and
(ii) may consult with other Federal agencies as appropriate.
(2) REQUIREMENTS.—If the Administrator
elects to establish a committee under this
subsection, the Administrator shall do the
following:
(A) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall
direct the committee to make recommendations relating to—
(i) ADS–B In equipment and its use;
(ii) ADS–B In equipment performance
standards pursuant to subsection (a)(3);
(iii) the consideration of effective approaches to facilitating ADS–B In equipage
across the entire fleet of affected aircraft,
including requirements under part 26 of title
14, Code of Federal Regulations, to provide
support for affected transport category airplane operators in complying with the requirements of this section; and
(iv) with respect to aircraft with a maximum certificated takeoff weight of less
than 12,500 pounds when operating under part
91 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, a
recommendation for low cost alternative
equipment or technology in accordance with
subsection (e).
(B) LACK OF COMMITTEE CONSENSUS.—In the
event the committee does not reach a consensus regarding a recommendation for low
cost alternative equipment or technology
under subparagraph (A)(iv), the Administrator shall, after the submission of the committee under paragraph (3), consider prescribing a low cost alternative that includes
the criteria described in subsection (e).

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.042

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S168

(3) SUBMISSION TO THE ADMINISTRATOR.—If
the Administrator elects to establish a committee under this subsection, not later than
1 year after the date of enactment of this
section, the committee shall submit to the
Administrator—
(A) a consensus proposal of regulations to
implement the requirement described in subsection (a)(1); or
(B) in the event the committee does not
reach a consensus, a report identifying any
points of agreement and disagreement with
respect to such proposed regulations.
(4) PROPOSED RULE.—If the Administrator
elects to establish a committee under this
subsection, not later than 180 days after receiving the submission of the committee
under paragraph (3), the Administrator shall
issue a proposed rule, in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code, that
either—
(A) to the maximum extent possible consistent with the legal obligations of the
FAA, uses the consensus proposal of the
committee under paragraph (3)(A) as the
basis for the proposed rule for notice and
comment, including with respect to any
standards or requirements described in subsection (a)(3); or
(B) in the event the committee does not
reach a consensus, considers the points of
agreement and disagreement submitted by
the committee under paragraph (3)(B).
(c) CONSULTATION REQUIRED WITHOUT NEGOTIATED RULEMAKING COMMITTEE.—If the Administrator does not establish a committee
under subsection (b), prior to issuing a final
rule, the Administrator shall consult with
appropriate stakeholders in conducting the
rulemaking required under subsection (a)(1),
including at a minimum the representatives
described in subsection (b)(1)(B).
(d) PHASED-IN RETROFIT.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—In issuing a final rule
under subsection (a)(1), the Administrator
shall—
(A) establish a process by which the operator of an affected aircraft, in service as of
the date on which the final rule under subsection (a)(1) is published in the Federal Register in accordance with subsection (a)(2)(A),
may apply to the Administrator to request
additional time, not to exceed a period of 1
year after the deadline described in subsection (a)(2)(B), to finalize equipage of its
fleet and make ADS–B In operational, provided that—
(i) an aircraft operator, owner, or their
agent submits an application deemed acceptable to the Administrator for additional
time for compliance, including a justification for such request and an attestation of
actions to date demonstrating progress toward achieving compliance;
(ii) the Administrator, in consultation
with the Secretary of Transportation, determines additional time is required to mitigate a significant disruption to air transportation; and
(iii) the Administrator determines the aircraft operator or owner does not have any
uncorrected violations of subchapters F and
G of chapter I of title 14, Code of Federal
Regulations; and
(B) notify the appropriate committees of
Congress not later than 14 days after making
a determination under clause (ii) or (iii) of
subparagraph (A).
(2) SPECIAL RULE FOR AGENTS.—With the exception of an agent representing an owner or
operator of transport airplanes, for the purposes of this subsection, an agent may represent more than 1 aircraft operator or
owner of the same type, model, or manufacturer and may submit 1 or more applications
under paragraph (1)(A)(i), each of which may
contain multiple aircraft operators or owners.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

(e) LOW COST ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF
COMPLIANCE.—In issuing a final rule under
subsection (a)(1), the Administrator shall determine low cost equipment or technologies
that provide similar or improved situational
awareness to the location of other airborne
traffic, as well as traffic advisory information, that satisfy the ADS–B In equipage requirement for aircraft with a maximum certificated takeoff weight of less than 12,500
pounds when operated under part 91 of title
14, Code of Federal Regulations. In making
such a determination, the Administrator
shall consider the use of—
(1) portable ADS–B In receivers; and
(2) equipment that allows display on an existing or future electronic flight bag or panel
mounted display, provided the installation
or use does not adversely affect other required avionics or the airworthiness of the
aircraft.
(f) PROACTIVE EQUIPAGE.—With respect to
any aircraft for which ADS–B In equipment
is available and complies with the requirements of the final rule issued under subsection (a)(1), the operator of any such aircraft shall take all appropriate actions necessary to equip such aircraft with ADS–B In
prior to the compliance deadline described in
subsection (a)(2).
(g) SEPARATION STANDARDS; RELEVANT CONTROLLER TRAINING.—
(1) RULEMAKING.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 18 months
after the effective date of the final rule described in subsection (a), the Administrator
shall issue a notice of proposed rulemaking
to establish separation standards, as appropriate, that leverage ADS–B Out or ADS–B
In equipment, and all other available technological capabilities in the air traffic control
system, to achieve safety and efficiency benefits throughout the national airspace system, including on an airport surface and
within Class E airspace (as defined in section
71.71 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations,
or any successor regulation).
(B) CONSULTATION.—In conducting the rulemaking under this subsection, the Administrator shall consult with appropriate stakeholders, including, at a minimum—
(i) representatives of—
(I) air carriers;
(II) original equipment manufacturers; and
(III) general aviation organizations;
(ii) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots;
(iii) the exclusive bargaining representative of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified under section 7111 of title 5, United
States Code;
(iv) aviation safety experts from outside
the FAA; and
(v) any other stakeholder deemed appropriate by the Administrator.
(2) REQUIRED UPDATES TO FAA ORDERS.—Not
later than 18 months after the issuance of
the notice of proposed rulemaking under
paragraph (1)(A), the Administrator shall
complete revisions, as appropriate, to FAA
Order 7110.65 and other relevant FAA Orders,
to increase safety and efficiency benefits in
the national airspace system.
(3) RELEVANT CONTROLLER TRAINING.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 1 year
after the compliance deadline described in
subsection (a)(2), the Administrator shall revise initial and recurrent air traffic controller training, as appropriate, in accordance with FAA Orders 3000.22 and 3120.4 and
revise associated orders and directives, as
appropriate, to ensure such controllers are
trained to apply any new separation standards and procedures.

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

(B) REQUIREMENTS.—In revising training
under subparagraph (A), the Administrator
shall—
(i) consider human factors impacts, appropriate phraseology adjustments, and surface
movement applications; and
(ii) consult with the exclusive bargaining
representative of air traffic controllers of
the FAA certified under section 7111 of title
5, United States Code.
(h) ACAS–X ACTION PLAN.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 180 days
after the date of enactment of this section,
the Administrator shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress an action
plan for advancing the deployment of the
Airborne Collision Avoidance System-X (in
this section referred to as ‘‘ACAS–X’’), or
any variant or successor technology, in the
national airspace system. The Administrator
shall publish the action plan in a publicly
available format not later than 10 days after
submitting such action plan to Congress.
(2) CONTENTS.—In developing the action
plan under paragraph (1), the Administrator
shall include—
(A) a strategic roadmap for the deployment
of ACAS–X technology, including steps required for widespread adoption among aircraft operators (including rotorcraft operators);
(B) actions and funding necessary to complete any applicable research, development,
testing, evaluation, and standards development needed to support the certification of
such technology;
(C) plans for engagement with appropriate
stakeholders, including—
(i) aircraft operators, including those in
the Department of Defense;
(ii) aviation safety experts outside the
FAA;
(iii) avionics manufacturers;
(iv) aircraft manufacturers;
(v) general aviation organizations;
(vi) the exclusive bargaining representative of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified under section 7511 of title 5, United
States Code;
(vii) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots; and
(viii) any other stakeholders determined
appropriate by the Administrator;
(D) engagement with foreign civil aviation
authorities to harmonize international
standards for certification of such technology;
(E) ACAS–X interoperability considerations for aircraft operators (including
rotorcraft operators) equipped with ADS–B
Out and ADS–B In equipment;
(F) an assessment of safety benefits for aircraft operators equipping with such technology, including civil and military operators; and
(G) any recommendations for administrative or legislative action, as determined appropriate by the Administrator, to advance
such technology deployment.
(3) IMPLEMENTATION.—The Administrator
may take actions, as appropriate, to implement the action plan developed under paragraph (1).
(4) BRIEFING.—Not later than 30 days after
the date on which the Administrator submits
the action plan under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall brief the appropriate committees of Congress on the contents of such
action plan and any prospective actions to
implement such plan.
(i) ARAC TASKING.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall
task the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory
Committee (in this section referred to as the

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.042

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

‘‘ARAC’’) with reviewing and assessing the
need for aircraft operating in Class D airspace to be equipped with ADS–B Out and
ADS–B In equipment.
(2) REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS.—Not
later than 1 year after initiating the review
and assessment under this section, the ARAC
shall submit to the Administrator—
(A) a report on the findings of the review
and assessment under paragraph (1); and
(B) any recommendations for legislative or
regulatory action the ARAC determines appropriate.
(3) BRIEFING.—Not later than 30 days after
the date on which the ARAC submits the report under paragraph (2), the Administrator
shall brief the appropriate committees of
Congress on—
(A) the findings and recommendations included in such report; and
(B) any plan to implement such recommendations, including a justification for
any recommendations the Administrator determines should not be implemented.
SEC. 105. REPEAL OF MANNED ROTARY WING
AIRCRAFT SAFETY PROVISIONS.

Section 373(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2026 is repealed, and Chapter 157 of title 10, United
States Code, shall be applied as if the amendments made by such section had not been enacted.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 106. INSPECTOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY
AUDIT.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 60 days

after the date of enactment of this section,
the Inspector General of the Army shall initiate an audit to evaluate the Army’s coordination with the FAA, pilot training, and
qualification standards, and the Army’s use
of ADS–B Out and whether it adheres to
Army policy, regulation, and law.
(b) ASSESSMENT.—In conducting the audit
required by subsection (a), the Inspector
General of the Army shall assess practices
and recommendations for the Army, including—
(1) whether Army policy and United States
law was adhered to, and the Army’s coordination with the FAA, during National Capital Region (‘‘NCR’’) operations of pilot
training and qualifications standards in the
NCR;
(2) the Army’s policy on ADS–B Out equipage, usage, and activation;
(3) maintenance protocols for UH–60 Black
Hawk helicopters operated by the 12th Army
Aviation Brigade including, but not limited
to, the calibration of any system that transmits altitude and position information outside the aircraft and the calibration of systems that send altitude and position information to the pilots inside the aircraft, and
the frequency with which such maintenance
protocols occur;
(4) compliance with the September 29, 2021,
Letter of Agreement executed between the
Pentagon Heliport Air Traffic Control Tower
and the Ronald Reagan Washington National
Airport Air Traffic Control Tower regarding
flight operations in the NCR; and
(5) the Army’s review of loss of separation
incidents involving its rotorcraft in the NCR
along with possible mitigations to prevent
future mishaps.
(c) PUBLIC DISCLOSURE.—Not later than 14
days after the audit required by subsection
(a) is concluded, the Secretary of the Army
shall—
(1) transmit a report on the results of the
audit, without redactions, to the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
and the Committee on Armed Services of the
Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure and the Committee
on Armed Services of the House of Representatives; and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S169

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

(2) publicly release the report without
redactions, except to the extent required for
national security reasons.
(d) INTERIM REPORTING.—Not later than 180
days after initiating the audit required by
subsection (a), and every 180 days thereafter
until such audit is concluded, the Inspector
General of the Army shall brief the committees of Congress described in subsection
(c)(1) regarding the progress of such audit.
SEC. 107. SAFETY REVIEWS OF AIRSPACE.
(a) FAA–DOD COORDINATION.—Not

later
than 30 days after the date of enactment of
this section, the Administrator shall establish or designate an office within the FAA as
the ‘‘Office of FAA–DOD Coordination’’ (in
this section referred to as the ‘‘Office’’),
which shall—
(1) coordinate airspace usage of military
aircraft and rotorcraft with relevant FAA
lines of business, including the Air Traffic
Organization;
(2) coordinate with the Office of Audit and
Evaluation of the FAA to ensure employee
complaints and whistleblower protections
are considered;
(3) consider opportunities to improve management and consolidation of aviation safety
information system databases to enhance
civil and military aviation incident reporting; and
(4) carry out the safety review required by
subsection (b).
(b) SAFETY REVIEWS.—
(1) REVIEW OF RONALD REAGAN WASHINGTON
NATIONAL AIRPORT.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 30 days
after the date on which the Office is established or designated, the Administrator shall
initiate a safety review of all military, law
enforcement, and civilian rotary wing, powered lift, fixed wing, and unmanned aircraft
system flight operations and flight routes in
the Washington D.C. Metropolitan Area Special Flight Rules Area, including but not
limited to flight operations conducted by the
Department of Defense, emergency response
providers, and air medical transport operators, to evaluate any associated safety risk
to commercial transport airplane operations
at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport.
(B) CONSULTATION.—In conducting a safety
review under subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall consult with—
(i) the Secretary of Defense;
(ii) Federal, State, and local agencies;
(iii) law enforcement agencies;
(iv) emergency response providers, including air medical transport operators;
(v) air carriers;
(vi) aviation labor organizations, including, at a minimum—
(I) the exclusive bargaining representative
of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified
under section 7511 of title 5, United States
Code; and
(II) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots; and
(vii) other stakeholders determined appropriate by the Administrator.
(2) OTHER AIRPORT REVIEWS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall
conduct safety reviews of all military, law
enforcement and civilian rotary wing, powered lift, fixed wing, and unmanned aircraft
system flight operations and flight routes at
other Class B airports (as listed in section 1
of Appendix D to part 91 of title 14, Code of
Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation)) and within the lateral boundary of
Class B airspace, at commercial service Class
C airports (as listed in FAA Order JO 7400.11J

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

(or any successor order)) and within the lateral boundary of Class C airspace in the national airspace system, and at Class D airports that provide passenger service under
part 121 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, determined to meet the risk criteria
set forth in subparagraph (C), including
flight operations conducted by the Department of Defense, emergency response providers, and air medical transport operators,
to evaluate any associated safety risk to
commercial transport airplane operations.
(B) CONSULTATION.—In conducting a safety
review under subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall consult with—
(i) the Secretary of Defense;
(ii) Federal, State, local, and Tribal agencies;
(iii) law enforcement agencies;
(iv) emergency response providers;
(v) air carriers;
(vi) aviation labor organizations, including, at a minimum—
(I) the exclusive bargaining representative
of air traffic controllers of the FAA certified
under section 7511 of title 5, United States
Code; and
(II) organizations representing certified
collective bargaining representatives of airline pilots, including the principal organization representing the largest certified collective bargaining representative of airline pilots; and
(vii) other stakeholders determined appropriate by the Administrator.
(C) PRIORITIZATION AND RISK CRITERIA.—In
prioritizing the safety reviews of Class B,
Class C, and Class D airports described in
subparagraph (A) and conducting the safety
reviews pursuant to subparagraph (A), the
Administrator shall, at a minimum, consider
the following risk criteria:
(i) The type of airspace the airport is located in and the type of tower at the airport.
(ii) Whether the airport has radar on the
field.
(iii) The total number of air traffic operations at the airport per calendar year, as reported in the Operations Network (OPSNET)
data of the FAA, and the rate of growth
measured over a 20-year period prior to the
initiation of a safety review under this section.
(iv) The Traffic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) resolution advisory rates at the
airport compared to the number of arrivals
at the airport.
(v) The presence of parallel runways.
(vi) The presence of visual flights (in this
subparagraph referred to as ‘‘VFR’’) corridors in proximity to the airport.
(vii) The presence of a helicopter corridor
in proximity to the airport or nearby helicopter operations.
(viii) The presence of dense VFR operations at the airport.
(ix) The presence of complex VFR procedures at the airport or in the adjacent airspace.
(D) DEADLINE OF INITIATION OF REVIEWS.—
The Administrator shall initiate the reviews
under this paragraph by the following deadlines:
(i) CLASS B AIRPORTS.—With respect to
Class B airports, not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of this section.
(ii) CLASS C AIRPORTS.—With respect to
Class C airports, not later than 90 days after
the initiation date of the Class B airport reviews.
(iii) CLASS D AIRPORTS.—With respect to
Class D airports, not later than 90 days after
the initiation date of the Class C airport reviews.
(3) REQUIREMENTS.—In conducting the safety reviews required by paragraphs (1) and (2),
the Office shall do the following:

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.042

S13JAPT1

S170

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

(A) Analyze air traffic and airspace management.
(B) Evaluate the level of coordination the
Administrator exercises with the Secretary
of Defense and the heads of any other Federal agencies, and emergency response providers as appropriate, to inform the designation and approval of airspace use and flight
routes for non-transport airplane operations.
(C) Assess any risks posed to transport airplanes from military aircraft and rotorcraft,
civil rotorcraft, powered lift aircraft, and unmanned aircraft systems operating in Class
B, Class C, or Class D airspace in proximity
to Class B, Class C, or Class D airports.
(D) Review relevant incidents submitted to
the Administrator through Air Traffic Mandatory Occurrence reports (as documented
via FAA Form 7210–13), Aviation Safety Reporting System reports, and Aviation Safety
Action Program reports, and relevant reports submitted to the Administrator of the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration through the Aviation Safety Reporting
System, to identify any safety trends regarding the operation of military aircraft and
rotorcraft, civil rotorcraft, powered lift aircraft, and unmanned aircraft systems in
Class B, Class C, or Class D airspace near
Class B, Class C, or Class D airports.
(4) DEADLINES FOR COMPLETION OF SAFETY
REVIEWS.—
(A) RONALD REAGAN WASHINGTON NATIONAL
AIRPORT.—The Administrator shall complete
the safety review required by paragraph (1)
not later than 120 days after the date on
which such review is initiated.
(B) OTHER AIRPORTS.—The Administrator
shall complete a safety review required by
paragraph (2) not later than 180 days after
such review is initiated.
(5) REPORTS.—
(A) REVIEW OF RONALD REAGAN WASHINGTON
NATIONAL AIRPORT.—Not later than 60 days
after completing the safety review required
by paragraph (1), the Administrator shall
submit to the appropriate committees of
Congress a report detailing the analyses and
results of such review, together with relevant findings and recommendations, including any corrective action plans to address
any risks identified, and recommendations
for legislative or administrative action determined appropriate by the Administrator.
(B) OTHER AIRPORT REVIEWS.—Not later
than 6 months after the date of enactment of
this section, and every 6 months thereafter,
the Administrator shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report detailing the analyses and results of the safety
reviews completed pursuant to paragraph (2)
since the preceding report under this subparagraph (or, in the case of the first such
report, since such date of enactment), together with relevant findings and recommendations, including any corrective action plans to address any risks identified,
and recommendations for legislative or administrative actions determined appropriate
by the Administrator.
(6) DESIGNATION.—The Administrator shall
designate a person within the Senior Executive Service of the FAA to be directly responsible for the completion of the requirements of this subsection.
(7) STAFFING.—The Administrator shall ensure adequate staffing to conduct the safety
reviews within the deadlines specified in this
section.
SEC. 108. FAA–DOD SAFETY INFORMATION SHARING.
(a) MOU WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
ARMY.—Not later than 60 days after the date

of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall enter into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Secretary of the Army
to permit, as appropriate, the sharing of information from the Army’s Safety Manage-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

ment Information System with the FAA, as
well as the sharing of information from the
FAA’s Aviation Safety Information Analysis
and Sharing System, Operational Analysis
Reporting System, Safety Trend Analytics
Dashboard, Aviation Risk Identification and
Assessment Program, Comprehensive Electronic Data Analysis and Reporting Tool,
and Falcon tool with the Army, to facilitate
communications and analysis of any applicable impacts to the safety and efficiency of
civil aviation operations and to mitigate
risk in the national airspace system.
(b) OTHER DOD MOUS.—Not later than 90
days after the date of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall enter into a
Memorandum of Understanding with the following military departments to permit, as
appropriate, the sharing of information from
applicable aviation safety information systems to facilitate communications and analysis of any applicable impacts to the safety
and efficiency of civil aviation operations
and to mitigate risk in the national airspace
system:
(1) The Department of the Navy.
(2) The Department of the Air Force.
(3) The Coast Guard.
NOTIFICATION.—Not
(c)
CONGRESSIONAL
later than 7 days after the date on which the
Administrator enters into any Memorandum
of Understanding under subsection (a) or (b),
the Administrator shall notify the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the Committee on Armed Services
of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of
Representatives.
SEC. 109. TREATMENT OF MEMORANDUM OF
AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND FEDERAL
AVIATION ADMINISTRATION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of sub-

section (b) of section 1046 of the John S.
McCain National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115–232; 49
U.S.C. 40101 note), the Memorandum of
Agreement Between the Department of Defense and the FAA entered into on May 10,
2024, is deemed to be notice jointly submitted to the appropriate congressional
committees for purposes of such subsection
and subsection (a) of such section shall cease
to be effective as of such date.
(b) UPDATE AND EFFECT OF MEMORANDUM OF
AGREEMENT.—
(1) UPDATE.—The Secretary of Transportation and the Secretary of Defense shall update the memorandum of understanding described in subsection (a) consistent with regulations issued by the Administrator of the
Federal Aviation Administration pursuant
to section 103(a)(2).
(2) EFFECT OF MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT.—The memorandum of agreement described in subsection (a) shall remain in
force subject to—
(A) any modifications made jointly by the
Secretary of Transportation and the Secretary of Defense;
(B) termination by either such Secretary;
or
(C) modification or termination by law.

SA 4191. Mr. THUNE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
Strike ‘‘1 day’’ and insert ‘‘3 days’’

SA 4192. Mrs. BLACKBURN submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by her to the bill H.R. 6938,

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of title I of division C, add the
following:
SEC. 1lll. PLACEMENT OF MOVABLE, TEMPORARY STRUCTURES ON CERTAIN
FEDERAL LAND TO SECURE AN
INTERNATIONAL BORDER OF THE
UNITED STATES.
(a) DEFINITIONS.—In this section:
(1) BORDER STATE.—The term ‘‘Border

State’’ means a State that is adjacent to the
northern border or southern border.
(2) FEDERAL LAND.—The term ‘‘Federal
land’’ means land under the jurisdiction and
management of a Federal land management
agency that is adjacent to the northern border or southern border.
(3) FEDERAL LAND MANAGEMENT AGENCY.—
The term ‘‘Federal land management agency’’ means—
(A) the Bureau of Indian Affairs;
(B) the Bureau of Land Management;
(C) the Bureau of Reclamation;
(D) the Forest Service;
(E) the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service; and
(F) the National Park Service.
(4) NORTHERN BORDER.—The term ‘‘northern border’’ means the international border
between the United States and Canada.
(5) OPERATIONAL CONTROL.—The term
‘‘operational control’’ has the meaning given
such term in section 2(b) of the Secure Fence
Act of 2006 (8 U.S.C. 1701 note; Public Law
109–367).
(6) SECRETARY CONCERNED.—The term ‘‘Secretary concerned’’ means—
(A) the Secretary of the Interior, with respect to Federal land under the jurisdiction
and management of the Secretary of the Interior, acting through, as applicable—
(i) the Director of the Bureau of Indian Affairs;
(ii) the Director of the Bureau of Land
Management;
(iii) the Commissioner of Reclamation;
(iv) the Director of the United States Fish
and Wildlife Service; and
(v) the Director of the National Park Service; and
(B) the Secretary of Agriculture, with respect to National Forest System land, acting
through the Chief of the Forest Service.
(7) SOUTHERN BORDER.—The term ‘‘southern
border’’ means the international border between the United States and Mexico.
(b) SPECIAL USE AUTHORIZATION.—Subject
to subsection (c), the Secretary concerned
shall not require a Border State to obtain a
special use authorization for the temporary
placement on Federal land within the Border
State of a movable, temporary structure for
the purpose of securing the northern border
or southern border, if the Border State submits to the Secretary concerned notice of
the proposed placement not later than 45
days before the date of the proposed placement.
(c) TEMPORARY PLACEMENT.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—A movable, temporary
structure described in subsection (b) may be
placed by a Border State on Federal land in
accordance with that subsection for a period
of not more than 1 year, subject to paragraph
(2).
(2) EXTENSION.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The period described in
paragraph (1) may be extended in 90-day increments, on approval by the Secretary concerned.
(B) CONSULTATION REQUIRED.—The Secretary concerned shall consult with the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection for purposes of determining whether

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.042

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

to approve an extension under subparagraph
(A).
(C) APPROVAL.—The Secretary concerned
shall approve a request for an extension
under this paragraph if the Commissioner of
U.S. Customs and Border Protection determines that operational control has not been
achieved as of the date of the consultation
required under subparagraph (B).

SA 4193. Mrs. BLACKBURN submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by her to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC.

lll.

STUDY OF NATIONAL SECURITY
RISKS POSED BY CERTAIN ROUTERS
AND MODEMS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall con-

duct a study of the national security risks
and cybersecurity vulnerabilities posed by
consumer routers, modems, and devices that
combine a modem and router that are designed, developed, manufactured, or supplied
by persons owned by, controlled by, or subject to the influence of a covered country.
(b) REPORT TO CONGRESS.—Not later than 1
year after the date of the enactment of this
Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the
House of Representatives and the Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
of the Senate a report on the results of the
study conducted under subsection (a).
(c) DEFINITIONS.—In this section:
(1) COVERED COUNTRY.—The term ‘‘covered
country’’ means a country specified in section 4872(f)(2) of title 10, United States Code.
(2) SECRETARY.—The term ‘‘Secretary’’
means the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Assistant Secretary of
Commerce for Communications and Information.

SA 4194. Mrs. BLACKBURN submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by her to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of division A, add the following:
TITLE VI—PRESERVATION OF CASH BAIL
Subtitle A—States and Local Governments
SEC. 611. SHORT TITLE.

This subtitle may be cited as the ‘‘Keep
Violent Criminals Off Our Streets Act’’.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 612. PROHIBITION ON GRANTS FOR CERTAIN ENTITIES.

Section 502 of title I of the Omnibus Crime
Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (34
U.S.C. 10153) is amended—
(1) in the matter designated as subsection
(A), by striking ‘‘(A) IN GENERAL’’ and inserting ‘‘(a) IN GENERAL’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(c) INELIGIBILITY.—
‘‘(1) COVERED OFFENSE DEFINED.—In this
subsection, the term ‘covered offense’ means
a criminal offense that poses a clear threat
to public safety and order, including—
‘‘(A) an offense involving a violent or sexual act, such as murder, rape, sexual assault,
carjacking, robbery, burglary, or assault;
and
‘‘(B) an offense that promotes public disorder, such as looting, vandalism, destruction of property, rioting or inciting to riot,
or fleeing from a law enforcement officer.
‘‘(2) PROHIBITION.—With respect to the fiscal year beginning on the first October 1 oc-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S171

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

curring after the date of enactment of the
Keep Violent Criminals Off Our Streets Act,
and each fiscal year thereafter, the Attorney
General may not award, renew, or extend a
grant under this subpart to a State or unit of
local government that has in effect a policy
or law that substantially limits cash bail as
a potential condition for every individual
charged with a covered offense in the State
or the area under the jurisdiction of the unit
of local government.’’.
Subtitle B—District of Columbia
SEC. 621. SHORT TITLE.

This subtitle may be cited as the ‘‘District
of Columbia Cash Bail Reform Act of 2026’’.
SEC. 622. MANDATORY PRETRIAL AND POST-CONVICTION DETENTION FOR CRIME OF
VIOLENCE OR DANGEROUS CRIME.
(a) PRETRIAL DETENTION.—Section 23–1322,

District of Columbia Official Code, is amended—
(1) in subsection (a), by striking ‘‘with an
offense’’ and inserting ‘‘with an offense,
other than a crime of violence or dangerous
crime (as such terms are defined in section
1331 of this title),’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
‘‘(j) Notwithstanding any other provision
of this section, the judicial officer shall
order each person charged with a crime of violence or a dangerous crime (as such terms
are defined in section 1331 of this title) be detained for the period before trial.’’.
(b) POST-CONVICTION DETENTION.—Section
23–1325, District of Columbia Official Code, is
amended—
(1) in subsection (b), by striking ‘‘unless’’
and all that follows through ‘‘section 23–
1321’’;
(2) in subsection (c), by striking ‘‘unless’’
and all that follows through ‘‘section 23–
1321’’; and
(3) by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
‘‘(e) The provisions of this section shall
apply with respect to a person convicted of a
crime of violence or a dangerous crime (as
such terms are defined in section 1331 of this
title).’’.
(c) CHANGES TO DEFINITION OF DANGEROUS
CRIME.—Section 23–1331(3), District of Columbia Official Code, is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (E), by striking ‘‘Burglary or attempted burglary’’ and inserting
‘‘Burglary in the first degree, attempted burglary in the first degree, or burglary with a
dangerous weapon’’; and
(2) in subparagraph (G), by striking ‘‘Robbery or attempted robbery’’ and inserting
‘‘Robbery in the first degree, attempted robbery in the first degree, or robbery with a
dangerous weapon’’.
(d) CHANGES TO DEFINITION OF CRIME OF VIOLENCE.—Section 23–1331(4), District of Columbia Official Code, is amended—
(1) by striking ‘‘burglary’’ and inserting
‘‘burglary in the first degree, attempted burglary in the first degree, or burglary with a
dangerous weapon’ ’’; and
(2) by striking ‘‘robbery’’ and inserting
‘‘robbery in the first degree, attempted robbery in the first degree, or robbery with a
dangerous weapon’’.
(e) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.—
(1) REMOVAL OF CRIME OF VIOLENCE AND
DANGEROUS CRIME FROM PRETRIAL RELEASE
PROCEDURES.—Section 23–1322, District of Co-

lumbia Official Code, is further amended—
(A) in subsection (b)(1)—
(i) by striking subparagraph (A); and
(ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (B)
through (D) as subparagraphs (A) through
(C), respectively;
(B) by amending subsection (c) to read as
follows:
‘‘(c) Subject to rebuttal by the person, it
shall be presumed that no condition or com-

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

bination of conditions of release will reasonably assure the safety of any other person
and the community if the judicial officer
finds that there is probable cause to believe
that the person—
‘‘(1) has threatened, injured, intimidated,
or attempted to threaten, injure, or intimidate a law enforcement officer, an officer of
the court, or a prospective witness or juror
in any criminal investigation or judicial proceeding;
‘‘(2) violated section 3 of the Act of July 8,
1932 (sec. 22–4503, D.C. Official Code), section
4(a) of such Act (sec. 22–4504(a), D.C. Official
Code), or section 4(a-1) of such Act (sec. 22–
4504(a)(1), D.C. Official Code); or
‘‘(3) violated the Firearm Control Regulations Act of 1975 (sec. 7–2501.01 et seq., D.C.
Official Code) while on probation, parole, or
supervised release for committing a dangerous crime or a crime of violence (as such
terms are defined in section 1331 of this title)
and while armed with or having readily
available a firearm, imitation firearm, or
other deadly or dangerous weapon as described in section 2(a) of the Act of July 8,
1832 (sec. 22–4502(a), D.C. Official Code).’’;
(C) in subsection (e)(1), by striking ‘‘is a
crime of’’ and all that follows through ‘‘, or’’;
and
(D) in subsection (f), by striking paragraph
(3).
(2) REMOVAL OF MURDER OFFENSES FROM
PRETRIAL RELEASE PROCEDURES.—Section 23–
1325, District of Columbia Official Code, as
amended by subsection (b), is amended—
(A) by striking subsection (a); and
(B) by redesignating subsections (b)
through (e) as subsections (a) through (d), respectively.
SEC. 623. REQUIRING CASH BAIL FOR RELEASE
OF INDIVIDUALS CHARGED WITH
PUBLIC SAFETY OR ORDER OFFENSES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 23–1321, District

of Columbia Official Code, is amended—
(1) in subsection (a)—
(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ‘‘Released’’ and inserting ‘‘Except as provided
under paragraph (5), released’’;
(B) in paragraph (3), by striking ‘‘; or’’ and
inserting a semicolon;
(C) in paragraph (4), by striking the period
at the end and inserting ‘‘; or’’ ; and
(D) by adding at the end the following new
paragraph:
‘‘(5) With respect to a person charged with
a public safety or order crime (as such term
is defined in section 1331 of this title), released only upon execution of a secured appearance bond (as such term is defined in
section 1331 of this title) and subject to any
requirement under subsections (b) and (c) of
this section as the judicial officer may
order.’’;
(2) in subsection (b), by striking ‘‘or upon
execution of an unsecured appearance bond
in an amount specified by the court,’’ and inserting ‘‘upon execution of an unsecured appearance bond in an amount specified by the
court, or upon execution of a secured appearance bond under subsection (a)(5),’’; and
(3) by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
‘‘(f) A person who is released upon the execution of an appearance bond with a surety,
under subsection (a)(5), may be arrested by
the surety, and if so arrested, shall be delivered promptly to a United States marshal
and brought before a judicial officer in the
District of Columbia. The judicial officer
shall determine in accordance with the provisions of this section whether to revoke the
release of the person, and may absolve the
surety of responsibility to pay all or part of
the bond in accordance with the provisions
of rule 46 of the Federal Rules of Criminal
Procedure. The person so committed shall be

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.044

S13JAPT1

S172

held in official detention until released pursuant to this title or any other provision of
law.’’.
(b) DEFINITIONS.—
(1) PUBLIC SAFETY OR ORDER CRIME DEFINED.—Section 23–1331, District of Columbia
Official Code, is amended by adding at the
end the following new paragraph:
‘‘(7) The term ‘public safety or order crime’
means failure to appear when ordered to do
so by a judicial officer; obstruction of justice; fleeing from a law enforcement officer;
rioting; inciting a riot; destruction of property; stalking; burglary or robbery (other
than burglary or robbery in the first degree
or with a dangerous weapon); or a previous
conviction of any such offense, or substantially similar offense, under Federal, State,
or local law.’’.
(2) SECURED APPEARANCE BOND DEFINED.—
Section 23–1331, District of Columbia Official
Code, is further amended by adding at the
end the following new paragraph:
‘‘(8) The term ‘secured appearance bond’
means an agreement to forfeit upon failing
to appear as required, the designated property, including money, as is reasonably necessary to assure the appearance of the person
as required, and post with the court the indicia of ownership of the property, or a percentage of the money as the judicial officer
may specify; or a bail bond with solvent
sureties in whatever amount is reasonably
necessary to assure the appearance of the
person as required.’’.
(c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.—Section 23–
1321, District of Columbia Official Code, is
further amended—
(1) in subsection (a), by striking ‘‘with an
offense’’ and all that follows through ‘‘shall
issue’’ and inserting ‘‘with an offense, other
than a crime of violence or dangerous crime
(as such terms are defined in section 1331 of
this title), the judicial officer shall issue’’;
and
(2) in subsection (c)—
(A) in paragraph (1)—
(i) by striking ‘‘shall’’ and inserting ‘‘may’’
; and
(ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘Least
restrictive further’’ and inserting ‘‘Further’’;
(B) by striking paragraph (3);
(C) by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5)
as paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and
(D) in paragraph (4), as so redesignated, by
striking ‘‘additional or different conditions’’
and inserting ‘‘any additional or different
condition described under this subsection’’.
SEC. 624. APPLICABILITY.

This subtitle, and the amendments made
by this subtitle, shall apply with respect to
an individual charged with an offense in the
District of Columbia on or after the date
that is 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SA 4195. Mr. CRUZ submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the joint resolution S.J. Res. 98,
to direct the removal of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of section 1, add the following:
(5) Members of the United States Armed
Forces and intelligence community, and all
those involved in the operations within Venezuela related to the January 3, 2026, capture
of Nicolás Maduro, including President Donald J. Trump, should be commended for their
efforts in a successful mission.

SA 4196. Mr. CRUZ submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

him to the joint resolution S.J. Res. 98,
to direct the removal of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of section 1, add the following:
(5) The execution of the arrest warrant
against Nicolás Maduro on January 3, 2026,
and subsequent efforts to prosecute him, enhance the national security of the United
States and advance the legitimate democratic aspirations of the people of Venezuela.

SA 4197. Mr. CRUZ submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the joint resolution S.J. Res. 98,
to direct the removal of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
In section 2, strike subsection (b) and insert the following:
(b) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this section shall be construed—
(1) to prevent the United States from defending itself from an armed attack or
threat of an imminent armed attack; or
(2) to prohibit, influence, or disrupt activities by the United States Armed Forces, including the use of force, involving efforts to
prevent the flow of illicit drugs into the
United States.

SA 4198. Mr. CRUZ submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the joint resolution S.J. Res. 98,
to direct the removal of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of section 1, add the following:
(5) In 1950, Venezuela had one of the world’s
strongest economies, ranking as the fourth
wealthiest country in the world by GDP per
capita.
(6) Venezuela holds the largest proven oil
reserves in the world and the largest proven
gold reserves in Latin America.
(7) Under the leadership of Nicolás Maduro,
Venezuela adopted socialist policies that
crippled the country’s economy, caused
acute humanitarian crises, and triggered the
mass displacement of the Venezuelan population.

SA 4199. Mr. CRUZ submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the joint resolution S.J. Res. 98,
to direct the removal of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress; which
was ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of section 1, add the following:
(5) Tren de Aragua is a designated foreign
terrorist organization pursuant to section
219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act
(8 U.S.C. 1189).
(6) Tren de Aragua has authorized its members to conduct aggression against Texans
and Americans across the country, including
kidnappings, extortion, the bribery of public
officials, and attacks and murders of United
States law enforcement.
(7) On June 16, 2024, two Venezuelan nationals and members of Tren de Aragua

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

raped and murdered 12-year-old Texan
Jocelyn Nungaray.
(8) The regime of Nicolas Maduro partnered
with and exercised control over Tren de
Aragua and Tren de Aragua’s violent activities against Texans and the United States.

SA 4200. Mr. WYDEN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. lllll. Not later than 60 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau
of Investigation shall provide to the Senate
an unclassified report and briefing to related
to criminal investigations into individuals
employed by Jeffrey Epstein that controlled
the movement of funds in and out of the
bank accounts of Epstein. The report and
briefing shall contain the following information:
(1) A list of all criminal investigations conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation into any individual that was employed
by Epstein, had signatory authority over the
bank accounts of Epstein, or has been an executor or beneficiary of the estate of Epstein
at any time. Each investigation identified
shall include the subject or target of the investigation, the conduct that was investigated, and the result of the investigation.
(2) A copy of all declination memoranda
prepared by the Department of Justice related to any individual that—
(A) was employed by Epstein;
(B) had signatory authority over the bank
accounts of Epstein;
(C) had been an executor or beneficiary of
the estate of Epstein at any time.
(3) A detailed analysis regarding whether
the Federal Bureau of Investigation has ever
questioned Darren Indyke, Richard Kahn, or
Harry Beller in connection with any criminal investigation into Epstein or Ghislane
Maxwell, and, if so, the date on which the individual was questioned.
(4) A list of all cash withdrawals and wire
transfers made by Darren Indyke, Richard
Kahn, or Harry Beller from the bank accounts of Epstein at JPMorgan Chase & Co.,
Deutsche Bank, BNY Mellon, or any other financial institution that have been identified
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as related to or in furtherance of the sex trafficking conspiracy of Epstein. Each withdrawal or wire transfer identified shall include the date, amount, and financial institution involved for each withdrawal or wire
transfer.

SA 4201. Mr. LUJÁN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
In title I of division B, in the matter under
the heading ‘‘SALARIES AND EXPENSES’’ under
the heading ‘‘DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT’’,
strike ‘‘: Provided, That’’ and insert ‘‘: Provided, That, of that amount, not less than
$2,000,000 shall be to support small and medium-sized businesses to conduct activities
including navigating the rapidly evolving
trade and tariff policies of the United States
Government: Provided further, That’’.

SA 4202. Mr. LUJÁN (for himself and
Mr. HEINRICH) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.044

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
In section 425 of division C, strike ‘‘, prior
to the completion of the cultural resources
investigation identified in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 in the matter preceding division A of the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2021 (Public Law 116–
260)’’.

SA 4203. Mr. LUJÁN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
In section 444(a) of division C, strike
‘‘763,514,000’’ and insert ‘‘478,514,000’’.
In section 444(a) of division C, strike ‘‘; (3)
$285,000,000 from the unobligated balances
under the heading ‘Department of the Interior—Methane Reduction Infrastructure’ ’’.

SA 4204. Mr. LUJÁN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

At the appropriate place in division A, insert the following:
SEC. lll. (a) None of the funds made
available by this Act under the heading
‘‘SCIENCE’’ under the heading ‘‘NATIONAL
AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION’’
may be—
(1) used for any purpose other than the programs, projects, and activities specified for
such account in this Act and the report accompanying this Act; or
(2) transferred, reprogrammed, deferred, or
otherwise withheld from obligation, except
pursuant to the reprogramming of funds
under section 505 of this Act.
(b) The Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration—
(1) shall obligate and expend funds made
available under the heading ‘‘SCIENCE’’ under
the heading ‘‘NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND
SPACE ADMINISTRATION’’ in a manner consistent with the amounts and purposes specified in this Act; and
(2) shall neither take, nor permit to be
taken, any action that would impede the
timely obligation of such funds without prior
notification to the Committees on Appropriations pursuant to section 505 of this Act.
(c) Not later than 30 days after the date of
the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a certification that
funds appropriated under the heading
‘‘SCIENCE’’ under the heading ‘‘NATIONAL
AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION’’
have been received and were made available
in a manner consistent with congressional
intent and without delay.

SA 4205. Mr. WHITEHOUSE submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by him to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S173

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

SEC. llll. BLOCKING TRAVEL BY THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR.

Notwithstanding any other provision of
any division of this Act, none of the funds
appropriated or otherwise made available by
any division of this Act may be used to support travel by the Secretary of the Interior
until the lease pause issued by the Secretary
of the Interior on December 22, 2025, for certain offshore wind facilities is lifted.

SA 4206. Mr. WHITEHOUSE submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by him to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. llll. BLOCKING PAUSES TO LEASES AND
OTHER ACTIVITIES FOR CERTAIN
ENERGY PROJECTS.

The Secretary of the Interior may not use
any funds provided in any division of this
Act to pause, in whole or in part, any lease
or activity associated with holding a lease
for an applicable energy project during the 1
year period following the issuance of an injunction to a stop work order on that energy
project by a Federal court.

SA 4207. Ms. DUCKWORTH submitted
an amendment intended to be proposed
by her to the bill H.R. 6938, making
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes; which was ordered
to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. lllll. PUBLICATION AND DISTRIBUTION
OF OPINIONS.

Section 521 of title 28, United States Code,
is amended—
(1) by inserting ‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—’’ before
‘‘The Attorney General’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(b) OLC OPINIONS.—
‘‘(1) DEFINITIONS.—In this subsection, the
following terms shall apply:
‘‘(A) FINAL OLC OPINION.—The term ‘final
OLC opinion’ means an OLC opinion that—
‘‘(i) the Attorney General, Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel,
or a Deputy Assistant General for the Office
of Legal Counsel, has determined is final;
‘‘(ii) is relied upon by government officials
or government contractors;
‘‘(iii) is relied upon to formulate legal
guidance; or
‘‘(iv) is directly or indirectly cited in another OLC opinion.
‘‘(B) NON-LEGAL OLC GUIDANCE.—The term
‘non-legal OLC guidance’ means a communication from the Office of Legal Counsel of
the Department of Justice that—
‘‘(i) is non-legal; and
‘‘(ii)(I) is relied upon by government officials or government contractors;
‘‘(II) is relied upon to formulate legal guidance; or
‘‘(III) is directly or indirectly cited in another OLC opinion.
‘‘(C) OLC OPINION.—The term ‘OLC opinion’—
‘‘(i) means views communicated by the Office of Legal Counsel of the Department of
Justice to any other office or agency, or person in an office or agency, in the Executive
Branch, including any office in the Department of Justice, the White House, or the Executive Office of the President, and rendered
in accordance with sections 511 through 513;
and
‘‘(ii) includes—

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(I) in the case of a verbal communication
of a legal interpretation, a memorialization
of that communication;
‘‘(II) a final OLC opinion;
‘‘(III) a revised OLC opinion; and
‘‘(IV) non-legal OLC guidance.
‘‘(D) REVISED OLC OPINION.—The term ‘revised OLC opinion’ means an OLC opinion—
‘‘(i) that is withdrawn;
‘‘(ii) to which information is added; or
‘‘(iii) from which information is removed.
‘‘(2) REQUIREMENT.—Subject to paragraph
(3) and in accordance with paragraph (4), the
Attorney General shall publish all OLC opinions on the public website of the Department
to be accessed by the public free of charge.
‘‘(3) REDACTION OF CLASSIFIED INFORMATION.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In the case of an OLC
opinion required to be published under paragraph (2) that contains classified information, the Attorney General shall—
‘‘(i) redact the classified information from
the OLC opinion before publication of the
OLC opinion; and
‘‘(ii) establish and preserve an accurate
record documenting each redaction from the
OLC opinion, including information describing in detail why public online disclosure of
the classified information would have resulted in the associated harm that pertains
to each level of classification.
‘‘(B) LIMITATION.—The Attorney General
may not redact information under this paragraph that is sensitive and unclassified unless it is highly likely that disclosure of the
information would, either directly or indirectly, result in—
‘‘(i) loss of life,
‘‘(ii) serious bodily harm, or
‘‘(iii) significant economic or property
damage.
‘‘(C) SUBMISSION TO CONGRESS.—In the case
of an OLC opinion described in subparagraph
(A), the Attorney General shall submit the
full opinion to—
‘‘(i) any Member of Congress, without redaction;
‘‘(ii) any appropriately cleared congressional staff member, without redaction or
with redaction up to top secret depending on
the individual’s clearance level; and
‘‘(iii) the Committee on the Judiciary and
the Select Committee on Intelligence of the
Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary
and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives,
which shall create a process through which
appropriately cleared congressional staff
from other committees may access the opinion, without redaction or with redaction up
to top secret depending on the individual’s
clearance level.
‘‘(D) PERIODIC REVIEW.—To the maximum
extent practicable, the Attorney General
shall, on a continual basis and not less frequently than once every 90 days—
‘‘(i) review every OLC opinion published
under
this
subsection
that
contains
redactions of classified information; and
‘‘(ii) remove any redactions that no longer
protect information that is classified as either sensitive, secret, or top secret.
‘‘(4) DEADLINE FOR PUBLICATION.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in
subparagraph (B), each OLC opinion issued
by the Office of Legal Counsel of the Department after the date of enactment of the DOJ
OLC Transparency Act shall be published in
accordance with this section as soon as practicable, but not later than 48 hours.
‘‘(B) EXCEPTION.—If the Attorney General
determines that publishing an OLC opinion
described in subparagraph (A) risks alerting
the target of an ongoing sensitive law enforcement operation, the OLC opinion shall

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.045

S13JAPT1

S174

be published not later than 48 hours following the completion of the initial operation.
‘‘(C) PREVIOUSLY ISSUED OPINIONS.—In the
case of OLC opinions issued before the date
of enactment of the DOJ OLC Transparency
Act, the Attorney General shall, subject to
subparagraph (D)—
‘‘(i) not later than 30 days after the date of
enactment of the DOJ OLC Transparency
Act, publish all of the OLC opinions issued
during fiscal years 2020 through 2023;
‘‘(ii) not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of the DOJ OLC Transparency
Act, publish all of the OLC opinions issued
during fiscal years 2000 through 2019;
‘‘(iii) not later than 90 days after the date
of enactment of the DOJ OLC Transparency
Act, publish all of the OLC opinions issued
during fiscal years 1980 through 1999;
‘‘(iv) not later than 120 days after the date
of enactment of the DOJ OLC Transparency
Act, publish all of the OLC opinions issued
during fiscal years 1960 through 1979; and
‘‘(v) not later than 2 years after the date of
enactment of the DOJ OLC Transparency
Act, publish all of the OLC opinions issued
before fiscal year 1960.
‘‘(D) DESCRIPTION OF CERTAIN OPINIONS.—In
the case of an OLC opinion issued by the Office of Legal Counsel of the Department before the date of enactment of the DOJ OLC
Transparency Act for which the text of the
OLC opinion cannot be located, the Attorney
General shall—
‘‘(i) publish a description of the OLC opinion; and
‘‘(ii) submit a written certification to Congress, under penalty of perjury, that—
‘‘(I) a good faith effort was made to find
the text of the OLC opinion; and
‘‘(II) the text of the OLC opinion is unavailable.
‘‘(5) RIGHT OF ACTION.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—On complaint brought
by a complainant who has been harmed as a
result of being deprived access to an OLC
opinion that is required to be made available
to the public free of charge on the public
website of the Department under this subsection, the district court of the United
States in the district in which the complainant resides, or has his principal place of business, or in the District of Columbia, has jurisdiction to enjoin the Office of Legal Counsel from withholding information required to
be made available under this subsection and
to order the production of information improperly withheld from the complainant.
‘‘(B) REVIEW.—In a case brought under subparagraph (A)—
‘‘(i) the court shall—
‘‘(I) determine the matter de novo; and
‘‘(II) examine the contents of the opinion
issued by the Office of Legal Counsel in camera to determine whether such information
or any part thereof shall be withheld under
paragraph (3); and
‘‘(ii) the burden is on the Office of Legal
Counsel to sustain its action.’’.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SA 4208. Mr. THUNE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the end add the following.
‘‘This Act shall take effect 1 day after the
date of enactment.’’

SA 4209. Mr. THUNE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed to
amendment SA 4208 submitted by Mr.
THUNE and intended to be proposed to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other
purposes; which was ordered to lie on
the table; as follows:

SEC. 223. None of the funds made available
to the Executive Office for Immigration Review under this title may be used for immigration judges who facilitate any arrest by
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
officers or agents at any courthouse.

Strike ‘‘1 day’’ and insert ‘‘2 days’’

SA 4210. Mr. THUNE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed to
amendment SA 4209 submitted by Mr.
THUNE and intended to be proposed to
the amendment SA 4208 proposed by
Mr. THUNE to the bill H.R. 6938, making
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes; which was ordered
to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end add the following.
‘‘This Act shall take effect 5 day after the
date of enactment.’’

SA 4211. Mr. THUNE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed to
amendment SA 4210 submitted by Mr.
THUNE and intended to be proposed to
the amendment SA 4209 proposed by
Mr. THUNE to the bill H.R. 6938, making
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes; which was ordered
to lie on the table; as follows:
Strike ‘‘5 day’’ and insert ‘‘6 days’’

SA 4212. Mr. THUNE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed to
amendment SA 4211 submitted by Mr.
THUNE and intended to be proposed to
the amendment SA 4210 proposed by
Mr. THUNE to the bill H.R. 6938, making
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes; which was ordered
to lie on the table; as follows:
Strike ‘‘6 day’’ and insert ‘‘7 days’’

SA 4213. Mr. WYDEN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
On page 18, line 9, insert before the period
the following: ‘‘: Provided further, That
$300,000 shall be made available to procure
additional tsunami warning data’’

SA 4214. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in title III of division A, insert the following:
SEC. lll. The Administrator of National
Aeronautics and Space Administration shall
not carry out reductions of force at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

SA 4215. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in title II of division A, insert the following:

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

SA 4216. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. lll. REINSTATEMENT OF GRANTS UNDER
THE REGIONAL CLEAN HYDROGEN
HUBS PROGRAM.
(a) DEFINITION OF COVERED AWARD.—In this

section, the term ‘‘covered award’’ means an
award provided under the Regional Clean Hydrogen Hubs Program of the Department of
Energy.
(b) NO RENEGOTIATION OR RESCOPING.—No
agency or entity funded in this Act may terminate in whole or in part, require a renegotiation or rescoping of, or decide not to fund
a future budget period of a covered award on
the basis that the covered award no longer
effectuates the program goals or agency priorities, including pursuant to section
200.340(a)(4) of title 2, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor regulation).
(c) REINSTATEMENT.—Any covered award
that was terminated by any agency or entity
funded in this Act during the period beginning on September 30, 2024, and ending on the
date of enactment of this Act for no longer
effectuating the program goals or agency
priorities, including pursuant to section
200.340(a)(4) of title 2, Code of Federal Regulations, shall be reinstated by such agency or
entity under its previous terms and conditions.

SA 4217. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of title I of division C, add the
following:
SITE OF SMITHSONIAN NATIONAL MUSEUM OF
THE AMERICAN LATINO

SEC. 1lll. (a)(1) Notwithstanding any
other provision of law or regulation, including section 8908(c) of title 40, United States
Code, the Smithsonian National Museum of
the American Latino may be located within
the Reserve (as defined in section 8902(a) of
title 40, United States Code).
(2) Section 201(g)(4) of division T of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (20
U.S.C. 80u(g)(4)) is amended by striking ‘‘,
except that’’ and all that follows and inserting a period.
(b) Section 201(g)(2) of division T of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (20
U.S.C. 80u(g)(2)) is amended to read as follows:
‘‘(2) SITE UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF ANOTHER FEDERAL AGENCY.—
‘‘(A) NOTIFICATION TO OTHER AGENCY OR ENTITY.—The Board of Regents shall not designate a site for the Museum that is under
the administrative jurisdiction of another
Federal agency or entity without first notifying the head of the Federal agency or entity.
‘‘(B) NOTIFICATION TO COMMITTEES.—Once
notified under subparagraph (A), the head of
the Federal agency or entity shall promptly

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.045

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 13, 2026

submit written notification to the Chair and
ranking minority members of the Committee
on Rules and Administration, the Committee
on Appropriations, and the Committee on
Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate,
and the Committee on House Administration, the Committee on Natural Resources,
the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, stating that the Federal agency or entity was
notified by the Board of Regents that a site
under its jurisdiction was designated and
that a transfer will be initiated as soon as
practicable.
‘‘(C) TRANSFER.—As soon as practicable
after the date on which the individuals described in subparagraph (B) receive the written notification described in such subparagraph, the head of the Federal agency or entity shall transfer to the Smithsonian Institution its administrative jurisdiction over
the land or structure that has been designated as the site for the Museum.’’.
(c) Section 201(d)(2)(D) of division T of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (20
U.S.C. 80u(d)(2)(D)) is amended to read as follows:
‘‘(D) ENSURING DIVERSITY OF POLITICAL
VIEWPOINTS AND AUTHENTIC EXPERIENCES.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—The Board of Trustees
shall ensure that the exhibits and programs
of the Museum accurately and comprehensively represent the varied cultures, histories, events, and values of Hispanic or
Latino communities.
‘‘(ii) SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.—In carrying
out its duties, the Board of Trustees shall
ensure that it seeks and utilizes to its maximum ability guidance from a broad array of
knowledgeable and respected sources reflecting the diversity of the political viewpoints
and authentic experiences held by Hispanics
or Latinos in the United States, and shall
seek such guidance for both the creation and
substantial revision of exhibits and programs.
‘‘(iii) DEFINITIONS.—In this subparagraph—
‘‘(I) the term ‘broad array’ means a range
of experts and publications that represent
the broad spectrum of Hispanic or Latino
communities, to include varied viewpoints,
political ideologies, cultures, and lived experiences in the United States; and
‘‘(II) the term ‘knowledgeable and respected source’ means an individual who has
gained through education, publication, or
witnessing an important or historical event,
the ability to advise on at least one unique
viewpoint or experience of a particular Hispanic or Latino community, and whose
knowledge has been relied upon by a notable
segment of that community for education,
heritage preservation, or historical purposes,
and includes the work of such an individual
which reflects such ability and knowledge.’’.
(d) Not later than 120 days after the date of
enactment of this Act and every 2 years
thereafter, the Secretary of the Smithsonian
shall submit to the Committee on Natural
Resources of the House of Representatives,
the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, the Committee on
House Administration of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Rules and
Administration of the Senate, the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives, and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, a report on actions taken by the Director of the Smithsonian National Museum of the American
Latino Museum and the Board of Trustees of
the Museum to comply with the requirements of the amendments made by subsection (c), including a description of actions
taken with respect to substantial revisions

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S175

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

of current exhibits and programs as well the
planning of future exhibits and programs.
(e) This section and the amendments made
by this section shall take effect as if included in the enactment of section 201 of division T of the Consolidated Appropriations
Act, 2021 (20 U.S.C. 80u).

SA 4218. Mr. PADILLA submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the end of title I of division C, add the
following:
PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR CERTAIN
NONRESIDENT FEES FOR ENTRANCE TO UNITS
OF THE NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM

SEC. 1llll. None of the funds made
available under any division of this Act may
be used by the Secretary of the Interior to
administer the nonresident America the
Beautiful—the National Parks and Federal
Recreational Lands Pass or the $100 nonresident fee for entrance to certain units of
the National Park System that went into effect on January 1, 2026, until the date on
which the Secretary of the Interior provides
the public with an opportunity to participate
in the development of, and modification to,
the entrance fee to units of the National
Park System pursuant to the Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement Act (16 U.S.C. 6801
et seq.) with respect to the nonresident pass
and nonresident fees.

SA 4219. Mr. LUJÁN (for himself, Mr.
WYDEN, and Ms. CORTEZ MASTO) submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by him to the bill H.R. 6938,
making consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
In title I of division A, in the matter under
the heading ‘‘SALARIES AND EXPENSES’’ under
the heading ‘‘DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT’’,
strike ‘‘: Provided, That’’ and insert ‘‘: Provided, That, of that amount, not less than
$2,000,000 shall be to support small and medium-sized businesses to conduct activities
including navigating the rapidly evolving
trade and tariff policies of the United States
Government: Provided further, That’’.

SA 4220. Mr. JOHNSON submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. ll. REISSUANCE OF RULE REMOVING THE
GRAY WOLF FROM THE LIST OF ENDANGERED AND THREATENED WILDLIFE.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 60 days

after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall reissue the final rule entitled ‘‘Endangered and Threatened Wildlife
and Plants; Removing the Gray Wolf (Canis
lupus) From the List of Endangered and
Threatened Wildlife’’ (85 Fed. Reg. 69778 (November 3, 2020)).
(b) NO JUDICIAL REVIEW.—Reissuance of the
final rule described in subsection (a) shall
not be subject to judicial review.

SA 4221. Mr. WELCH (for himself, Mr.
SANDERS, Mr. BOOKER, Mr. MERKLEY,

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Mr. BLUMENTHAL, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, and
Mr. BENNET) submitted an amendment
intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; which was ordered to lie on the
table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. lll. DATABASE AND WEBPAGE FOR INFORMATION ON BILLION-DOLLAR
DISASTERS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator of the

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (in this section referred to as the
‘‘Administrator’’) shall establish and maintain a database and webpage that is available to the public and contains information
on each billion-dollar disaster that occurs
each year in the United States.
(b) UPDATE.—Not less frequently than biannually, the Administrator shall update the
database and webpage required under subsection (a) as new information is available.
(c) MATTERS TO BE INCLUDED.—The database and webpage required under subsection
(a) shall include the following:
(1) With respect to each billion-dollar disaster included in the database and webpage—
(A) the estimated cost of the disaster;
(B) the type of disaster;
(C) the location of the disaster;
(D) the date or dates of the disaster; and
(E) such other information regarding the
disaster as the Administrator considers appropriate.
(2) Visual graphs and mapping features
showing the trajectory of disasters over time
and the distribution of types of disasters
across the United States that are similar, if
not identical, to those features produced by
the National Centers for Environmental Information from 1980 through 2024 and that
were available and updated online at
www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/billions/ until May
9, 2025.
(d) DATA TO BE USED.—In establishing and
maintaining the database required under
subsection (a), the Administrator shall use
data available to the Administrator and may
collaborate with Federal and non-Federal
partners as necessary, such as those partners
with which the Administrator collaborated
previously while the database specified
under subsection (c)(2) was active from 1980
through 2024.
(e) INCLUSION OF OTHER DISASTERS.—The
Administrator may include in the database
required under subsection (a) a disaster that
is not a billion-dollar disaster if the Administrator determines that the inclusion of the
disaster in the database would be appropriate.
(f) MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING DATABASE.—
The Administrator shall maintain and update information contained in the previously
existing disaster database specified under
subsection (c)(2) on the webpage for the National Centers for Environmental Information for archiving and research purposes.
(g) BILLION-DOLLAR DISASTER DEFINED.—In
this section, the term ‘‘billion-dollar disaster’’ means a storm or severe weather
event that results in $1,000,000,000 or more in
combined direct costs and market costs as
determined by the National Centers for Environmental Information.
f

AUTHORITY FOR COMMITTEES TO
MEET
Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, I have
two requests for committees to meet
during today’s session of the Senate.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.048

S13JAPT1

S176

They have the approval of the Majority
and Minority Leaders.
Pursuant to rule XXVI, paragraph
5(a), of the Standing Rules of the Senate, the following committees are authorized to meet during today’s session
of the Senate:
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Committee on Armed Services is
authorized to meet in closed session
during the session of the Senate on
Tuesday, January 13, 2026, at 9:30 a.m.
SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE

The Select Committee on Intelligence is authorized to meet during
the session of the Senate on Tuesday,
January 13, 2026, at 2:30 p.m., to conduct a closed briefing.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority leader.
f

MEASURE READ THE FIRST
TIME—S. 3627
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I understand that there is a bill at the desk,
and I ask for its first reading.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will read the bill by title for the
first time.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
A bill (S. 3627) to require institutions of
higher education to disseminate information
on the rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for other
purposes.

Mr. THUNE. I now ask for a second
reading, and in order to place the bill
on the calendar under the provisions of
rule XIV, I object to my own request.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Objection is heard. The bill will receive its
second reading on the next legislative
day.
f

ORDERS FOR WEDNESDAY,
JANUARY 14, 2026
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that when the Senate completes its business today, it
stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on
Wednesday, January 14; that following
the prayer and pledge, the Journal of
proceedings be approved to date, the
morning hour be deemed expired, the
time for the two leaders be reserved for
their use later in the day, morning
business be closed, and the Senate resume consideration of H.R. 6938.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

ORDER FOR ADJOURNMENT
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, if there is
no further business to come before the
Senate, I ask that it stand adjourned
under the previous order following the
remarks of my colleagues.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Rhode Island.
f

UNANIMOUS CONSENT REQUEST—
S. RES. 550
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President,
the world is undeniably round; water

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

undeniably freezes at 32 degrees Fahrenheit; and equally undeniably, the climate is changing, and the changes in
the climate are human-caused by fossil
fuel emissions. Fossil fuel emissions
are the primary cause.
These are facts, and they are demonstrated by sound science. Not only is
climate change a demonstrated fact
recognized by all sound science on the
topic, but human beings have been
aware of this scientific fact for over a
century. The fossil fuel industry has
worked to suppress that fact for nearly
60 years, but it is still a fact.
One hundred thirty years ago, in 1896,
Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius
concluded that greenhouse gas emissions from human activities contributed to a global ‘‘greenhouse effect’’
driving global warming. That was 1896.
In 1968, at a celebration of the hundred-year anniversary of the fossil fuel
industry, the physicist Edward Teller
warned that greenhouse gas emissions
from burning fossil fuels cause a greenhouse effect and that increased use of
fossil fuels would cause global warming
and severe sea level rise. His audience,
obviously, was fossil fuel executives at
that event commemorating the 100
years of the fossil fuel industry.
This chart is of the famous Keeling
Curve, which shows the dramatic acceleration in CO2 in the atmosphere beginning around 1950. You can see it start
up in 1850, but it really kicked off after
1950.
This data, actually, from back here
comes from scientists who collect core
samples in glaciers, date the core samples, and can test the bubbles that are
preserved in those ice core samples
from ancient glaciers. I have actually
been to the lab at Ohio State where a
married couple of scientists had this
immense freezer in which they had core
after core after core of samples from
glaciers, and very often, the glacier is
now gone.
This chart shows the rise in global
average temperatures from 1860 to now.
While it jumps up and down a lot seasonally, the red line shows the average.
As you see the CO2 curve accelerating,
you see the global average temperature
also accelerating.
Between 1968 and 2003, fossil fuel interests, including American Petroleum
Institute, Exxon, and Shell, commissioned scientific reports on climate
change to look into this, all of which—
all of which—concluded that climate
change was happening, that greenhouse
gas emissions from fossil fuel combustion were the primary cause of climate
change, and that the impacts of this
change in our climate would be severe.
The fossil fuel industry suppressed
their own scientists’ findings for decades, but in 2015, investigative journalists found and leaked the suppressed
internal memos. These companies
knew what their business was doing all
along, and they chose to hide the evidence of their own scientists and do
nothing.

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Not only did they know, but their
own scientists’ work was stunningly
accurate.
This is a chart from Exxon pulled
from a 1982 Exxon memo. This line in
black is the predicted rise, back when
this was prepared, before 1982, in CO2
concentrations. They start at 1960 and
work their way to 2100. This is what
Exxon predicted for CO2 concentration
increase, and this lower line is what
Exxon predicted for temperature increase driven by the CO2 concentration
increase. The blue line is what actually
happened with respect to CO2 concentration. The red line is what actually happened with respect to temperature.
Those Exxon scientists pretty well
nailed it. I mean, that is very, very
close, to have actual results track the
Exxon predictions. But that didn’t get
out even though Exxon knew because
the fossil fuel industry suppressed all
of this.
Today, NASA maintains that ‘‘there
is unequivocal evidence’’—unequivocal
evidence—‘‘that Earth is warming at
an unprecedented rate’’ and that
‘‘[h]uman activity is the principal
cause’’ of this warming. That is what
NASA scientists say.
NASA scientists are pretty good. We
are driving remotely controlled vehicles around the surface of Mars that
got sent there by NASA, driving
around collecting data and sending images back to Earth from Mars. When
you can pull that off, you are a pretty
good scientist.
This is what NASA said: ‘‘unequivocal evidence that Earth is warming’’
and that ‘‘[h]uman activity is the principal cause.’’
The United States has its own National Climate Assessments, which
Congress actually mandated by law.
They are the most comprehensive
source for data on climate impacts in
the United States. Five have been published since they were required by Congress—2000, 2009, 2014, 2018, and 2023. A
sixth National Climate Assessment was
due for 2028, but in 2025, the Trump administration fired all the scientists and
researchers working on that project.
They even shut down the website.
Why, you may ask, is the Trump administration suppressing science, firing scientists and researchers? Why
won’t the Trump administration protect the American people from greenhouse gas emissions? Why are they
even trying to repeal the finding that
these greenhouse gases are pollutants?
It is pretty simple: fossil fuel industry
pressure from fossil fuel industry front
groups.
This is a graph I have used repeatedly on the floor before. It is put together by a scientist, Robert Brulle,
who studies the science denial operation as a social and economic phenomenon. Each of these dots represents
a group that propagates the fossil fuel
industry’s climate denial fraud campaign. As you can see, there are a lot of
them. This is a big cloud of groups

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.047

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 13, 2026

whose job is to fool the American public, propagate climate denial fraud
about what is really going on, and in
some cases actually work on the political side to put dark money into our
politics to corrupt America’s response
to this known danger. This web of denial, of fraud, of corruption costs
American lives, and it costs Americans
money, too.
By the way, voters are paying attention. A December poll found that 65
percent of American voters understand
that climate change is increasing their
cost of living. And we know that to be
true. As chairman of the Budget Committee, I had hearing after hearing
that demonstrated that.
What we see across the country is climate change driving extreme weather,
sea level rise, heat waves, catastrophic
wildfires, and toxic pollution. That not
only drives illness and death, but it is
right now as we speak undermining the
insurance, mortgage, and real estate
markets in places like Florida. Those
parts are already in disarray. And
when you can’t get insurance on your
home because the climate risk is uninsurable, nobody can get a mortgage on
your home either, which means that
when you try to sell that home, unless
you are a millionaire swapping
McMansions—if you are a regular person who needs a buyer who can get a
mortgage on your property to sell it, it
means your property becomes hard to
sell. It means its value decreases.
And, in fact, in Florida you are seeing an insurance market that is in
complete collapse, propped up by taxpayers to try to hold it together. You
are seeing a mortgage market that is
in disarray as people find they are unable to sell their properties. And Florida led the country last year in the decline in property values. It was the top
State in property value decline.
This is coming at us, and it is coming
at us hard. In other speeches, I have
given surveys of the multiple, multiple
warnings—not from green groups, not
from environmentalists, but from people who understand the financial system and see this threat that is bearing
down on us.
So fossil fuel’s climate denial fraud is
coming at American families’ finances.
It is real, and it is costing them.
So I have a resolution, and the punch
line is very simple: One, climate
change caused by fossil fuel combustion is not a hoax. I hope we can go
with NASA on that. I hope we can go
with Exxon on that. I hope we can go
with real, measured observation of
weather on that.
Second, the reality of human-caused,
greenhouse-gas-driven climate change
is sound science. That is essentially
undisputed in the scientific community. There is a microscopic stable of
people whose science usually means
they show up here to testify for the
fossil fuel industry to sow doubt. But
once you get beyond that tiny stable of
paid climate deniers, it is 99.9 percent.
I mean, science is—that is as close to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S177

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

unanimous as science gets on this, and
I urge that this body should reflect
that.
And, finally, the third, Congress
should protect legislatively mandated
climate research programs. Science is
the headlights for society. Science predicts and tells us what is coming at us.
You would be a fool to turn the headlights out on your car driving onto a
dark road. We are fools if we turn off
the science headlights of our government as we move into increasing climate danger.
So, Mr. President, I ask unanimous
consent that the Committee on Environment and Public Works be discharged from further consideration and
the Senate now proceed to S. Res. 550;
further, that the resolution be agreed
to, that the preamble be agreed to, and
that the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid upon the table.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there
an objection?
The Senator from Kansas.
Mr. MARSHALL. Mr. President, reserving the right to object, I just want
to say that I am optimistic that the
Senator from Rhode Island and I agree
on our goals here: that we both think
the environment is important, that we
both want to leave this world cleaner,
healthier, and safer than we found it. I
think those are great goals. And having children and grandchildren that
love the great outdoors, I want to leave
this world better than I found it.
But I guess where we disagree is, How
are we going to get there? As a family,
we have done projects like we planted
over 20,000 trees on our land. We have
done several water projects where we
preserved wetlands. We have eliminated invasive species. We have worked
with and invested in Ducks Unlimited,
which does some incredible things for
the environment.
What is interesting, as we think
about what are the biggest impacts on
the environment and what the future
holds, actually, the No. 1 predictor is
the world economy—that if we have a
strong world economy, the carbon footprint is going to be less. So we think
about: Well, why is that? And we
should answer the question: Why is
that so? If there is a strong world economy, then the infrastructure can be
built for energy production with a
smaller carbon footprint.
I think of building pipelines for natural gas, for instance, as opposed to all
these countries that are still burning
coal, that are burning wood and diesel
fuel, heating fuel. I can’t even believe
that still, in America, we are burning
heating fuel because we won’t let natural gas pipelines go across certain
areas. So a strong world economy is
one of the biggest impacts on our environment’s future.
And so what impacts the world economy? I think one of the things is energy. The world needs energy that is
not only affordable, but it needs to be
reliable and clean. It has to be all those
things. And we can do that. But if you

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

have energy production that is not affordable, that is not reliable, then people aren’t going to use it, and countries
aren’t going to use it.
So we need this bridge. We need this
bridge, and I think the solution long
term is probably some form of nuclear
energy. I think it is probably small
modular reactors, which have zero carbon footprint. They are walkaway safe.
They are not quite ready for prime
time, but we are getting closer every
year. And I think, within 5 to 10 years,
we will have these small modular reactors
powering
communities
and
powering data centers and all those
great things.
I think we have to keep in mind that
it is so expensive to transport electricity. If you transport natural gas to
make energy, it is a tenth of the cost
that it is to transport electricity. So,
again, we have to think about the
equation as well as clean, but we also
need to think about affordable and reliable.
I think the challenge for those of us
who are actually scientists is to go
back and think about all the predictions that have never, never come
true from the climate alarmists. In
2013, Peter Wadhams said we would be
ice free by 2015. In 2007, the IPCC said
the Himalayan glaciers would disappear by 2035; it was later retracted.
In 2019, everyone’s climate alarmist favorite, AOC, said the world is going to
end in 12 years if we don’t address the
climate change. We are not quite to
2031, but we are getting there.
It doesn’t do any good to be an
alarmist. We need a practical approach
to our environment—a practical, pragmatic, economical approach—and I
look forward to the day when my
friends across the aisle want to sit
down with Republicans and have a real
conversation about how we get there.
And, again, I am just committed to
leaving this world cleaner, healthier,
and safer. I don’t believe that we can
go along with my colleague from Rhode
Island’s resolution here, and for that
reason I object.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Objection is heard.
The Senator from Rhode Island.
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President,
let me just remind everyone who is listening what this resolution resolved—
three simple points: One, climate
change is not a hoax. Two, climate
science is actually sound science. And,
three, we shouldn’t turn off our research headlights that tell us what is
coming at us.
That was all. All we had to agree on
was basic facts. So when my friends on
the other side can’t agree on facts that
are so basic as climate change is real,
the science is sound, and we should
keep our headlights on as we drive into
this unprecedented new hazard, it is
hard to see how we move on from
there.
I agree very much with my friend
from Kansas that energy that is affordable, reliable, and clean is our common

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.037

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S178

goal. And I will give an example because the developers of Revolution
Wind have told me that our offshore
wind facility is going to send power
ashore at 9 cents per kilowatt hour
into a grid whose average price is 18
cents. It is literally half the price to
get power off Revolution Wind than it
is to pay for the primarily natural-gasfueled power that drives the New England grid. It is a 50-percent cost reduction; so it is affordable. Reliable? The
wind blows like crazy out on the ocean;
it is highly reliable.
In fact, Iowa, which has the biggest
wind component of its electric grid, has
actually treated wind as reliable baseload energy because where one turbine
might not be spinning, there are plenty
of others that are. So the people who
plan for making sure that the lights
don’t go out—technical people—actually treat wind as reliable baseload energy through formulas that that ISO
has developed.
And clean? Yes, it is clean. It burns
no fossil fuel.
And yet the Trump administration
twice has tried to shut down that
project—twice. Just yesterday, they
got blown up in Federal court for the
second time when they tried for the
second time to shut down that project.
After $5 billion had been invested in it,
they wanted to shut it down.
So we have the way to go forward,
but the administration doesn’t want to
go forward. They want to sabotage a
wind project that will bring power onto
the grid at about half the current grid
cost.
Our attorney general in those proceedings proposed an affidavit and, in
his pleadings, said that Revolution
Wind would save hundreds of millions
of dollars for New England customers.
The Trump Cabinet is running
around pretending that that is not
true. They pretend that it is expensive.
They lie.
They had a chance to come into
court, where it is a little harder to lie,
and say: Oh, no, you are wrong. Your
affidavit asserting hundreds of millions
of dollars in savings when this comes
online is wrong, and here is our case
for why 9 cents is bigger than 18 cents
or 9 cents isn’t real—or whatever it is
that they wanted to say.
They didn’t. They didn’t pipe up at
all because they couldn’t, because it is
not true, and every grid operator
proves that by calling up clean energy
first because it is less expensive.
Again, these are technical people.
They don’t have a point to make. Their
system calls the least expensive energy
up first, and once you get through
nukes and hydro, you are into solar,
wind, and battery. And it is only once
you are through all of that that you
then get into the fossil fuel plants, because they are more expensive, and
every grid operator can prove that to
you in the way they actually operate
our electric grids. They call up clean
energy first because it is less expensive, period.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

So it is unfortunate that here we are
with this web of denial controlling so
much of what happens in this building—fossil fuel industry dark money
slashing through this building—and we
can’t get agreement that climate
change is not a hoax, that climate
science is sound science, and that we
shouldn’t turn off our research headlights as we go into the future.
Before I yield, let me just point out
that the University of Kansas teaches
climate science. The University of
Kansas teaches climate science. It even
teaches about this stuff. It has a course
called ‘‘Anti-Environmentalism and
Climate Change Denial in America,’’ in
addition to a ‘‘Climate and Climate
Change’’ course, a ‘‘Climate Change
and Hazards Planning’’ course, and a
‘‘Climate Science’’ course.
When your home State university is
teaching the science of climate change,
you ought to be able to agree that climate science is real and that climate
change is not a hoax.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Hawaii.
f

ENERGY COSTS
Mr. SCHATZ. Mr. President, I thank
the Senator from Rhode Island for his
leadership and his clarity, and I want
to underscore one of the most basic
points that has to be made. And this is
how times have changed.
We have changed what we are talking
about because energy systems change,
prices change, needs change, and the
load changes. Right? But hearing the
Senator from Kansas, it could have
been 1998 or 2008 or 2018. It is the same
talking points, and it is literally not
true anymore.
There was a time when you could actually credibly say: Look, I understand
there is a planetary emergency. But
coal is so cheap. People are struggling.
We have to balance the planetary
emergency with the need for people to
be able to cool and heat their homes
and keep their lights on and all the
rest of it.
All of that is out the window. Why?
Because clean is cheap and cheap is
clean. Clean energy is now the cheapest
kind of electricity that we can get on
the grid in any kind of reasonable
timeframe.
There was a time where it was coal.
That is definitely more expensive now.
There was a time where it was gas, but
the cost of gas keeps going up and up
and up, for a couple of reasons—because we are exporting a lot of our gas
but also because the turbines needed to
convert natural gas into electrons—
there is a huge backlog of them.
So we have an industrial renaissance
happening in certain States, and we
have all of this AI data center load
coming up, and we have your normal
American economy stuff happening.
There are not enough electrons on the
grid.
What happens when there is not
enough of something? The people sell-

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ing that thing raise the price. And that
is exactly what is happening.
That is not a rhetorical flourish.
Like, they have overnight prices. They
have people whose job it is to find how
we are going to meet everybody’s
needs, so when you flick that switch,
everything just works. There are technicians in front of probably three or
four screens figuring out ‘‘OK. I am
going to buy this. This is the overnight
price. This is the backup,’’ all that.
What has changed over the last couple of years is that solar energy is it.
Even if you don’t care at all about the
climate, you should still love solar energy. Why? Because nobody should be
enthused about paying more for electricity.
What Donald Trump has done is very
unique in American history, maybe
even in world history—I am not too
sure. It is normal for a President of the
United States to try to alleviate economic pain for the citizens of the
United States, and this is certainly the
first President that I have experienced
in the U.S. Senate but honestly the
first President that I have even been
aware of who is intentionally raising
the price of something that we all
need.
It is Secretary Burgum’s order, and
it is the way Secretary Wright is behaving, and it is the way Lee Zeldin is
behaving, and it is the way people in
the White House are behaving. They
want to create a shortage of electricity. Why? First, they have ideology
against solar and wind. Trump has a
particular idea about wind and golf
courses and birds or whatever. But
they viewed, 10 years ago, solar as a
kind of ideological project, as like a
nice to have, United Nations, utopian
view of the world.
Well, listen, solar is the most pragmatic thing we can put on the grid.
Solar is really the only thing that is
ready quickly. Why? Because nuclear
energy has tremendous potential but is
at least an 8- to 12-year timeframe, so
we are talking about the 2030s. Geothermal also has tremendous potential,
but they have not worked out all of the
technical issues. And again, that is
really a 2030 to 2040 play.
In the short run, we have a shortage.
In the short run, we have a shortage,
and Donald Trump is making it worse.
Now, why would you make it worse?
Well, when there are shortages of
something, the people selling the thing
get to charge more, and they are charging more.
So you, as the consumer—and again,
I care deeply about this planetary crisis. It is actually the main reason I am
in the U.S. Senate. I care deeply about
this. But even if you don’t, nobody
wants to pay more than necessary on
their electricity bills, and this national
solar ban is making everybody pay
more.
One in four Americans struggles to
pay their electricity bills—one in four
Americans. So what is Trump doing
about it? Well, it is definitely worse
than nothing.

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.039

S13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 13, 2026

The criticism about Biden during the
inflation crisis was that he wasn’t
doing enough about inflation, but this
is a different criticism. This is deliberate policy choices to drive up the
cost of something that everybody
needs.
By the way, that is also true for food
and health insurance and electricity.
All the stuff you need, he is creating a
shortage of. Why? Because when there
are shortages, people have to petition
the King for mercy, and that is what is
going on right now.
If you are close to him, if you can get
dinner with him at Mar-a-Lago, you
can get relief. There is enough money
in the system for lots of people to get
wealthy, but there is not enough
money for a regular person living in
Kaimuki, Honolulu, already paying
three or four times the average electricity rate, paying more and more and
more because there is a national policy
driven by the President of the United
States to create a shortage of electrons
because he has decided that climate action is against his interests.
I think, if we are going to move forward on permitting reform but if we
are going to move forward more generally on the question of affordability,
we have to say that shortages are bad
for prices. When there is not enough of
something, people charge too much,
and right now, we need as many electrons on the grid as we can possibly
get, which means we need interstate
transmission, and we need to not just
permit new projects but at a minimum
let the projects that have been almost
totally built be plugged into the grid.
So this is not a climate speech; this
is a ‘‘people can’t afford their electricity bills’’ speech. And I just hope
some of my Republican colleagues understand they have to abandon their
old talking points because they don’t
apply anymore.
Cheap is clean, and clean is cheap.
I yield the floor.
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Might the Senator be willing to retain the floor for a
moment to yield for a question?
Mr. SCHATZ. Yes. I would be pleased
to yield for a question through the
Chair.
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. In Rhode Island,
we have a grid. ISO New England it is
called. It is through that grid that
electrons get from powerplant to the
grid and from the grid to people’s
homes, and it is run as a basically common utility.
I assume Hawaii, which is geographically quite distinct, has its own grid.
So on our grid, this Revolution Wind
project, as I said, is going to come on
at 9 cents per kilowatt hour into a
market where the prevailing rate is 18
cents. So if President Trump and his
minions at Interior and EPW and Energy can stop that plant, they are making Rhode Islanders, New Englanders,
buy 18-cent power instead of 9-cent
power. So that raises the price for everybody.
By the way, for those of you who are
listening, the ISO grid, like almost all

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S179

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

the others—the price at any given
minute on the grid for electricity is set
by the highest cost plant that has to
operate to meet that level of demand.
So if you can get that 9-cent cost to be
the highest cost, that is it for everybody, but if you got to go back to 18,
that is also it for everybody. That
plant just doesn’t raise costs to pay
itself back; it raises grid costs for
every electron that is running at that
same time.
So what that produces is, sticking
with the 9- and 18-cent example, the 18cent cost comes out of ratepayers’
pockets. They have to pay their electric bill at 18 cents. They could have
paid only 9 cents; instead, they are
going to pay 18. The difference is going
to go to the fossil fuel industry, to the
big donors of Trump.
I call this a scam that Trump and his
minions, for their big fossil fuel donors,
are deliberately holding clean energy
off the grid, which is cheaper, so that
the grid can’t go to it, has to go to
higher and higher cost fossil fuel
plants, so consumer costs go up. But
that additional money that consumers
have to pay goes to the fossil fuel industry, which gave him hundreds of
millions of dollars to be elected, and
this is payback for them.
Only Trump is no fool. Why pay it
back himself or ask his political supporters to pay it back when he can go
to electric consumers and bury it in
their bill and make consumers pay to
send hundreds of millions of dollars to
these big donors.
So that is what we see in New England.
On the Hawaii grid, how does this
work also?
Mr. SCHATZ. Well, our grid is different, obviously, because we have a series of islands, and they are kind of
self-contained grids. But our challenge
is, to meet the load, we need electrons.
And we do the dirtiest and most expensive thing, which is to light low-sulfur
fuel oil on fire to create electrons.
That is just north of like, you know,
wood-burning stoves in terms of its efficiency. It is not a good way to do it
economically, and it is not a good way
to do it in terms of climate impact.
So the Hawaiian Electric Company
has a bunch of clean-energy projects on
the grid because we have—the net capacity factors for our wind project on
land are comparable to offshore wind.
That is how much the wind blows in
parts of essentially Maui and Hawaii
Island. The southern part of Hawaii Island is incredible. People don’t believe
the numbers until they go down there
and measure them. It is as if it is an
offshore wind platform, but it is landbased. So we have ample resources to
power our grid.
When I was a kid in the Hawaii Legislature, I still remember the Hawaiian
Electric Company would come and testify and say: The maximum penetration of renewables onto the grid is 15
percent. After that, you get power
quality problems.

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 9801

By the way, that was true when that
person studied electrical engineering in
the seventies. That was actually true.
The person wasn’t lying. It is just that
we have figured out a lot of this. It is
not that we don’t continue to need
dispatchable power or baseload power;
it is that grids are getting really, really smart and capable of handling high
penetration of intermittent renewable
energy. And when you layer them on
top of each other, they are no longer
functionally intermittent.
So I kind of was like—I am sort of
like from the future, right, because 10
years ago, 15 years ago, it was cheaper
for us to move in the direction of clean
energy in Hawaii, but you couldn’t say
that on the continental United States
side. And we moved in that direction as
fast as we possibly could and tried to
provide some measure of relief for ratepayers.
But now what is going to happen is
we are going to have to buy a bunch of
electrons in the most expensive fashion. We are the most isolated majorly
populated place on the planet, and everybody pays more for everything, and
now electricity bills are going to go up
because of the OBBA.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. SCHATZ. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

ADJOURNMENT UNTIL 10 A.M.
TOMORROW
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate stands
adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 6:56 p.m.,
adjourned until Wednesday, January
14, 2026, at 10 a.m.
f

NOMINATIONS
Executive nominations received by
the Senate:
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
ADEMOLA ADEWALE–SADIK, OF NEW YORK, TO BE
UNITED STATES DIRECTOR OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR A TERM OF FIVE YEARS, VICE OREN E.
WHYCHE–SHAW.

FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY
CHARLTON ALLEN, OF NORTH CAROLINA, TO BE GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY FOR A TERM OF FIVE YEARS, VICE JULIA
AKINS CLARK, TERM EXPIRED.

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
ADMINISTRATION
MATTHEW ANDERSON, OF COLORADO, TO BE DEPUTY
ADMINISTRATOR OF THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND
SPACE ADMINISTRATION, VICE PAMELA A. MELROY, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
JEFFREY ANDERSON, OF GEORGIA, TO BE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA ON THE
COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION, WITH THE RANK OF AMBASSADOR.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
BRIAN BARBER, OF LOUISIANA, TO BE UNITED STATES
MARSHAL FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF LOUISIANA

E:\CR\FM\G13JA6.040

S13JAPT1

S180
TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY

LEE BEAMAN, OF TENNESSEE, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE TENNESSEE VALLEY
AUTHORITY FOR A TERM EXPIRING MAY 18, 2030, VICE
JOE H. RITCH, TERM EXPIRED.

EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
SCOTT BESSENT, OF SOUTH CAROLINA, TO BE UNITED
STATES GOVERNOR OF THE EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT; UNITED STATES
GOVERNOR OF THE INTER–AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT
BANK FOR A TERM OF FIVE YEARS; UNITED STATES GOVERNOR OF THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT FOR A TERM OF FIVE
YEARS; AND UNITED STATES GOVERNOR OF THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND FOR A TERM OF FIVE
YEARS, VICE STEVEN T. MNUCHIN.

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
BRIAN BIRDWELL, OF TEXAS, TO BE AN ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, VICE CHRISTOPHER JOSEPH
LOWMAN.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
JAMES BISHOP, OF NORTH CAROLINA, TO BE UNITED
STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE MIDDLE DISTRICT OF
NORTH CAROLINA FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE
SANDRA J. HAIRSTON.

DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

BRIAN GOOTKIN, OF MONTANA, TO BE UNITED STATES
MARSHAL FOR THE DISTRICT OF MONTANA FOR THE
TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE CRAIG J. ANDERSON.
THOMAS GOVAN, JR., OF ALABAMA, TO BE UNITED
STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE MIDDLE DISTRICT OF ALABAMA FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE LOUIS V .
FRANKLIN, SR., TERM EXPIRED.

NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
MICHAEL GRAHAM, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD FOR A
TERM EXPIRING DECEMBER 31, 2030. (REAPPOINTMENT)

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
STEVEN HAINES, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE AN ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF COMMERCE, VICE GRANT T. HARRIS, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
LINDSEY ROBYN–MICHELLE HALLIGAN, OF COLORADO,
TO BE UNITED STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE EASTERN
DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS,
VICE JESSICA D. ABER.

FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION
ROBERT HARVEY, OF FLORIDA, TO BE A FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSIONER FOR A TERM EXPIRING JUNE 30,
2029, VICE CARL WHITNEY BENTZEL, TERM EXPIRED.

CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION
WILLIAM HEWES III, OF MISSISSIPPI, TO BE A COMMISSIONER OF THE CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION FOR A TERM OF SEVEN YEARS FROM OCTOBER 27,
2024, VICE DOUGLAS DZIAK, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
JOHN BRESLOW, OF ARIZONA, TO BE AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA TO THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS.
WESLEY BROOKS, OF FLORIDA, TO BE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE FOR OCEANS AND INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS, VICE
MONICA P. MEDINA, RESIGNED.
JEREMY CARL, OF MONTANA, TO BE AN ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF STATE (INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS), VICE MICHELE JEANNE SISON.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
ROBERT CEKADA, OF FLORIDA, TO BE DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, FIREARMS, AND EXPLOSIVES, VICE STEVEN M. DETTELBACH, RESIGNED.
WALTER CLAYTON, OF NEW YORK, TO BE UNITED
STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF
NEW YORK FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE
DAMIAN WILLIAMS.

EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
CARTER CROW, OF TEXAS, TO BE GENERAL COUNSEL
OF THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION FOR A TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE KARLA ANN
GILBRIDE.

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
AUSTIN DAHMER, OF ARIZONA, TO BE AN ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, VICE MARA ELIZABETH
KARLIN.

THE JUDICIARY

GEORGE HOLDING, OF NORTH CAROLINA, TO BE UNITED
STATES DIRECTOR OF THE EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT, VICE J. STEVEN DOWD.

NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
JOHN DELEEUW, OF TEXAS, TO BE A MEMBER OF THE
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD FOR THE
REMAINDER OF THE TERM EXPIRING DECEMBER 31, 2026,
VICE ALVIN BROWN.

DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT

KENNETH JACKSON, OF TEXAS, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE INTER–AMERICAN
FOUNDATION FOR A TERM EXPIRING SEPTEMBER 20, 2028,
VICE HECTOR E. MORALES, TERM EXPIRED.

FEDERAL AGRICULTURAL MORTGAGE
CORPORATION
JEFFREY KAUFMANN, OF IOWA, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE FEDERAL AGRICULTURAL MORTGAGE CORPORATION, VICE CHESTER JOHN
CULVER.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
MICHAEL KAVOUKJIAN, OF FLORIDA, TO BE AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY OF
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA TO THE KINGDOM OF
NORWAY.

SURFACE TRANSPORTATION BOARD
RICHARD KLOSTER, OF WEST VIRGINIA, TO BE A MEMBER OF THE SURFACE TRANSPORTATION BOARD FOR A
TERM EXPIRING DECEMBER 31, 2028, VICE MARTIN J.
OBERMAN, TERM EXPIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
SRIPRAKASH KOTHARI, OF MASSACHUSETTS, TO BE AN
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY, VICE BENJAMIN HARRIS, RESIGNED.

BENJAMIN LANDA, OF NEW YORK, TO BE AMBASSADOR
EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA TO HUNGARY.
LEE LIPTON, OF FLORIDA, TO BE AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA TO THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES.
GREGORY LOGERFO, OF MASSACHUSETTS, A CAREER
MEMBER OF THE SENIOR FOREIGN SERVICE, CLASS OF
MINISTER–COUNSELOR, TO BE COORDINATOR FOR
COUNTERTERRORISM, WITH THE RANK AND STATUS OF
AMBASSADOR AT LARGE, VICE ELIZABETH H. RICHARD.

UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE

IRVING DENNIS, OF OHIO, TO BE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, VICE VINAY VIJAY SINGH, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
MARK DITLEVSON, OF MINNESOTA, TO BE AN ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, VICE MELISSA GRIFFIN
DALTON, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

ANTHONY LOMANGINO, OF FLORIDA, TO BE A GOVERNOR OF THE UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE FOR A
TERM EXPIRING DECEMBER 8, 2031, VICE ROMAN MARTINEZ IV, TERM EXPIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WILLIAM LONG, OF MISSOURI, TO BE AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA TO THE REPUBLIC OF ICELAND.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
DANIEL EDWARDS, OF NORTH CAROLINA, TO BE AN ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION, VICE CAROL
ANNETTE PETSONK, RESIGNED.
EDWARD EPPLER, OF CONNECTICUT, TO BE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,
VICE VICTORIA MARIE BAECHER WASSMER, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
PAUL FERGUSON, OF WEST VIRGINIA, TO BE UNITED
STATES MARSHAL FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF
WEST VIRGINIA FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE J.
C. RAFFETY, TERM EXPIRED.
GREGORY GILMORE, OF ILLINOIS, TO BE UNITED
STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE CENTRAL DISTRICT OF ILLINOIS FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE GREGORY
K. HARRIS.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
ERIC MEYER, OF CALIFORNIA, TO BE AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA TO THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
JOSEPH NOCELLA, OF NEW YORK, TO BE UNITED
STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF NEW
YORK FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE BREON S.
PEACE.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
JARED NOVELLY, OF MISSOURI, TO BE AMBASSADOR
EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA TO NEW ZEALAND, AND TO
SERVE CONCURRENTLY AND WITHOUT ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION AS AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY AND
PLENIPOTENTIARY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
TO THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF SAMOA, THE COOK ISLANDS, AND NIUE.

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
SEVAL OZ, OF CALIFORNIA, TO BE AN ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION. (NEW POSITION)

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
STEVAN PEARCE, OF NEW MEXICO, TO BE DIRECTOR OF
THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT, VICE TRACY
STONE–MANNING, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

INTER–AMERICAN FOUNDATION

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
CHRISTOPHER MICHAEL DE BONO, OF THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, TO BE AN ASSOCIATE JUDGE OF THE SUPERIOR COURT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FOR THE
TERM OF FIFTEEN YEARS, VICE HEIDI M. PASICHOW, RETIRED.

PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE
CASEY MEANS, OF CALIFORNIA, TO BE MEDICAL DIRECTOR IN THE REGULAR CORPS OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH
SERVICE, SUBJECT TO QUALIFICATIONS THEREFOR AS
PROVIDED BY LAW AND REGULATIONS, AND TO BE SURGEON GENERAL OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FOR A
TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE VIVEK HALLEGERE
MURTHY, RESIGNED.

EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT

DANIEL BONHAM, OF OREGON, TO BE AN ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF LABOR, VICE ELIZABETH SCHOFF WATSON, RESIGNED.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE HENRY LEE
WHITEHORN, SR., TERM EXPIRED.

PRISCILLA LOPEZ, OF FLORIDA, TO BE UNITED STATES
MARSHAL FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF FLORIDA
FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE GADYACES S.
SERRALTA, TERM EXPIRED.

FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
DAVID MACNEIL, OF FLORIDA, TO BE A FEDERAL
TRADE COMMISSIONER FOR THE TERM OF SEVEN YEARS
FROM SEPTEMBER 26, 2025, VICE MELISSA HOLYOAK,
TERM EXPIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
RYAN MCCORMACK, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE UNDER SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION FOR POLICY, VICE CARLOS ALBERTO MONJE, JR.

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 9801

SEAN PLANKEY, OF PENNSYLVANIA, TO BE DIRECTOR
OF THE CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY AGENCY, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY,
VICE JEN EASTERLY, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
ARVIND RAMAN, OF INDIANA, TO BE UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY, VICE LAURIE E. LOCASCIO, RESIGNED.

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FOUNDATION
LAKEN RAPIER, OF TEXAS, TO BE A MEMBER OF THE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
FOUNDATION FOR A TERM EXPIRING SEPTEMBER 27, 2027,
VICE LINDA THOMAS–GREENFIELD, TERM EXPIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
RYAN RAYBOULD, OF TEXAS, TO BE UNITED STATES
ATTORNEY FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF TEXAS FOR
THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE LEIGHA SIMONTON.
ROBERT ROTTER, OF IOWA, TO BE UNITED STATES
MARSHAL FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA FOR
THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE DOUGLAS J. STRIKE,
TERM EXPIRED.
DANIEL SATTERLEE, OF SOUTH DAKOTA, TO BE UNITED
STATES MARSHAL FOR THE DISTRICT OF SOUTH DAKOTA
FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE DANIEL C.
MOSTELLER, TERM EXPIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
GLEN SMITH, OF IOWA, TO BE UNDER SECRETARY OF
AGRICULTURE FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT, VICE BASIL
IVANHOE GOODEN, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
DAVID ST. PIERRE, OF MAINE, TO BE UNITED STATES
MARSHAL FOR THE DISTRICT OF MAINE FOR THE TERM
OF FOUR YEARS, VICE THEODOR G. SHORT, TERM EXPIRED.
JAMES STUART, OF MINNESOTA, TO BE UNITED
STATES MARSHAL FOR THE DISTRICT OF MINNESOTA
FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE EDDIE M. FRIZELL.

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
ROBERT SWEENEY, OF TEXAS, TO BE UNITED STATES
DIRECTOR OF THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK, WITH
THE RANK OF AMBASSADOR, VICE CHANTALE YOKMIN
WONG, RESIGNED.

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
ALEXANDER VELEZ–GREEN, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE A DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, VICE ALEXANDRA
BAKER, RESIGNED.

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FOUNDATION
RUSSELL VOUGHT, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FOUNDATION FOR A TERM EXPIRING SEPTEMBER
22, 2027, VICE LINDA I. ETIM, TERM EXPIRED.

INTER–AMERICAN FOUNDATION
RUSSELL VOUGHT, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE INTER–AMERICAN
FOUNDATION FOR A TERM EXPIRING SEPTEMBER 20, 2030,
VICE J. KELLY RYAN, TERM EXPIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
FRANK WEILAND, OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, TO
BE AN ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE (INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT AFFAIRS), VICE TODD D. ROBINSON.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.007

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
PHILLIP WILLIAMS, JR., OF ALABAMA, TO BE UNITED
STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF
ALABAMA FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE JOHN E.
TOWN, TERM EXPIRED.

IN THE AIR FORCE
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES AIR
FORCE UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 624:

To be colonel
PATRICK W. MCMORROW
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES AIR
FORCE UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 624:

To be colonel
SUNIL L. AMIN
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES AIR
FORCE UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 624:

To be colonel
LESLIE A. WOLL
THE FOLLOWING NAMED AIR NATIONAL GUARD OF THE
UNITED STATES OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE
GRADE INDICATED IN THE RESERVE OF THE AIR FORCE
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 12203 AND 12212:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

To be colonel
AYAD M. ABISAAB
MIGUEL R. ACOSTA
EVA V. ALLEN
KENNETH A. ARTZ
ANDREW B. BAILEY
JENNIFER N. BAILEY
MICHAEL D. BAIRD
DONALD R. BAKER
HARRY E. BAKER, JR.
PAUL J. BAKER
VICTOR P. BALAJADIA
CHRISTOPHER R. BALL
GEOFFREY S. BALL
JON D. BARRETT
JOSEPH R. BASZYNSKI
MICHAEL A. BATTAGLIA
FRANK T. BEDNAR
DUSTIN R. BENKER
MASTEN R. BETHEL
CHARLES P. BIEDIGER
MICHAEL J. BLAIR
TAYLOR A. BLEVINS
CHASE A. BODENHAUSEN
SARAH N. BOONE
THOMAS B. BOWMAN
DARYL B. BREZINA
LESLIE A. BROOKS
CURTISS J. BROWN
GRANT E. BROWN
DEAN O. BULFORD
REBECCA M. BURTON
AMBER K. CARBALLO
JENNIFER L. CARLSON
JERAMIE A. CASTELLANOS
JAMI S. CAVINS
LEEANN H. CHAVERS
CHRISTY M. CLIFTON
DAVID E. CONLEY
JEREMY T. COOK
NEIL R. COPELAND
SHARON T. CORTNEY
DALE J. COWAN
VANESSA K. COX
SCOTT C. CRANE
ROBERT C. DAMON III
ROBERT D. DAVIDSON
VINCENT L. DAVIS
DENNIS L. DEBAR, JR.
SCOTT M. DIEFFENBACH
DANIEL M. DIERFELDT
JARED P. DRAKE
AMY E. DREW
PETER J. DRURY
MARC B. DUFRESNE
JULIA A. EDDY
RHONDA M. ELLISON
JAMES R. EMBRY
KRISTINE N. ESPINOLA
ELIZABETH A. EVANS
QUINN R. FISCHER
CORRINE A. FOREE
JAMES W. FOWLEY
JEFFREY C. FOWLKES
IAN T. FRIEL
JOSEPH J. FRIEL
JESSE J. FRITZ
AARON J. GADBOIS
JESSICA M. GAMBONE
TIMOTHY W. GANNON
GEORGE R. GIBSON III
KRISTEN A. GIBSON
EZRA T. GLANZER
JARRET S. GODDARD
STEVEN K. GOOD
JAMES J. GRANDAW
HOWARD M. GRANTHAM
DAVID T. GRIBBIN
ROBERT N. GRIFFIN

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S181

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

JENNIFER WICKS MCNAMARA, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY OF
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA TO THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM.

Jkt 069060

ROSEMARIE GUERRERO
JASON P. GUTIERREZ
MICHAEL S. HACKMAN
JASON M. HARLEY
CHRISTOPHER L. HARRIGAN
MATTHEW J. HARRIS
MATTHEW C. HARVEY
JESSICA J. HEGEWALD
THAYNE M. HEUSI
BENJAMIN R. HILD
CHRISTOPHER R. HILL
TODD H. HNATKO
KEITH D. HODSDEN
MICHAEL T. HOLTON
JULIE A. HONEYCUTT
PATRICIA L. HOOD
PATRICIA E. HOOGEVEEN
TRACY L. HORAN
JOSHUA P. HOVANAS
EMILY J. HUFFMAN
ROBERT J. ICE
JOHN A. IPPOLITI
LINDSEY A. JACKSON
JOHN M. JASPER
CAMERON JOHNSON
SETRICK R. JOHNSON
STEPHANIE L. JOHNSON
TROY E. JOHNSON
BRIAN M. JONES
HEATHER M. JONES
DAVID A. KAHLER
JAMES D. KASH
GARY R. KATZ
KERI A. KAVOURAS
KIMBERLY M. KAYS
MATTHEW R. KAYSER
THOMAS L. KENNEDY
JAMES J. KETTERER
GREGORY A. KHANARTHUR
WESTON D. KILLIAN
JOSEPH P. KING
NATHANIEL D. KING
ALAN J. KLINE
ERIC C. KNIGHT
MICHAEL J. KOOB
ADAM J. KORNITZER
MICHAEL L. KROM
PATRICK L. LAMIE
STEVEN W. LARSON
RICHARD J. LAVERY V
KEVIN D. LAWHON
EMILY E. LAZEAR
ROBERT C. LEPOME II
JACK B. LEWIS
PETER LIGGIERI
ANGELA M. LING
MICHAEL K. LONG
AARON I. LUNDERVILLE
PAUL W. LUONGO
BRADLEY J. LURING
JOHN D. MACRAE
ERIC H. MANNION
JOHN J. MANTHE
PAUL G. MARIANI
BRIAN S. MARSHALL
CHARLENE A. MARSHALL
MILTON MARTINEZ
MICHAEL T. MCFARLAND
ANDREW S. MCLAY
DAVID P. MCNABNEY
STACEY C. MEISER
NATALIE MEYERS
ERIC B. MILLER
JOSEPH J. MILLER, JR.
STEEN D. MILNE
NELSON A. MITCHELL
CODY H. MOORE
STEPHEN D. MOORHEAD
CHAD E. MORGAN
PETER D. MUDGE
PAUL A. NESLUSAN
SUSAN S. NEWTON
FRANCISCO NIEVES
JOSEPH D. OGLE
DAVID A. OLDS
SHAWN W. OLEARY
RUDY J. OLIVO
KIERAN R. O’SHEA
KEVIN W. OTT
SHANE D. PAIR
RICHARD E. PEACE
JOSHUA B. PEAD
BRET P. PETERS
RUSSELL S. PIERCE
JUSTIN M. PODNAR
BRADLEY W. RADTKE
ROBERT W. REED
RYAN D. REEVES
JEREMY J. REYNOLDS
SHAWN P. REYNOLDS
CASEY P. ROBBINS
JOSEPH L. ROBERSON
DOUGLAS J. ROBINSON
JENNIFER S. ROCK
STACEY R. ROESTEL
KATHRYN M. ROMANO
MICHELLE SABALA
ROBERT I. SANDWITH III
AARON P. SAUER
CHARLES A. SCHELLBACH
KARL A. SCHEUERMAN
MATTHEW R. SCHWARTZ
JACOB W. SCOTT
JACOB R. SEARLES
MATTHEW J. SECKO
MATTHEW L. SILVER
JOSEPH A. SIMONETTI

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4624

DANIEL R. SLATER
BRIAN A. SLOCUM
JOHN C. SMITH
RICHARD S. SMITH
SAMUEL A. SMITH
BARRY M. SODINI
ANDRE E. SPRAUVE
COOPER W. STEELE
RICHARD A. STEEN
AARON D. STEFFANUS
KURT M. STEINMETZ
SAMUEL P. STEPHENS
ROBERT S. STUART
MATTHEW P. TANIS
RUDOLPH F. TAUTE
BRANDEN H. TAYLOR
JAMES W. TAYLOR III
LEE T. TEIGEN
KIRK T. TEUFEL
DEAN U. THIBODEAU
CALANDRA R. THOMAS
THAD E. TODD
JOHN L. TORRES, JR.
JAMES E. TURNER II
CHRISTOPHER P. VALLIERE
CARMEN L. VAZQUEZ SANTOS
DARRELL VEGA
SHANNON M. VICKERS
MARK A. VOLLENWEIDER
LOWELL C. WALLACE III
RYAN P. WALSH
LELAND H. WEBB
ERIC N. WEBER
RICHARD A. WELCH
THOMAS M. WERNER
ERIC A. WISMAR
LOUIS T. WONG
MATTHEW B. WOODFIELD
RYAN L. WORKMAN
RYAN M. YINGLING
BENJAMIN M. YOUNG
TRINA G. YOUNG
ANTHONY P. ZELASKO
THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUAL FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR AIR
FORCE UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

To be lieutenant colonel
EVANGELINE C. OBI
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES AIR
FORCE UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 624:

To be lieutenant colonel
ADRIANNA PEREZ

IN THE ARMY
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
AS A PERMANENT PROFESSOR AT THE UNITED STATES
MILITARY ACADEMY IN THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
REGULAR ARMY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 7433(B)
AND 7436(A):

To be major
TIMOTHY T. CHAN
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY
MEDICAL CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 531
AND 7064:

To be major
MICHAEL P. THOMAS
THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUAL FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR ARMY
MEDICAL CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 531
AND 7064:

To be major
SCOTT M. MCGINLEY
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE RESERVE OF THE
ARMY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 12203:

To be colonel
ANTHONY C. KIGHT
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY
JUDGE ADVOCATE GENERAL’S CORPS UNDER TITLE 10,
U.S.C., SECTIONS 624 AND 7064:

To be colonel
KRISTA L. BARTOLOMUCCI
JAY S. BURNS
BRIAN K. CARR
CESAR B. CASAL
JUSTIN P. FREELAND
JEREMY A. HAUGH
BRIAN J. KARGUS
SAMUEL K. KIM
RYAN D. KROHN
DAVID C. LAI
BRIAN D. LOHNES
BRENDAN J. MAYER
DANIEL L. MAZZONE
ROBERT N. MICHAELS
ALAN J. NEF
GREGORY T. OMALLEY
GEOVANNY A. ROJAS
EMILY M. ROMAN
NATHANIEL G. SMITH
KENTON E. SPIEGLER
MALCOLM H. WILKERSON

Sfmt 9801

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.008

S13JAPT1

S182

THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
AS A PERMANENT PROFESSOR AT THE UNITED STATES
MILITARY ACADEMY IN THE GRADE INDICATED UNDER
TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 7433(B) AND 7436(A):

To be colonel
SCOTT M. KATALENICH
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
AS A PERMANENT PROFESSOR AT THE UNITED STATES
MILITARY ACADEMY IN THE GRADE INDICATED UNDER
TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 7433(B) AND 7436(A):

To be colonel

THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major
BRENCENT T. BERRY
WILLIAM J. PROCTOR
OLEG SHEKHTER
ANDREW J. VANHOOGMOED

JOHN R. HALL, JR.
NICHOLAS G. WELBORNE
THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be colonel
MARK C. RUMMEL
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
AS A PERMANENT PROFESSOR AT THE UNITED STATES
MILITARY ACADEMY IN THE GRADE INDICATED UNDER
TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 7433(B) AND 7436(A):

To be colonel
CHRISTOPHER FUHRIMAN
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 624:

To be lieutenant colonel
JAVIER F. BARRERA

IN THE MARINE CORPS
THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major
ANDREW J. CLARKE
JOEL C. ELLIS
THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major
DARIEN J. GARLAND
ANDRES A. MADERA
THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major
ROBERT S. JEVNING
GREGORIO W. PRO
THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major
DAVID K. BURGER
VERONICA A. CRUZ
JULIA V. FLORES
SHELDON W. FORD, JR.
JERALD B. JOHNSON, JR.
JERRY K. JORDAN III
RICHARD D. SIMO
JOSEPH F. SOILEAU
THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major
JOSHUA M. CARTER
COREY B. DIXON
JONATHAN J. PATRICK
ROBERT J. STEPHENSON
THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICER FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major
STEVEN S. MITCHELL, JR.

To be major

IN THE NAVY

JASON R. MCLAMB
GEORGE VINAY
THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major

THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUAL FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR NAVY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

To be lieutenant commander
RYAN D. CURRAN
THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUALS FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR NAVY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

TRAVIS L. ELLIOTT
ANDREW J. GREEN
BART A. HARRY
RONALD J. PEREZ
BRENT J. ROMEO
NATHEN J. WERNER

To be lieutenant commander
SATYA K. GUTTA
LUIS E. TORRES

THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major

THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES NAVY
RESERVE UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 12203:

To be captain
TIMOTHY R. TRIMBLE

ZANE D. BOWMAN
ERIK D. COSTNER
VICTOR T. CRUZ
JEFFERY C. JOHNSON, JR.
MICHAEL A. KEATY

THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES NAVY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 624:

THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

VICTOR C. SCHAEFER

To be commander
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES NAVY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 624:

To be major

To be commander

MICHAEL R. CHIUDIONI
CHAD M. COPP
EDDIE DIAZ
DAVID L. ESTES
BRANDON W. GRZYB
CHRISTOPHER D. WEBBER

ASHLEY E. ALLISON
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES NAVY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 624:

To be captain

THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICER FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major

JESS B. FELDON
THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUALS FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADES INDICATED IN THE REGULAR
NAVY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

To be commander

RYAN W. KNAUL
THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICER FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

To be major
THOMAS J. HEINSOHN

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

REZA J. MEHRAN

To be lieutenant commander
VADIM GRITSUS
ILIA GUR
LARA M. JACOBSON
JAE Y. LIM

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4624

THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUALS FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR NAVY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

Sfmt 9801

ANITA R. BHARDWAJ
RALPH H. DE SIMILIEN
DEANA J. MCREYNOLDS
BRANDEE D. WIMBERLY

IN THE COAST GUARD
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE UNITED STATES COAST GUARD TO THE GRADE INDICATED UNDER TITLE 14 U.S.C., SECTION 2121(E):

To be major

THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUAL FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE RESERVE OF
THE ARMY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 12203:

BIJAN MOSSADEGHI
DAVID F. PIPER
PARSA P. SALEHI

To be lieutenant commander

THE FOLLOWING NAMED LIMITED DUTY OFFICERS FOR
APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 624:

MARK J. CROW

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

ABRAHAM L. YOUNG

To be commander
HILLARY R. ADAMS
WESLEY M. AGEE
MICHAEL J. AHLIN-LYONS
KARL N. ALEJANDRE
JESSICA P. ANDERSON
LILY Z. ANDREWS
SCOTT M. ARBEITER
STEVE J. ARGUELLES
WADE E. ARNOLD
JACOB L. AULNER
ERIC P. BALCUNAS
ZACHARY N. BALLARD
MARIE C. BAXTER
JOHN W. BEAL
RYAN T. BECK
STEVEN A. BECKER
KIMBERLY A. BEISNER
PATRICK G. BENNETT
KYLE BERTOLUZZI
MARY A. BITZER
ALBERT D. BLAISDELL
SCOTT W. BOCK
JORDAN C. BOGDEN
THEODORE J. BORNY
DAVID T. BOURBEAU
KRISTEN R. BRADLEY
GREGORY V. BREDARIOL
JESSIE K. BRENTON
JUSTIN P. BROOKS
REBECCA J. BROOKS
SAMUEL T. BROWN
GREGORY W. BUKATA
DANIEL Y. BURKE
MICHAEL J. BURKE
DANIEL J. CAHILL
THOMAS D. CARMAN
KYLE M. CARTER
TIMOTHY J. CASSEL
LAURENCE S. CHEN
JOSEPH C. CHEVALIER
JAMES T. CHRISTY
ANDREW J. CINQUE
RICHARD K. COLEMAN
ANDREW W. CORWELL
MICHELLE A. COSENZA
JESSE A. CREMEANS
ALEXANDER J. CROPLEY
TANYA M. CUPRAK
CAROLINE E. DALLA BETTA
JAMES T. DAUGHERTY
BENJAMIN C. DAVNE
ANDREW T. DENNING
ZACHARY R. DIETZ
MATTHEW Z. DIIULIO
JACOB A. DORSEY
DANIEL F. DOUGHERTY
BRIAN R. DOYLE
JONATHAN B. DUFFETT
BRIAN A. DYKENS
KELLEY C. EDWARDS
LAWTON K. ENNIS
ALAINA M. FAGAN
CORY P. FAGAN
MICHAEL B. FARRIS
DUSTIN S. FAUX
MICAH K. FIGUEIRA
ANTHONY J. FOSS
RYAN M. FOX
PATRICK B. FRAIN
PETER J. FRANSSON
WALTER S. FREDENHAGEN
ADAM R. FRYE
ANNA E. FUNK
SEAN R. GAJEWSKI
JESSICA M. GALARZA
RVEN T. GARCIA
AARON M. GARNIER
ROBERT M. GARRIS
AMANDA L. GAVELEK
AMY E. GAYMAN
ALLICE V. GHOLSON
CATHLEEN A. GIGUERE
SPENCER W. GRINNELL
JENNA H. GROSS
ZACHARY T. GROSS
KENNETH W. HALL
BRADLEY S. HANOVER
JESSE B. HARMS
REMI HARRINGTON
NICHOLAS J. HATHAWAY
KEITH C. HEINE
JASON D. HELSABECK
CRAIG A. HERMILLER
NICHOLAS D. HERNDON
JOSHUA A. HERRADOR
STEPHEN A. HILLS

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.010

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:36 Jan 14, 2026

S183

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

JILLIAN M. HOFFMAN
RAVEN R. HOLM
JACQUELINE F. HUNNICUTT
JARED R. HYLANDER
NICHOLAS S. IANNARONE
HEATHER E. JOHANSON
WESLEY C. JONES
PAUL R. JUNGHANS
KIRK D. KALMBACHER
SHAWN P. KARASEVICZ
LAUREN K. KEEFE
MATTHEW T. KEITH
JORDAN C. KELLAM
BRENDEN V. KELLEY
DAVID KENT
KEVIN C. KINSELLA
JARED W. KORN
GARY R. KUEHN
ANGEL M. KWOK
DANIEL J. LAGDON
JONATHAN M. LANG
MICHAEL R. LAURENCE
MARK C. LEAHEY
ELIZABETH A. LEDBETTER
PETER C. LEWIA
STEFAN A. LEWIS
ROBERT E. LITTS
QUENTIN L. LONG
ERIC J. LUNDE
CARL A. LUXHOJ
ABBIE E. LYONS
STEPHEN MACOMBER
MANUEL MADDOX
SEAN M. MARCH
JAMES MCCORMACK
ZACHARY W. MCCUNE
HAYLEY J. MCELROY
MATTHEW J. MCKENNEY
MICHELLE R. MCNALLY
MATTHEW K. MEACHAM
WILLIAM W. MENDENHALL
BRIDGET A. METCALF
ALLISON G. MIDDLETON
DANIEL L. MILLER
RAYMOND C. MILNE
KENNETH L. MILTENBERGER
DEREK R. MITTLEFEHLDT
BLAKE J. MORRIS
MARGUERITE T. MULLEN
RYAN P. MULLIKIN
ALLISON B. MURRAY
NATHAN D. NEUHARDT
KATE M. NEWKIRK

TIMOTHY G. NICOLET
JESSICA NORTHCUTT
FRANCIS A. O’BRIEN
CORY O’HARA
GINA R. O’HARA
LARS T. OKMARK
SYNGE C. OLEARY
BRIAN S. OPLINGER
CARLOS M. ORTEGA–PEREZ
JOHN D. PACKARD
PATRICK M. PAGE
MERIDITH A. PALO
KYLE J. PEARSON
FREDERIK A. PEGNA
JANE R. PENA
MATTHEW R. PERKINS
DARNELL R. PHILLIPS
ANDREW D. PHIPPS
NILES C. PIERSON
MATTHEW E. PINHEY
PARKER B. POUSER
DANA E. PREFER
JAMES C. PROVOST
DEVIN W. QUINN
KRISTINA L. QUINN
JAMES A. RADER
JUAN J. RAMIREZ
JOHN E. RAMOS
MICHAEL T. RATHBUN
JOHN K. RAUSCHENBERGER
CHAD L. RAY
DANIEL J. REILLY
REGINALD W. REYNOLDS
JOSHUA D. RICE
MICHELLE J. RICE
HECTOR F. RIVERA
TROY L. ROBISON
ANTHONY M. RODRIGUES
MATTHEW V. ROMERO
ELISE V. ROSS
SPENCER E. ROSS
BRADEN L. ROSTAD
STEVEN D. ROTH
DONALD W. RUDNICKAS
JEREMY C. RUNCO
GRANT K. RUTTER
JASON Y. RYU
LINDSAY A. SAKAL
CHRISTOPHER P. SALERNO
LOREN M. SANCINETO
NICHOLAS J. SAPIANO
JOHN F. SAUVE
LYNN M. SCHRAYSHUEN

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 4624

KAYLA J. SCHULTZ
MITCHELL P. SCHUMACHER
ERIC A. SCHWARTZ
JEFFREY M. SCHWIND
JASON R. SCOTT
JONATHAN J. SCOTT
KIMBERLY K. SHADWICK
KEVIN P. SHANAHAN
NICHOLAS J. SHARPE
ANDREW C. SHEEHY
JENNIFER L. SHEEHY
ERIN D. SHERIDAN
GRAHAM S. SHERMAN
SARAH K. SHVEDA
WILLIAM J. SIROKMAN
KRISTI I. SLOANE
CHRISTIE L. SMITH
LAUREN R. SMITH
ANDREW R. SNYDER
MATTHEW A. SPADO
TRAVIS J. STARSINIC
KEVIN W. STEVENS
TANNER P. STIEHL
CARL N. STOKES
MARK G. SVENCER
ADAM R. TANNER
MARK A. TATARA
MICHAEL G. THOMPSON
DRAKE M. THORNTON
ROBERT M. TOLLIVER
AARON L. URBANAWIZ
NASARIA E. VALADEZ
KRISTOPHER M. VALDEZ
DEREK W. WALLIN
JEFFREY B. WALSH
JOHN T. WATERS
BRYAN R. WEBER
MARY KATHERINE WHEELER
DIMITRIOS N. WIENER
DANIEL C. WILKINSON
DION L. WILLIAMS
KATHRYN C. WILLIAMS
PAUL N. WILLIAMS
MEGAN L. WILLMANN
CHARLES R. WILSON
JOSHUA C. WOFFORD
BENJAMIN T. YAHLE
KENN A. YUEN
MATTHEW T. ZANGLE
NATHAN L. ZINN
JOSHUA J. ZIRBES

Sfmt 9801

E:\CR\FM\A13JA6.012

S13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

E31

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS
RECOGNIZING GABRIEL GRIESS

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Lieutenant Colonel
Gabriel Griess, United States Air Force, of
Grapevine, Texas, for his honorable service in
the Armed Forces of the United States of
America and for his continued service to his
community.
Lieutenant Colonel Griess served with distinction in the United States Air Force from
1991 to 2015, holding command and leadership positions across the globe, including during Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. Over his 24-year career,
he demonstrated exceptional skill, courage,
and integrity in both combat and peacetime
operations. His leadership ensured mission
success and the safety of his personnel, and
his mentorship inspired countless Airmen to
excel in service. For his outstanding contributions, he received numerous decorations, including the Defense Meritorious Service
Medal, Meritorious Service Medal with oak leaf
cluster, Air Medal with three oak leaf clusters,
and Air Force Commendation Medal with three
oak leaf clusters, among many others.
Following his military career, Lieutenant
Colonel Griess has continued to exemplify
service before self through his civic and volunteer leadership. He serves as Secretary of the
Tarrant County College Foundation and as a
member of the Fort Worth Air Power Council.
He is active in numerous Grapevine community organizations, including the Grapevine Rotary Club, Chamber of Commerce, and the
City of Grapevine Building Board of Appeals.
He has also served as a commissioner on the
city’s Planning and Zoning Commission, a
PTA board member, youth coach, and advocate for civic engagement across Tarrant
County.
Lieutenant Colonel Griess’ exemplary record
of military and civic service reflects the highest
traditions of the United States Air Force and
brings great credit upon himself, the State of
Texas, and the United States of America.
f

HONORING MAYOR FREDDY PUZA

HON. SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE
OF CALIFORNIA

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the new mayor of Culver City
in my district, Freddy Puza.
First as a Councilmember and most recently
as Vice Mayor, Freddy has relentlessly fought
for a more inclusive, vibrant, and equitable

Culver City. His unwavering leadership and
compassion are exactly what Culver City deserves in its next mayor.
His accession to Mayor represents visibility,
dignity, and hope that extend far beyond the
boundaries of my district. As the first openly
gay Mayor in Culver City’s 108-year history,
he paves the way for future generations of
LGBTQ+ youth to see themselves reflected in
public service and civic life.
I look forward to working alongside Mayor
Puza as we serve the Culver City community
together in the year ahead.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. GREG CASAR
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. CASAR. Mr. Speaker, had I been
present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call
No. 12, H.R. 5184.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. HILLARY J. SCHOLTEN
OF MICHIGAN

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Mr. Speaker, I was unable
to vote on January 12, 2026. Had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call
No. 15.
f

RECOGNIZING FELIX JIMENEZ
GARCIA

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Sergeant Felix Jimenez Garcia, United States Army, of Fort
Worth, Texas, for his honorable service in the
Armed Forces of the United States of America
and for his continued service to his community.
Sergeant Garcia served in the United States
Army and the Texas Army National Guard for
thirteen years, including a twelve-month combat deployment in support of Operation Iraqi
Freedom. As a squad leader with Headquarters and Headquarters Company, 3rd Battalion, 144th Infantry Regiment, he led and
completed more than one hundred combat
missions in Iraq demonstrating courage,
composure, and devotion to his fellow soldiers. For his valor and leadership in combat,
he was awarded the Army Commendation

Medal with ‘‘V’’ Device, along with the Iraq
Campaign Medal, Global War on Terrorism
Expeditionary Medal, Expert Infantry Badge,
and Combat Infantry Badge.
Following his military service, Sergeant Garcia has continued to exemplify service before
self through his work in the North Texas community. He volunteers with Catholic Charities
of Fort Worth, serves on the Board of Directors for the Greater Keller Chamber of Commerce, and dedicates his time to helping fellow veterans navigate the Department of Veterans Affairs benefits process. Recently certified as an Onward Ops Sponsor, he mentors
transitioning service members as they adjust
to civilian life offering guidance, encouragement, and support. A husband, father of four,
and small business owner, Sergeant Garcia
continues to live a life of purpose, leadership,
and compassion, strengthening both the veteran community and his local neighborhood.
Sergeant Garcia’s courage in combat and
his lifelong commitment to serving others reflect the highest traditions of the United States
Army and bring great credit upon himself, the
State of Texas, and the United States of
America.
f

CONGRATULATING
SPOT
FUTURE
AMERICA

THE GARDEN
FARMERS
OF

HON. LLOYD SMUCKER
OF PENNSYLVANIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. SMUCKER. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased
to congratulate and recognize the Garden
Spot Future Farmers of America chapter (Garden Spot FFA), affiliated with Lampeter-Strasburg High School in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, on their success at the 98th National
FFA Convention & Expo.
The Garden Spot FFA represented themselves well during the 98th National FFA Convention & Expo, which was held from October
24, 2025, to November 1, 2025, in Indianapolis, Indiana. At the Farm and Agribusiness
Management event, which tested students on
their economic and agricultural knowledge, the
Garden Spot FFA Team placed second. Each
student on the team—Antonio Franco, Will
Gajecki, Rex Giberson, and Jack Ross—
earned silver for their individual performance.
Five Garden Spot FFA alumni also received
American FFA Degrees in 2025, the highest
honor bestowed to FFA members, and were
recognized at the convention. These individuals were Gracie Albright, Sydney Albright,
Kayla Frey, Jaclyn Martin, and Katelyn Ranck.
With their success at the 98th National FFA
Convention, the students at Garden Spot FFA
demonstrated their remarkable work ethic and
devotion to agriculture—making all of Pennsylvania’s 11th Congressional District proud. I
congratulate the Garden Spot FFA on their accomplishments, and I wish them continued
success.

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:04 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A13JA8.001

E13JAPT1

E32

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

CONGRATULATING BISHOP MARIO
AVILÉS ON HIS INSTALLATION

HON. VICENTE GONZALEZ
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ of Texas. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to congratulate Most
Reverend Mario Alberto Avilés, C.O., on his
appointment by Pope Leo XIV to serve as the
ninth Bishop of Corpus Christi.
In his previous role as Auxiliary Bishop for
the Diocese of Brownsville, he served our region and uplifted those in need through his
faith and compassion.
His recent appointment is a testament to
this leadership and the humility with which he
serves. Bishop Avilés has consistently upheld
the values of integrity and compassion that the
Catholic church is proud to represent.
This calling comes at a time when our Nation is facing hardship, and our people are divided. I can think of no better servant of God
to provide ministry to our community.
As South Texas continues to grow and navigate these complex challenges, Bishop Avilés’
leadership has been essential in fostering
hope, stability, and moral clarity for our community.
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a grateful South
Texas, I wish to congratulate Most Reverend
Mario Avilés, C.O., for his appointment as
Bishop of Corpus Christi. I also wish to thank
him for his service to the Rio Grande Valley.
f

RECOGNIZING AMERICAN PATRIOT
PENNY JUSTICE

HON. JOHN H. RUTHERFORD
OF FLORIDA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. RUTHERFORD. Mr. Speaker, today I
rise to recognize and congratulate Penny Justice on her selection as the winner of the Patriot of the Year Award. This annual award
ceremony celebrates our great American
servicemembers, first responders, and citizens, and recognizes men and women who,
through their actions and words, exemplify
servant leadership and patriotism.
Mrs. Justice has made exceptional contributions in support of service members, veterans
and their families in Northeast Florida, and
has demonstrated extraordinary patriotism and
dedication to our Nation’s ideals.
On this historic occasion, I congratulate and
recognize Penny Justice. I thank her for her
dedication and leadership. May God bless her
and congratulations to her.
f

RECOGNIZING MS. MARTHA ELIAS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

HON. DAVID G. VALADAO
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. VALADAO. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize Ms. Martha Elias for her well-earned
retirement from Nueva High School and for
her decades of dedicated service to the Lamont community. Shortly after completing her

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:04 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

education in Mexico, Ms. Elias immigrated to
the United States and began her professional
career as a bilingual secretary at a printing
company. Determined to further her education,
she attended Brigham Young University in
Utah, where she earned a bachelor’s degree
in Spanish Teaching and Latin American Studies. In 1991, Ms. Elias continued her commitment to education by earning a teaching credential in Bakersfield, going on to serve students at both Arvin High School and Highland
High School. Since 2010, Ms. Elias has been
a trusted counselor and dedicated English
Language Development Coordinator at Nueva
High School.
Through her compassion, professionalism,
and deep cultural roots, she built meaningful
relationships with students and families alike.
She made it her mission to ensure every student felt supported, confident, and prepared
with the skills needed to succeed beyond
graduation. Ms. Elias’ impact extends far beyond the classroom. She has been a mentor
to colleagues, a trusted partner to parents,
and a pillar of the greater Kern County community. As the Master of Ceremonies for academic award assemblies, she brought families
together to celebrate student achievement,
often receiving heartfelt thanks from parents
whose children’s lives she helped shape.
Under her leadership and guidance, Nueva
High School achieved significant milestones,
including the highest graduation rate in alternative education, increased scholarship attainment, and record participation in ROTC programs.
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues in the
House of Representatives to join me in recognizing Ms. Martha Elias for her extraordinaly
career, her lasting impact on generations of
students, and her unwavering dedication to
the Lamont community. Her service exemplifies the difference one committed educator
can make, and she leaves behind a legacy
that will be felt for years to come.
f

HONORING EULESS JAIL
SUPERVISOR ALISHA JOHNSON

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor the distinguished career of Jail Supervisor Alisha Johnson of the Euless Police
Department, who is retiring after twenty-five
years of dedicated service.
Alisha joined the City of Euless in November 1999 as a Public Service Officer, after previously serving as a Correctional Officer with
Correctional Service Corporation in Fort
Worth. Through her commitment to public
service, she was promoted to Jail Supervisor
in October 2023. She is an expert in the Live
Scan fingerprinting system and has completed
new supervisor school and other job-related
training courses.
Alisha graduated from Kofa High School in
Yuma, Arizona, pursued accounting and business at Arizona Western University, and
earned an Associate Degree in General Studies from Tarrant County College. She is a
member of the Euless Peace Officers Association and has received numerous awards, including the Blackie Sustaire Award, Employee

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 13, 2026

of the Month in 2006, Civilian of the Year in
2013, the Distinguished Service Civilian Award
in 2020, and a Unit Citation in 2022.
She enjoys traveling, reading, outdoor activities, and spending time with her family.
I would like to thank Jail Supervisor Johnson for her exemplary service to the Euless
community and congratulate her on her welldeserved retirement.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. JAMES A. HIMES
OF CONNECTICUT

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. HIMES. Mr. Speaker, had I been
present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call
No. 334.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. J. FRENCH HILL
OF ARKANSAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. HILL of Arkansas. Mr. Speaker, I was in
discussion with another Member on the floor.
Had I been present, I would have voted YEA
on Roll Call No. 8, H.R. 504.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF
COUNCILWOMAN
DOROTHY
‘‘MS. DOT’’ GLENN NICHOLS

HON. BENNIE G. THOMPSON
OF MISSISSIPPI

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor and celebrate the extraordinary life, service, and legacy of Councilwoman Dorothy ‘‘Ms. Dot’’ Glenn Nichols, a
devoted public servant, community leader, educator, and compassionate advocate for the
people of Greenwood, Leflore County, and the
State of Mississippi.
Councilwoman Glenn Nichols was born on
October 16, 1957, in Leflore County, Mississippi. From an early age she demonstrated
a steadfast commitment to faith, service, and
education. She was a lifelong member of New
Foundation Missionary Baptist Church in
Greenwood, Mississippi, where she faithfully
served in numerous leadership roles and lived
out her Christian values through service to
others.
A proud graduate of Greenwood High
School, Class of 1976, Councilwoman Glenn
Nichols pursued higher education with purpose and determination. She earned an Associate of Arts Degree in Education from Mary
Holmes Junior College and later a Bachelor of
Science Degree in Early Childhood Development, with a minor in Business Administration,
from Tougaloo College. Her educational foundation became the cornerstone of a distinguished career devoted to improving the lives
of children and families.
For decades, Ms. Glenn Nichols served in
the Head Start and Early Start programs at
the local, state, and national levels. Beginning

E:\CR\FM\A13JA8.007

E13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

as a classroom teacher, she rose through the
ranks to serve as a case worker, child and
family advocate, program lead, and ultimately
a Head Start Technical Assistance Program
Improvement Coach. Her expertise supported
educators, administrators, and agencies
throughout Mississippi and the broader region.
Her work gained national recognition, leading
to her appointment as a National Advisor and
Professional Development Specialist with the
Council for Professional Recognition, where
she helped shape the future of early childhood
education across Mississippi, Arkansas, and
Alabama.
Beyond her professional achievements,
Councilwoman Glenn Nichols was a devoted
entrepreneur and community builder. As the
owner and operator of Dot’s Corner Market on
historic Broad Street in Greenwood, she transformed a neighborhood store into a center of
care, connection, and compassion. Known affectionately as ‘‘The Mother of Broad Street,’’
she provided not only goods, but guidance,
encouragement, and refuge for countless individuals. Her store became a symbol of trust,
unity, and resilience within the community.
Councilwoman Glenn Nichols also answered
the call to public service. She represented the
citizens of Greenwood with integrity and dedication as a member of the Greenwood City
Council. In 2021, she assumed the role of
Councilwoman for District 6 and was re-elected in 2025, serving faithfully until her passing.
Her leadership was rooted in advocacy, fairness, and an unwavering commitment to uplifting her constituents. She was a lifelong member of Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority, Incorporated, the NAACP Leflore County Chapter,
and the Greenwood Voters League—organizations that reflect her dedication to civic engagement, social justice, and community empowerment.
On Friday, January 2, 2026, Councilwoman
Dorothy ‘‘Ms. Dot’’ Glenn Nichols departed this
life, leaving behind a legacy defined by faith,
service, leadership, and love. Her impact is
evident in the lives of the children she educated, the families she supported, the community she strengthened, and the city she
served.
Mr. Speaker, Councilwoman Glenn Nichols
exemplified what it means to live a life of purpose. Her compassion, perseverance, and
commitment to others stand as an enduring
example of public service at its finest. I ask
my colleagues to join me in honoring her life
and legacy.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN
OF COLORADO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I missed
three votes on January 12, 2026. Had I been
present, I would have voted: YEA on Roll Call
No. 15, final passage of H.R. 6504, Haiti Economic Lift Program Extension Act; YEA on
Roll Call No. 14, final passage of H.R. 6500,
AGOA Extension Act; and YEA on Roll Call
No. 13, final passage of H.R. 2683, Remote
Access Security Act.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:04 Jan 14, 2026

E33

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

RECOGNIZING ROBERT
HAZLEWOOD

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE

RECOGNIZING
BERNIE
PRAZENICA’S RETIREMENT AS
PRESIDENT AND GENERAL MANAGER OF WPVI–TV

HON. BRENDAN F. BOYLE

OF TEXAS

OF PENNSYLVANIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to First Sergeant
Robert Hazlewood, United States Marine
Corps, of North Richland Hills, Texas, for his
honorable service in the Armed Forces of the
United States of America and for his continued
service to his community.
First Sergeant Hazlewood served with distinction in the United States Marine Corps for
thirty years, including during the Vietnam War
and Operation Desert Storm. Throughout his
career, he held numerous leadership roles
across the 1st Marine Aircraft Wing, 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing, and 14th Marine Regiment
earning the respect of those he led through
his steadfast commitment to the Marine Corps
values of honor, courage, and commitment.
His military decorations include the National
Defense Service Medal with bronze star, three
Good Conduct Medals, three Selected Marine
Corps Reserve Medals, the Armed Forces Reserve Medal, and the Overseas Service Ribbon.
Following his retirement, First Sergeant
Hazlewood has continued to serve his community with the same dedication that marked
his military career. A lifelong mentor and educator, he operates a martial arts school where
he teaches self-defense and discipline to
young men and women, providing specialized
training for college-bound students to enhance
their personal safety. He also serves his
church, Compass Church in Colleyville, by
leading and training its volunteer security
team, and has been twice recognized by the
City of Colleyville for more than twenty years
of service to local youth.
First Sergeant Hazlewood’s contributions
have also been recognized nationally and
internationally. He has been honored by the
Governor of Tennessee for his work with the
Junior Achievement Program, received Rotary
International’s Paul Harris Fellow recognition
for promoting global understanding, and
earned the Jandal Service Award for his support of high school speech and debate students. He continues to mentor youth through
Rotary Interact, the U.S. Marine Corps Toys
for Tots program, and by coaching students
toward successful appointments to the United
States Air Force and Naval Academies.
First Sergeant Hazlewood’s distinguished
record of service to his Nation and his tireless
commitment to the next generation reflect the
highest traditions of the United States Marine
Corps and bring great credit upon himself, the
State of Texas, and the United States of
America.

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. BOYLE of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to congratulate Bernie Prazenica on
his retirement as President and General Manager of WPVI–TV, Philadelphia’s mostwatched local news and entertainment television station.
A
graduate
of
Temple
University,
Prazenica’s illustrious 43-year career in television saw stops in Pittsburgh, Richmond, and
Raleigh before he returned to Philadelphia in
1994. He would go on to serve as the President and General Manager of WPVI beginning
in 2007, making him the longest-serving General Manager in the station’s history.
Throughout the entirety of his tenure,
Prazenica played a critical role in maintaining
WPVI’s status as the home of the mostwatched local news broadcast in Philadelphia,
Action News, a title which the station and program have held for nearly 50 years. In 2009,
he oversaw the construction of a state-of-theart, 110,000 square foot digital broadcasting
facility next to the station’s previous home. His
unwavering commitment to his work has ensured that throughout his tenure, the station
has remained at the forefront of producing
groundbreaking news, brought into countless
homes across the Delaware Valley every single day.
Prazenica is also an active participant in
Philadelphia’s business, cultural and philanthropic communities. He has actively served
on many boards, including those of the Pennsylvania Association of Broadcasters, the
Greater Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce,
and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
Corporate Council. He has previously chaired
the Police Athletic League and Temple University’s Klein College Board of Advisors. In
2009, Prazenica was recognized by Philadelphia Magazine as one of the City’s 75 Most
Influential People and, in 2024, he was inducted into the Broadcast Pioneers of Philadelphia Hall of Fame.
Mr. Speaker, it is altogether fitting that the
House recognizes Bernie Prazenica for his exceptional career and congratulates him on his
well-deserved retirement.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF WILLIAM J. ‘‘BILL’’ MARTIN

HON. JENNIFER L. McCLELLAN
OF VIRGINIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. MCCLELLAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor and remember the life of William J.
‘‘Bill’’ Martin, a cherished leader, historian, and
steward of Richmond’s history, who passed
away on December 28, 2025, at the age of
71. Bill Martin served with distinction for over
three decades as the Director of The Valentine Museum in Richmond, Virginia, dedicating
his life to preserving and interpreting the rich
and complex narratives of our community.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA8.013

E13JAPT1

E34

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Born and raised in Culpeper County, Virginia, Bill’s passion for history and community
storytelling grew into a remarkable career that
transformed The Valentine into a dynamic, vibrant center of learning and civic engagement.
During his 32 years of leadership, Bill guided
the museum through financial crises, expanded its collections and programs, and fostered inclusive conversations about Richmond’s past and its impact on the present and
future. His stewardship helped ensure that
The Valentine became not just a collection of
artifacts, but a forum where history could be
studied and shared by all.
Bill’s commitment to truth and community
extended beyond The Valentine’s walls. He
embraced challenging and sometimes uncomfortable discourse about slavery, the legacy of
the Confederacy and Jim Crow, and how
Richmond’s history is told. His efforts strengthened civic understanding, bridged diverse perspectives, and inspired countless residents
and visitors to reflect deeply on our shared
past.
Bill Martin was widely recognized for his
contributions to Richmond’s cultural life. In
2024, he was named ‘‘Richmonder of the
Year’’ by Style Weekly, as a testament to his
influence and the profound respect he earned
across the Richmond community.
Bill was not just a constituent; he was a true
friend, one whose passion and joy for his work
and community were infectious. While his legacy will live on in the stories he brought to
light, he will be dearly missed. These words
reflect not only Bill’s professional excellence
but also his personal warmth, his ability to
bring people together, and his unwavering belief in the power of history to guide us toward
a more just and informed future.
Today, we mourn the loss of a visionary
leader, a devoted colleague, and a dear friend
to so many in the Richmond region and beyond. Bill’s legacy will endure in the countless
lives he touched, in the stories he preserved,
and in future generations of learners and leaders he inspired.
f

TRIBUTE TO MARGARET ‘‘BB’’
BELL HOUSTON

HON. SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to pay tribute to the extraordinary life of
a beloved Angeleno who passed away at the
age of 96, the late Margaret ‘‘BB’’ Bell Houston.
For more than four decades, she served as
a private nurse. Her unwavering commitment
to caring for others touched countless patients
and leaves behind a legacy of compassion
that will live on for generations to come.
Those who knew her best will remember a
passionate animal lover with an eye for fashion, a joy for jazz and dancing, and a fondness for sunflowers. I like to imagine her now
dancing to jazz in a garden of sunflowers in
heaven, reunited with her husband and parents.
Margaret was generous beyond measure to
her family and friends alike. Her loss will be
profoundly felt by her son Cedric, grand-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:04 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

children, and great-grandchildren. She will be
deeply missed.
f

HONORING LIEUTENANT COLONEL
MICHAEL W. KNAPP FOR HIS
SERVICE
TO
THE
UNITED
STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

HON. JOHN GARAMENDI
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor an outstanding officer and strategic
leader in our United States Air Force.
Lieutenant Colonel Michael W. Knapp distinguished himself through exceptional professional character and dedication by serving this
Nation in uniform. For the past two years,
Lieutenant Colonel Knapp served admirably as
the Deputy Director of Congressional Affairs
for U.S. Transportation Command. In this role,
he was the principal liaison for Members of
Congress and the Commander of the U.S.
Transportation Command. Here, he fostered
positive relationships between the Congress
and the command and conveyed information
critical to Congressional oversight, policy development, and appropriations.
Lieutenant Colonel Knapp graduated from
the U.S. Air Force Academy and serves as a
senior pilot with over three thousand one hundred flight hours as a combat pilot for the C–
17A Globemaster III and as a Vice Presidential pilot on C–32A aircraft. Prior to his assignment at U.S. Transportation Command, he
served as Defense Legislative Fellow to Senator Tammy Duckworth, where he advised on
defense, foreign relations, and veterans’ affairs legislation.
As Deputy Director of Congressional Affairs
for U.S. Transportation Command, Lieutenant
Colonel Knapp scheduled eighty-three office
calls between the Commander and Members
of Congress. These meetings addressed contested logistics and readiness concerns and
fortified posture testimony during Senate and
House Armed Services Committee hearings.
He also organized the Deputy Commander’s
annual Hill engagements, educating nearly
one hundred staffers on the Mobility Capabilities Study, directly influencing critical report
language for aeromedical evacuation requirements. Finally, he developed the command’s
appropriations engagement strategy thereby
protecting $2.8 million dollars for Research,
Development, Test, and Evaluation funds for
maritime logistics platforms.
Of particular note for my district, Lieutenant
Colonel Knapp led a four-day congressional
staff delegation to California showcasing
Ready Reserve Force vessels and joint mobility assets throughout the district, thus bolstering support for maritime equities, surface
transportation needs, and air mobility requirements that align perfectly with the Seapower
and Projection Forces Subcommittee’s priorities. This engagement provided Congress critical insights and directly influenced the debate
for recapitalizing the Ready Reserve Force in
the Fiscal Year 2025 National Defense Authorization Act.
Mr. Speaker, next month Lieutenant Colonel
Knapp will assume duties in my district at

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

January 13, 2026

Travis Air Force Base, California, as the Director of Operations of the 821st Contingency
Response Squadron, where he will once again
lead Airmen on the tactical and operational
levels. It has been a great pleasure to work
with Lieutenant Colonel Knapp during his time
representing U.S. Transportation Commands
on Capitol Hill. His dedication to the Nation’s
maritime and air mobility infrastructure, combined with his deep understanding of strategic
mobility challenges, made him an invaluable
partner in advancing our national defense
transportation priorities. On behalf of our
grateful Nation, it is my honor to recognize the
selfless service and sacrifice of Lieutenant
Colonel Knapp and his family for the past sixteen years. I wish them the very best as they
continue their journey in our U.S. Air Force,
and I look forward to welcoming them to California’s 8th Congressional District.
Together, we deliver.
f

RECOGNIZING MARK SMITS

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Captain Mark
Smits, United States Army, of Coppell, Texas,
for his honorable service in the Armed Forces
of the United States of America and for his
continued service to his community.
Captain Smits was commissioned into the
United States Army in 1979 and served as an
engineer officer until 1983. During his military
career, he demonstrated strong leadership
and technical skill earning the Parachutist
Badge, Humanitarian Service Medal, and
Army Service Ribbon. His dedication to excellence and teamwork exemplified the values of
duty, integrity, and service to others that define the United States Army.
Following his military service, Captain Smits
has continued a lifelong commitment to empowering others and supporting those who
serve. As a Board Member and Mentor for
Claymore Operations, he helps active-duty
service members prepare for the transition to
civilian life by providing personalized
mentorship, career guidance, and leadership
development. He also serves as Commander
of the Military Order of the World Wars Dallas
Chapter, where he promotes patriotism, civic
responsibility, and leadership among veterans
and students alike.
As Chairman of the Dallas MOWW’s Youth
Leadership initiatives, Captain Smits leads
programs that bring together JROTC cadets
and high school students from across Texas
to build leadership skills and foster a deeper
appreciation for service and citizenship. His
tireless work ensures that both current and future generations understand the value of duty,
honor, and commitment to country.
Captain Smits’ service to his Nation and
community is in keeping with the finest traditions of the United States Army and reflects
great credit upon himself, the State of Texas,
and the United States of America.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA8.017

E13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

HONORING THE 100TH BIRTHDAY
OF RICHARD LYNCH

HON. THOMAS H. KEAN, JR.
OF NEW JERSEY

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. KEAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the 100th birthday of Richard Lynch in
White Township, New Jersey.
Richard J. Lynch, a Warren County native
and World War II U.S. Navy veteran, was honored this week. He celebrated his 100th birthday on January 7, 2026, while surrounded by
family, friends, and fellow veterans.
Lynch further received a quilt from the Quilts
of Valor Foundation and a Distinguished Military Service Medal from the Warren County
War Memorial Corporation for his service to
our Nation.
A Navy veteran of World War II, Lynch
served as a signalman third class aboard the
USS LST 1109. After his military service, he
worked as a printer and volunteered as a Sunday school teacher in his local community. I
invite my colleagues to join me in honoring
this hero. There is no greater responsibility,
nor debt of gratitude, than that which our Nation owes to its veterans.
f

HONORING BARRY DEL BUONO’S
LIFETIME OF IMPACT

HON. SAM T. LICCARDO
OF CALIFORNIA

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. LICCARDO. Mr. Speaker, I rise along
with my colleague, Congresswoman ZOE LOFGREN, to recognize the life and contributions of
Barry Del Buono, a champion for the
unhoused and a longtime community leader in
San José, California, who passed away on
December 26, 2025. Mr. Del Buono dedicated
his life to building a more compassionate and
equitable society, working tirelessly to ensure
that every person, regardless of circumstance,
had access to shelter, dignity, and a second
chance. From the time I first met Barry as a
child, I considered Barry as a hero for the way
he transformed his quiet strength and potent
faith to launch and lead organizations to which
thousands of our most vulnerable neighbors
owe their survival.
Barry began his life of public service as a
Catholic priest in San José, where he cofounded the Loaves and Fishes Family Kitchen to serve meals to the hungry—an organization that continues to serve our community to
this day. Even after leaving the priesthood, he
never left the mission. Instead, he expanded
it. In the early 1980s, Barry became the first
employee, and soon the executive director, of
the Emergency Housing Consortium, later
known as EHC LifeBuilder, and now
HomeFirst. He built EHC into a dependable
organization for Santa Clara County residents.
He
developed
what
was
then
a
groundbreaking ‘‘continuum of care’’ model
that extended beyond emergency shelter to
transitional and permanent supportive housing.
From San José to Gilroy, Barry launched programs that offered not just temporary relief,
but a genuine pathway toward stability and recovery.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:04 Jan 14, 2026

E35

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

Barry brought remarkable creativity to this
work. He recognized the potential in empty
farmworker cottages during the off-season and
turned them into a winter family shelter.
He helped run the cold-weather shelter at
the National Guard Armory in Gilroy for nearly
two decades. He secured public funding by
mastering the machinery of government
grants, writing proposals late into the night
while running services by day. Through both
lean years and economic booms, Barry made
sure that EHC remained a lifeline for thousands of families and individuals.
Though widely respected for his strategic
mind and fundraising skill, Barry was most admired for his relentless conviction that homelessness could be solved. He built programs
and mentored a generation of nonprofit leaders who now carry on the work he started.
Barry was as fierce in his advocacy as he was
generous in spirit.
After stepping down from EHC in 2007,
Barry continued to serve his community. He
became a sociology instructor at San José
City College, sharing decades of hard-earned
wisdom with his students. He launched an
educational nonprofit with his wife, Dr. Maile
Del Buono, to help underserved workers and
students access opportunities.
San José’s City Council appointed Barry to
San José’s Housing and Community Development Commission, lending his voice and experience to policymaking until the final year of
his life. Throughout his multi-act career, he
maintained a deep commitment to his family of
five children and seven grandchildren, and to
Maile. With her by his side, they battled cancer courageously for several years—both hers,
and his own—until he succumbed at age 74.
Throughout his battle, he demonstrated the
same quiet strength and powerful faith that
made him a great community champion. We
will remember Barry Del Buono not only for
what he built, but for what he believed—that
no one is beyond help, and that it is our
shared responsibility to lift each other up. I extend my deepest condolences to his family
and friends, joined by the grateful many he
touched throughout his extraordinary life. May
he rest in peace and achieve his hero’s welcome in heaven.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF MARTIN
OLONDRIZ TUASON

HON. DARRELL ISSA
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. ISSA. Mr. Speaker, I rise today in both
tribute and sorrow for the life and loss of an
outstanding man, an extraordinary innovator,
and a great friend. We lost Martin Olondriz
Tuason late last year, and the news is as difficult to fathom today as it was then and every
day since.
He was larger than life and a person of
boundless energy, but those who had the
privilege to spend time with him out of the
spotlight saw the rest of Martin: his warm
smile, compassionate heart, unwavering kindness, and indefatigable spirit.
He commanded the heights of his business
and was a trusted advisor to government leaders around the world, yet he was available,
accessible, and the easiest man to talk to. As

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

consuming as his career was—as President
and CEO of Armscor/Rock Island Armory—he
made everyone else his priority. Martin was a
singular force but also a loyal teammate, an
enterprise leader but also an industrywide advocate, a decisive decision-maker but also a
patient consensus builder.
He had an unwavering belief in doing things
the right way, and he kept faith with more than
a century of his family’s history and legacy by
protecting the values of his father and grandfather: respect, integrity, craftsmanship, and
service. These are the hallmarks that made
his company the largest privately owned firearms and ammunition manufacturing company
in Southeast Asia with exports to more than
60 countries, including the United States and
Australia, as well as nations in Europe, South
America, and Southeast Asia.
But Martin’s most proud role—as he would
unhesitatingly tell everyone—was not in the Csuite, but as a loving husband to Tammy and
a fiercely devoted father to Nate, Olivia,
James—and as so many have shared—a father figure to many more. Outside of his family
he left an indelible mark on every life that he
touched—and for one man, he managed to
touch so many lives around the world.
Those who knew Martin best have shared
what was best about him: he carried his
charge willingly, graciously, and without complaining—out of duty and love in his big heart.
He truly cared for others. He was smart, fearless, gentle, and kind.
There is a void to fill in our world, and that
is the challenge for the friends of Martin
Tuason: those of us who knew him, who admired him, and who will always miss him.
f

HONORING THE CAREER OF HAMPTON ROADS NATIVE COACH MIKE
TOMLIN OF THE PITTSBURGH
STEELERS

HON. ROBERT C. ‘‘BOBBY’’ SCOTT
OF VIRGINIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to extend my sincere appreciation to
Coach Mike Tomlin for his extraordinary career and lasting impact on the game of football. His resignation marks the end of an era
not only for the Pittsburgh Steelers, but for the
entire National Football League.
Coach Tomlin has been a model of leadership, consistency, and excellence. As one of
the longest-tenured and most successful head
coaches in the league, he demonstrated what
it means to lead with integrity, resilience, and
a commitment to both performance and people. His historic achievements—including
never having a losing season—speak volumes
about his discipline, preparation, and ability to
bring out the best in those around him.
For those of us in Hampton Roads, Coach
Tomlin’s story is especially meaningful. A
proud graduate of Denbigh High School in
Newport News and a standout student-athlete
at the College of William & Mary, he represents the very best of our region. His journey from our local schools to the pinnacle of
professional football is a testament to the
power of hard work, perseverance, and community support.
Beyond the wins and championships, Coach
Tomlin’s legacy is also defined by the doors

E:\CR\FM\A13JA8.021

E13JAPT1

E36

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

he helped open. As one of the few Black head
coaches in the NFL, he has been an inspiration to countless young people who now see
what is possible when talent meets opportunity.
Mr. Speaker, I wish Coach Tomlin and his
family the very best in this next chapter. His
influence will continue to be felt for years to
come—on the field, in locker rooms, and in
the lives of the many players, coaches, and
fans he inspired.
f

RECOGNIZING LARRY KELLOGG

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Sergeant Larry
Kellogg, United States Army, of Coppell,
Texas, for his honorable service in the Armed
Forces of the United States of America and for
his continued service to his community.
Sergeant Kellogg was drafted into the
United States Army in 1966 and served with
Company C, 65th Engineer Battalion, 25th Infantry Division, as a combat medic during the
Vietnam War. In February 1967, at age twenty-four, he deployed to Vietnam, where his
courage and devotion to duty saved lives on
the battlefield. In July of that year, while on
patrol, his armored personnel carrier was
struck by a rocket-propelled grenade. Despite
his own severe injuries, Sergeant Kellogg immediately began tending to three wounded
squad members, continuing to render aid until
he lost consciousness from blood loss. His
selfless actions saved the lives of those men
and earned him the Bronze Star Medal for
Valor and the Purple Heart for wounds received in action. His additional decorations include the Army Commendation Medal, Army
Good Conduct Medal, National Defense Service Medal, Vietnam Service Medal with three
Bronze Service Stars, Vietnam Campaign
Medal, Marksman Badge (Rifle M14), Meritorious Unit Commendation, Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross Unit Citation with Palm,
and the Republic of Vietnam Civil Actions
Honor Medal Unit Citation.
Following his military service, Sergeant Kellogg has remained steadfast in his commitment to veterans and his community. He
served as a Director and honor guard member
with Vietnam Veterans of America Chapter
920 in Denton for more than fifteen years, volunteered with the Coppell Police Department’s
Citizen Patrol, and continues to serve as a Eucharistic Minister at Mary Immaculate Catholic
Church, bringing the Eucharist to the homebound. He is also an active member of the
Military Order of the Purple Heart, representing his chapter at civic events and community ceremonies honoring America’s veterans.
Sergeant Kellogg’s lifelong devotion to service both in uniform and in the community reflects the highest traditions of the United
States Army and brings great credit upon himself, the State of Texas, and the United States
of America.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:04 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

January 13, 2026

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF BETTY REID SOSKIN

CELEBRATING THE 100TH ANNIVERSARY
OF
THE
CITY
OF
PLACENTIA

HON. JOHN GARAMENDI

HON. DEREK TRAN
OF CALIFORNIA

OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor the extraordinary life and legacy of
Betty Reid Soskin, a trailblazer, public servant,
and living witness to American history who
used her 104 years of her life to the fullest.
Born in 1921, lived in the East Bay since
1927, when her family moved from New Orleans. She lived a life defined by courage, resilience, and an unwavering commitment to truth
and justice. She experienced firsthand the
hardships of segregation, the challenges of
wartime America, and the long struggle for
civil rights, yet she transformed those experiences into a lifetime of public service and education.
As a young woman during World War II,
Betty worked as a shipyard clerk for an allBlack auxiliary lodge of the segregated Boilermaker’s union. In 1945 she and her husband
founded one of the first Black-owned music
stores, which remained open until 2019.
Ms. Soskin made history as the oldest active National Park Service ranger, serving at
the Rosie the Riveter/World War II Home
Front National Historical Park in Richmond,
California. Through her work, she ensured that
the stories of women, people of color, and
working families who are often omitted from
traditional historical narratives were finally
heard and preserved. Her storytelling gave
voice to generations whose contributions
shaped our Nation but were too often overlooked.
Beyond her federal service, Betty Reid
Soskin has worked as staff to a Berkeley city
council member, a state Assemblywoman, and
a California State Senator. As well as a respected civil rights activist, author, educator,
and community leader. Her life reminded us
that history is not only something we study it
is something we live, challenge, and improve.
Even after surviving serious injury late in
life, Ms. Soskin continued to inspire with her
determination, grace, and clarity of purpose.
She taught us that patriotism includes honesty, that progress requires persistence, and
that every generation has a responsibility to
expand opportunity and justice.
Betty Reid Soskin leaves behind an enduring legacy of service, truth-telling, and hope.
Her life stands as a testament to the power of
perseverance and the importance of ensuring
that America’s full story is told. I extend my
deepest condolences to her family, loved
ones, and all those whose lives were touched
by her remarkable spirit. Her impact will be felt
for generations, and I know the people of
Contra Costa County, and our Nation will join
me in celebrating her life and legacy. May we
honor her memory by continuing the work she
so passionately advanced and by striving, as
she did, to build a more just and inclusive Nation.

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. TRAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to commemorate a truly momentous milestone as the
City of Placentia celebrates its 100th Anniversary. For a century, Placentia has stood as a
vibrant and resilient community in Orange
County, enriched by its history, strengthened
by its diversity, and united by a shared commitment to progress.
Founded in 1926, Placentia grew from its
agricultural roots into a thriving suburban city
while preserving the values that have long defined it: hard work, civic pride, and a deep
sense of community. From its early citrus
groves to the dynamic neighborhoods,
schools, and businesses that define the city
today, Placentia’s story is one of thoughtful
growth and enduring opportunity.
Over the past 100 years, generations of
residents, civic leaders, educators, public servants, and business owners have contributed to
Placentia’s success. Their dedication has fostered a city known for strong public institutions, safe neighborhoods, and a commitment
to education, innovation, and community engagement. Placentia’s ability to adapt while
honoring its past reflects the very best of the
American spirit.
As Placentia marks its centennial, we also
look forward to the next generation of leaders,
families, and entrepreneurs who will continue
shaping the city’s future. With ongoing investments in infrastructure, public safety, education, and economic development, Placentia
is well-positioned to thrive for the next hundred years and beyond.
On this historic occasion, I extend my heartfelt congratulations to the residents of
Placentia and express my deepest appreciation to all who have contributed to the city’s
growth and success. It is an honor to represent this remarkable community in Congress, and I am proud to recognize the City of
Placentia’s 100 years of history, service, and
achievement.
f

HONORING BEN AND ALISON
SKLARCZYK

HON. JACK BERGMAN
OF MICHIGAN

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. BERGMAN. Mr. Speaker, it is my honor
to congratulate Ben and Alison Sklarczyk for
receiving the Michigan Chapter of The Nature
Conservancy’s
Conservation
Innovation
Award, which will be presented at the Great
Lakes Crop Summit on January 28, 2026.
Ben and Alison Sklarczyk are third-generation farmers who operate Sklarczyk Seed
Farm in Otsego County, where innovation and
sustainability are at the heart of their work.
Their family-owned operation encompasses
approximately 2,000 acres of barley, oats,
wheat, corn, and soybeans, along with 50,000
square feet of advanced greenhouse space,
making them leaders in Michigan’s agricultural
community.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA8.024

E13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

The Sklarczyks’ commitment to conservation
is reflected in their use of cover crops, reduced-till practices, and high-efficiency greenhouses, all of which protect soil health and
conserve resources. Within their greenhouses,
they produce more than nine million diseasefree seed potatoes each year, spanning over
one hundred varieties. As well as using clean
growing environments that reduce the need for
pesticides while promoting soil conservation.
Beyond their success in potato production,
Ben and Alison continue to look toward the future by exploring new and emerging crops, including making barley, which exceeds current
quality standards. By combining scientific research with practical, hands-on experience,
they are helping build a more diverse, sustainable, and competitive agricultural economy for
Michigan and all of the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Speaker, let us all join in congratulating
Ben and Alison Sklarczyk on receiving the
Conservation Innovation Award and to thank
them for their dedication to Michigan agriculture, environmental stewardship, and the
future of our Nation’s food system.
f

RECOGNIZING DON MUNSON

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Lieutenant Colonel
Don Munson, United States Army, of Coppell,
Texas, for his honorable service in the Armed
Forces of the United States of America and for
his continued service to his community.
Lieutenant Colonel Munson was commissioned as an officer upon graduating from
Tulane University in 1960 as a Distinguished
Military Graduate. Over the course of a 23year Army career, he served in numerous
leadership roles, including with the 82nd Airborne Division, Special Forces, and the 1st
Cavalry Division. During the Vietnam War, he
commanded C Company, 1st Battalion, 7th
Cavalry, and later served as Operations Officer for the 2nd Battalion, 7th Cavalry. For his
extraordinary gallantry, he earned the Silver
Star for capturing three enemy combatants
under fire and the Distinguished Flying Cross
for heroism in extracting stranded soldiers
under intense enemy attack. Throughout his
command, he was deeply respected for his
courage, integrity, and care for those under
his leadership—never losing a single soldier in
combat.
Lieutenant Colonel Munson’s decorations
also include two Bronze Stars for Valor, eleven Air Medals, five Meritorious Service Medals, and the Purple Heart, as well as the Master Combat Infantryman Badge, Master Parachutist Badge, and Pathfinder Badge.
His dedication to service did not end with
his military career. A longtime member and
former commander of the Military Order of
World Wars, he authored and published the
Dallas Chapter’s monthly newsletter for twenty
years. As a result of his hard work and leadership, the Dallas Chapter was named ‘‘Chapter
of the Year’’ for 15 of its first 19 years. He
also served as Chairman of the Dallas Vet-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:04 Jan 14, 2026

E37

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

erans Day Parade, helping elevate the event
to one of national prominence. For nearly two
decades he directed the Texas A&M Youth
Leadership Conference, an initiative he founded to teach principles of patriotism, leadership,
and service to the next generation.
Lieutenant Colonel Munson’s service is consistent with the finest traditions of the United
States Army and reflects great credit upon
himself, the State of Texas, and the United
States of America.
f

COMMENDING
THE
TAIWANESE
AMERICAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF GREATER CHICAGO

HON. RAJA KRISHNAMOORTHI
OF ILLINOIS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize the Taiwanese American
Chamber of Commerce of Greater Chicago
(TACCGC) for its longstanding contributions to
economic development, entrepreneurship, and
civic engagement in the Greater Chicago region.
Founded in 1988, TACCGC has served as
a vital forum for professionals and business
leaders from a wide range of industries, fostering collaboration, supporting business
growth, and strengthening the local economy.
Beyond its work in business development,
TACCGC actively promotes Taiwanese American interests, strengthens economic ties between the United States and Taiwan, and encourages participation in American civic life.
Its commitment to community involvement and
international cooperation reflects the values
that drive lasting prosperity.
I want to thank President Lisa Su and the
other leaders for their leadership and service,
and I am proud to recognize the organization’s
continued positive impact.
f

RECOGNIZING THE 80TH ANNIVERSARY OF U.S.-PHILIPPINE RELATIONS

HON. JAMES C. MOYLAN

cornerstone for the U.S.-Philippine Alliance,
ensuring an attack on one is an attack on
both.
Since 1951, our security cooperation has
evolved and strengthened. In 2014, our two
countries signed an Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement, increasing the U.S. military’s rotational presence to tackle new challenges in the West Philippine Sea.
Our ties to the Philippines are more than
just defensive, they are connected deeply by
bonds of friendship and culture. More than 4
million people throughout the United States
identify as Filipino. They serve in our armed
forces, contribute to our healthcare system,
and own and operate thousands of small businesses that support our economy.
As we launch this 80th anniversary year, let
us reaffirm our commitments to our shared
democratic values, a free and open Indo-Pacific, and renewed prosperity for the peoples
of the United States and the Philippines.
f

TRIBUTE TO REVEREND GREGORY
M. GOETHALS

HON. SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life and legacy of the late
Reverend Gregory M. Goethals.
Reverend Gregory was an extraordinary
leader within the Loyola High School community for 19 years, and his teachings will continue to resonate in the lives of the students
he touched.
Since 1988, he dedicated his life to helping
others experience God’s unconditional love as
deeply as he did. Beyond his service, Reverend Gregory cherished the arts and was no
stranger to the stage—where his quick wit and
warm humor brought joy to so many.
His passing is a tremendous loss for his
family, his fellow Jesuits, and the entire Loyola
community. May he rest in peace with the angels and saints in the everlasting presence of
God.
f

RECOGNIZING DAVID LOCKWOOD

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE

OF GUAM

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Mr. MOYLAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize the 80th anniversary of U.S.-Philippine relations.
In 1946, the Nation of the Philippines gained
its independence and officially opened diplomatic relations with the United States. Since
then, the U.S.-Philippine Alliance has evolved
to become one of our most critical Pacific partnerships.
The United States and the Philippines share
deep historical and cultural ties. During the
Second World War, Filipinos fought alongside
American service members in a battle for freedom against the imperial Japanese military
from the battlefields of Luzon to the shores of
Leyte Gulf.
Our shared sacrifice in defense of the Philippines led to one of our Nation’s longest
standing defense treaties in Asia, The Philippine Mutual Defense Treaty, signed August
1951. The foundational agreement set up the

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 13, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th Congressional District of Texas.
The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Lieutenant David
Richard Lockwood, United States Navy, of
Grapevine, Texas, for his honorable service in
the Armed Forces of the United States of
America and for his continued service to his
community.
Lieutenant Lockwood began his military career in the Army National Guard in 2015 and
later commissioned as a Chaplain in the
United States Navy in 2021. Throughout his
service, he has ministered to Sailors, Marines,
and their families with compassion, courage,
and excellence serving in Japan, Everett, and
Bahrain. As Command Chaplain for Expeditionary Medical Facility Jacksonville, he created a training platform later adopted by the

E:\CR\FM\A13JA8.028

E13JAPT1

E38

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

Bureau of Navy Medicine to train more than
1,500 sailors worldwide. From 2023 to 2025,
he served as Chaplain Program Officer for
Navy Recruiting Command, leading a ten-person team across four states, mentoring nearly
one thousand personnel, and facilitating the
recruitment of ninety-two new Navy Chaplains
from diverse faith backgrounds. His dedication
to service and leadership is reflected in his numerous awards, including two Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medals, four Navy
and Marine Corps Achievement Medals, the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:04 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

Military Outstanding Volunteer Service Medal,
and the President’s Lifetime Achievement
Award for Volunteer Service.
Lieutenant Lockwood’s service extends far
beyond his military duties. Through his nonprofit work, he has supported and trained dozens of humanitarian and faith-based organizations across Latin America, strengthening
leadership and outreach in Spanish-speaking
communities. He has also served as a pastor,
counselor, and seminary professor mentoring
future faith and nonprofit leaders in Texas and

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 13, 2026

abroad. During the COVID–19 pandemic, he
provided critical pastoral care to patients and
medical staff at Baylor Scott & White Medical
Center, offering hope and resilience in an unprecedented time of crisis.
Lieutenant Lockwood’s unwavering devotion
to others has brought healing, guidance, and
inspiration to countless individuals and reflects
the highest traditions of the United States
Navy, bringing great credit upon himself, the
State of Texas, and the United States of
America.

E:\CR\FM\A13JA8.033

E13JAPT1

Tuesday, January 13, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate
Chamber Action
Routine Proceedings, pages S141–S183
Measures Introduced: Fourteen bills and two resolutions were introduced, as follows: S. 3616–3629,
Pages S161–62
and S. Res. 581–582.
Measures Passed:
Disrupt Explicit Forged Images And Non-Consensual Edits Act: Committee on the Judiciary was
discharged from further consideration of S. 1837, to
improve rights to relief for individuals affected by
non-consensual activities involving intimate digital
forgeries, and the bill was then passed. Pages S143–47
Measures Considered:
Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water
Development; and Interior and Environment
Appropriations Act—Agreement: Senate began
consideration of H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, after agreeing to the motion to proceed, and
taking action on the following amendments and moPages S141–43, S157
tions proposed thereto:
Pending:
Thune Amendment No. 4208, to change the enPage S157
actment date.
Thune Amendment No. 4209 (to Amendment
Page S157
No. 4208), of a perfecting nature.
Thune motion to commit the bill to the Committee on Appropriations, with instructions, Amendment No. 4210, to change the enactment date.
Page S157

Thune Amendment No. 4211 (to the instructions
(Amendment No. 4210)), of a perfecting nature.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Page S157

Thune Amendment No. 4212 (to Amendment
Page S157
No. 4211), of a perfecting nature.
A motion was entered to close further debate on
the bill, and, in accordance with the provisions of
Rule XXII of the Standing Rules of the Senate, a
vote on cloture will occur on Thursday, January 15,
Page S157
2026.
A unanimous-consent agreement was reached providing for further consideration of the bill, at ap-

proximately 10 a.m., on Wednesday, January 14,
2026.
Page S176
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act;
Market Integrity and Affordability: Senate began
consideration of the motion to proceed to consideration of S.J. Res. 84, providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5, United States
Code, of the rule submitted by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services relating to ‘‘Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; Market Integrity and
Affordability’’.
Pages S147–57
During consideration of this measure today, Senate
also took the following action:
By 47 yeas to 52 nays (Vote No. 8), Senate did
not agree to the motion to proceed to consideration
of the joint resolution.
Page S152
Message from the President: Senate received the
following messages from the President of the United
States:
Transmitting, pursuant to law, a report of the
continuation of the national emergency that was
originally declared in Executive Order 14156 of January 20, 2025, with respect to energy; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. (PM–46)
Page S159
Transmitting, pursuant to law, a report of the
continuation of the national emergencies originally
declared or expanded in Proclamation 10886 of January 20, 2025, Executive Order 14157 of January
20, 2025, Executive Order 14193 of February 1,
2025, Executive Order 14194 of February 1, 2025,
and Executive Order 14195 of February 1, 2025,
with respect to the southern border of the United
States and cartels and other transnational organizations; which was referred to the Committee on Finance. (PM–47)
Page S159
Nominations Received: Senate received the following nominations:
Ademola Adewale-Sadik, of New York, to be
United States Director of the African Development
Bank for a term of five years.
Charlton Allen, of North Carolina, to be General
Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations Authority for
a term of five years.

D68

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:16 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D13JA6.REC

D13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Matthew Anderson, of Colorado, to be Deputy
Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.
Jeffrey Anderson, of Georgia, to be Representative
of the United States of America on the Council of
the International Civil Aviation Organization, with
the rank of Ambassador.
Brian Barber, of Louisiana, to be United States
Marshal for the Western District of Louisiana for the
term of four years.
Lee Beaman, of Tennessee, to be a Member of the
Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority
for a term expiring May 18, 2030.
Scott Bessent, of South Carolina, to be United
States Governor of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development; United States Governor
of the Inter-American Development Bank for a term
of five years; United States Governor of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
for a term of five years; and United States Governor
of the International Monetary Fund for a term of five
years.
Brian Birdwell, of Texas, to be an Assistant Secretary of Defense.
James Bishop, of North Carolina, to be United
States Attorney for the Middle District of North
Carolina for the term of four years.
Daniel Bonham, of Oregon, to be an Assistant
Secretary of Labor.
John Breslow, of Arizona, to be Ambassador to
the Republic of Cyprus.
Wesley Brooks, of Florida, to be Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs.
Jeremy Carl, of Montana, to be an Assistant Secretary of State (International Organizations).
Robert Cekada, of Florida, to be Director, Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives.
Walter Clayton, of New York, to be United States
Attorney for the Southern District of New York for
the term of four years.
Carter Crow, of Texas, to be General Counsel of
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission for
a term of four years.
Austin Dahmer, of Arizona, to be an Assistant
Secretary of Defense.
Christopher Michael De Bono, of the District of
Columbia, to be an Associate Judge of the Superior
Court of the District of Columbia for the term of fifteen years.
John DeLeeuw, of Texas, to be a Member of the
National Transportation Safety Board for the remainder of the term expiring December 31, 2026.
Irving Dennis, of Ohio, to be Chief Financial Officer, Department of Housing and Urban Development.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:16 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

D69

Mark Ditlevson, of Minnesota, to be an Assistant
Secretary of Defense.
Daniel Edwards, of North Carolina, to be an Assistant Secretary of Transportation.
Edward Eppler, of Connecticut, to be Chief Financial Officer, Department of Transportation.
Paul Ferguson, of West Virginia, to be United
States Marshal for the Northern District of West
Virginia for the term of four years.
Gregory Gilmore, of Illinois, to be United States
Attorney for the Central District of Illinois for the
term of four years.
Brian Gootkin, of Montana, to be United States
Marshal for the District of Montana for the term of
four years.
Thomas Govan, Jr., of Alabama, to be United
States Attorney for the Middle District of Alabama
for the term of four years.
Michael Graham, of Virginia, to be a Member of
the National Transportation Safety Board for a term
expiring December 31, 2030.
Steven Haines, of Virginia, to be an Assistant Secretary of Commerce.
Lindsey Robyn-Michelle Halligan, of Colorado, to
be United States Attorney for the Eastern District of
Virginia for the term of four years.
Robert Harvey, of Florida, to be a Federal Maritime Commissioner for a term expiring June 30,
2029.
William Hewes III, of Mississippi, to be a Commissioner of the Consumer Product Safety Commission for a term of seven years from October 27,
2024.
George Holding, of North Carolina, to be United
States Director of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Kenneth Jackson, of Texas, to be a Member of the
Board of Directors of the Inter-American Foundation
for a term expiring September 20, 2028.
Jeffrey Kaufmann, of Iowa, to be a Member of the
Board of Directors of the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation.
Michael Kavoukjian, of Florida, to be Ambassador
to the Kingdom of Norway.
Richard Kloster, of West Virginia, to be a Member of the Surface Transportation Board for a term
expiring December 31, 2028.
Sriprakash Kothari, of Massachusetts, to be an Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.
Benjamin Landa, of New York, to be Ambassador
to Hungary.
Lee Lipton, of Florida, to be Ambassador to the
Republic of the Philippines.
Gregory LoGerfo, of Massachusetts, to be Coordinator for Counterterrorism, with the rank and status
of Ambassador at Large.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D13JA6.REC

D13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

D70

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Anthony Lomangino, of Florida, to be a Governor
of the United States Postal Service for a term expiring December 8, 2031.
William Long, of Missouri, to be Ambassador to
the Republic of Iceland.
Priscilla Lopez, of Florida, to be United States
Marshal for the Southern District of Florida for the
term of four years.
David MacNeil, of Florida, to be a Federal Trade
Commissioner for the term of seven years from September 26, 2025.
Ryan McCormack, of Virginia, to be Under Secretary of Transportation for Policy.
Casey Means, of California, to be Medical Director
in the Regular Corps of the Public Health Service,
subject to qualifications therefor as provided by law
and regulations, and to be Surgeon General of the
Public Health Service for a term of four years.
Eric Meyer, of California, to be Ambassador to the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.
Joseph Nocella, of New York, to be United States
Attorney for the Eastern District of New York for
the term of four years.
Jared Novelly, of Missouri, to be Ambassador to
New Zealand, and to serve concurrently and without
additional compensation as Ambassador to the Independent State of Samoa, the Cook Islands, and Niue.
Seval Oz, of California, to be an Assistant Secretary of Transportation.
Stevan Pearce, of New Mexico, to be Director of
the Bureau of Land Management.
Sean Plankey, of Pennsylvania, to be Director of
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, Department of Homeland Security.
Arvind Raman, of Indiana, to be Under Secretary
of Commerce for Standards and Technology.
Laken Rapier, of Texas, to be a Member of the
Board of Directors of the African Development
Foundation for a term expiring September 27, 2027.
Ryan Raybould, of Texas, to be United States Attorney for the Northern District of Texas for the
term of four years.
Robert Rotter, of Iowa, to be United States Marshal for the Northern District of Iowa for the term
of four years.
Daniel Satterlee, of South Dakota, to be United
States Marshal for the District of South Dakota for
the term of four years.
Glen Smith, of Iowa, to be Under Secretary of
Agriculture for Rural Development.
David St. Pierre, of Maine, to be United States
Marshal for the District of Maine for the term of
four years.
James Stuart, of Minnesota, to be United States
Marshal for the District of Minnesota for the term
of four years.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:16 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

January 13, 2026

Robert Sweeney, of Texas, to be United States Director of the Asian Development Bank, with the
rank of Ambassador.
Alexander Velez-Green, of Virginia, to be a Deputy Under Secretary of Defense.
Russell Vought, of Virginia, to be a Member of
the Board of Directors of the African Development
Foundation for a term expiring September 22, 2027.
Russell Vought, of Virginia, to be a Member of
the Board of Directors of the Inter-American Foundation for a term expiring September 20, 2030.
Frank Weiland, of the District of Columbia, to be
an Assistant Secretary of State (International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs).
Jennifer Wicks McNamara, of Virginia, to be
Ambassador to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
Phillip Williams, Jr., of Alabama, to be United
States Attorney for the Northern District of Alabama
for the term of four years.
Routine lists in the Air Force, Army, Coast
Pages S179–83
Guard, Marine Corps, and Navy.
Messages from the House:
Pages S159–60
Measures Referred:
Page S160
Measures Read the First Time:
Pages S160, S176
Petitions and Memorials:
Pages S160–61
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages S162–63
Statements on Introduced Bills/Resolutions:
Pages S163–64

Amendments Submitted:
Pages S164–75
Authorities for Committees to Meet:
Pages S175–76

Record Votes: One record vote was taken today.
(Total—8)
Page S152
Adjournment: Senate convened at 10 a.m. and adjourned at 6:56 p.m., until 10 a.m. on Wednesday,
January 14, 2026. (For Senate’s program, see the remarks of the Majority Leader in today’s Record on
page S176.)

Committee Meetings
(Committees not listed did not meet)

OPERATION ABSOLUTE RESOLVE
Committee on Armed Services: Committee received a
closed briefing on Operation Absolute Resolve from
Katherine E. Sutton, Assistant Secretary for Cyber
Policy, Richard D. Tilley, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict, and Vice Admiral Frederick W.
Kacher, USN, Director, Rear Admiral Brian H. Bennett, USN, Deputy Director for Special Operation
Operations, J37, and Brigadier General Ryan R.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D13JA6.REC

D13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Messer, USAF, Deputy Director for Global Operations, J39, each of the Joint Staff, all of the Department of Defense.

D71

INTELLIGENCE
Select Committee on Intelligence: Committee met in
closed session to receive a briefing on certain intelligence matters from officials of the intelligence
community.

h

House of Representatives
Chamber Action
Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 26 public bills, H.R. 7024–7049; and 6 resolutions, H.
Pages H717–18
Res. 990–995 were introduced.
Additional Cosponsors:
Page H719
Reports Filed: Reports were filed today as follows:
H.R. 2616, to require public elementary and middle schools that receive funds under the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act of 1965 to obtain parental consent before changing a minor’s gender
markers, pronouns, or preferred name on any school
form or sex-based accommodations, including locker
rooms or bathrooms, with an amendment (H. Rept.
119–441);
H.R. 2617, to amend the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 to prevent the use of
funds under such Act to teach or advance concepts
related to gender ideology, and for other purposes,
with an amendment (H. Rept. 119–442);
H.R. 3453, to modify the program of grants to
support high-quality charter schools, with an amendment (H. Rept. 119–443);
H.R. 2516, to amend the Higher Education Act
of 1965 to prohibit political litmus tests in accreditation of institutions of higher education, and for
other purposes, with an amendment (H. Rept.
119–444);
H. Res. 992, providing for consideration of the
bill (H.R. 7006) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes (H. Rept. 119–445);
and
H.R. 580, to amend the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 to provide for regulatory impact
analyses for certain rules, and for other purposes,
with an amendment (H. Rept. 119–446, Part 1).

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Pages H716–17

Speaker: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he
appointed Representative Clyde to act as Speaker pro
tempore for today.
Page H663
Recess: The House recessed at 10:52 a.m. and reconvened at 12 p.m.
Page H669

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:16 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0627

Recess: The House recessed at 12:53 p.m. and reconvened at 1:30 p.m.
Page H676
Recess: The House recessed at 3:38 p.m. and reconvened at 4:31 p.m.
Page H692
Flexibility for Workers Education Act: The
House failed to pass H.R. 2262, to amend the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 to exclude certain activities from hours worked, by a yea-and-nay vote of
209 yeas to 215 nays, Roll No. 19.
Pages H677–81,
H692–93

Rejected the Norcross motion to recommit the
bill to the Committee on Education and the Workforce, by a yea-and-nay vote of 209 yeas to 213 nays,
Roll No. 18.
Pages H680–81, H692
Pursuant to the Rule, the amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee
on Education and Workforce now printed in the bill,
modified by the amendment printed in part B of the
report of the Committee on Rules accompanying this
resolution, shall be considered as adopted.
Pages H677–78

H. Res. 988, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills H.R. 2988, H.R. 2262, H.R. 2270,
H.R. 2312 and H.R. 4366, was agreed to by a yeaand-nay vote of 214 yeas to 207 nays, Roll No. 17,
after the previous question was ordered by a yea-andnay vote of 206 yeas to 205 nays, Roll No. 16.
Pages H670–77

Empowering Employer Child and Elder Care Solutions Act: The House considered H.R. 2270, to
amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to exclude child and dependent care services and payments from the rate used to compute overtime compensation. Further proceedings were postponed.
Pages H681–85, H693–94

Rejected the Lee (PA) motion to recommit the
bill to the Committee on Education and the Workforce by a yea-and-nay 209 vote of yeas to 213 nays,
Roll No. 20.
Pages H684–85, H693–94
Pursuant to the Rule, the amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee
on Education and Workforce now printed in each
such bill shall be considered as adopted.
Page H681

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D13JA6.REC

D13JAPT1

D72

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

H. Res. 988, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills H.R. 2988, H.R. 2262, H.R. 2270,
H.R. 2312 and H.R. 4366, was agreed to by a yeaand-nay vote of 214 yeas to 207 nays, Roll No. 17,
after the previous question was ordered by a yea-andnay vote of 206 yeas to 205 nays, Roll No. 16.
Pages H670–77

Tipped Employee Protection Act: The House considered H.R. 2312, to amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to revise the definition of the term
‘‘tipped employee’’. Further proceedings were postPages H685–91, H694
poned.
Rejected the Budzinski motion to recommit the
bill to the Committee on Education and the Workforce by a yea-and-nay vote of 209 yeas to 215 nays,
Pages H690–91, H694
Roll No. 21.
Pursuant to the Rule, the amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee
on Education and Workforce now printed in each
Page H685
such bill shall be considered as adopted.
H. Res. 988, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills H.R. 2988, H.R. 2262, H.R. 2270,
H.R. 2312 and H.R. 4366, was agreed to by a yeaand-nay vote of 214 yeas to 207 nays, Roll No. 17,
after the previous question was ordered by a yea-andnay vote of 206 yeas to 205 nays, Roll No. 16.
Pages H670–77

Saving Homeowners from Overregulation With
Exceptional Rinsing Act: The House passed H.R.
4593, to amend the Energy Policy and Conservation
Act to revise the definition of showerhead, by a yeaand-nay vote of 226 yeas to 197 nays, Roll No. 23.
Consideration began Wednesday, January 7th.
Pages H695–96

Rejected the Riley (NY) motion to recommit the
bill to the Committee on Energy and Commerce by
a yea-and-nay vote of 209 yeas to 215 nays, Roll
No. 22.
Page H695
H. Res. 977, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 4593), (H.R. 5184), and (H.R.
6938) was agreed to Wednesday, January 7th.
Requesting return of official papers on H.R.
1834: The House agreed to H. Res. 991, that the
Clerk of the House of Representatives request the
Senate to return to the House the bill (H.R. 1834).

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Pages H697–98

Presidential Messages: Received a message from
the President transmitting a notification stating that
the national emergencies declared or expanded in
Proclamation 10886 of January 20, 2025, Executive
Order 14157 of January 20, 2025, Executive Order
14193 of February 1, 2025, Executive Order 14194
of February 1, 2025, and Executive Order 14195 of
February 1, 2025, are to continue in effect beyond
their applicable anniversary date(s)—referred to the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:16 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0627

January 13, 2026

Committees on Foreign Affairs, Judiciary, Ways and
Means, Armed Services, and Transportation and Infrastructure and ordered to be printed (H. Doc.
119–126).
Page H691
Received a message from the President transmitting a notification stating that national emergency
with respect to energy declared in Executive Order
14156 of January 20, 2025, is to continue in effect
beyond January 20, 2026—referred to the Committees on Armed Services, Energy and Commerce, Financial Services, Natural Resources, and Transportation and Infrastructure and ordered to be printed
(H. Doc. 119–127).
Pages H691–92
Senate Referral: S. 1837 was held at the desk.
Page H696

Senate Message: Message received from the Senate
appears on page H696.
Quorum Calls—Votes: Eight yea-and-nay votes developed during the proceedings of today and appear
on pages H676–77, H677, H692, H693, H693–94,
H694, H695, H695–96.
Adjournment: The House met at 10 a.m. and adjourned at 9:28 p.m.

Committee Meetings
WHO’S WATCHING THE KIDS? HOW
EMPLOYERS, INNOVATORS, AND PARENTS
ARE SOLVING AMERICA’S CHILD CARE
CRUNCH
Committee on Education and Workforce: Subcommittee
on Early Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education held a hearing entitled ‘‘Who’s Watching the
Kids? How Employers, Innovators, and Parents Are
Solving America’s Child Care Crunch’’. Testimony
was heard from public witnesses.
PROTECTING AMERICA’S ENERGY
INFRASTRUCTURE IN TODAY’S CYBER
AND PHYSICAL THREAT LANDSCAPE
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Subcommittee on
Energy held a hearing entitled ‘‘Protecting America’s
Energy Infrastructure in Today’s Cyber and Physical
Threat Landscape’’. Testimony was heard from Alex
Fitzsimmons, Acting Undersecretary of Energy and
Director, Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security,
and Emergency Response, Department of Energy;
and public witnesses.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D13JA6.REC

D13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

EXAMINING LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS TO
STRENGTHEN MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY,
ENSURE CONSUMER CHOICE AND
AFFORDABILITY, AND CEMENT U.S.
AUTOMOTIVE LEADERSHIP
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Subcommittee on
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade held a hearing
entitled ‘‘Examining Legislative Options to Strengthen Motor Vehicle Safety, Ensure Consumer Choice
and Affordability, and Cement U.S. Automotive
Leadership’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
DELIVERING FOR AMERICAN CONSUMERS:
A REVIEW OF FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY
INNOVATIONS AND REGULATIONS
Committee on Financial Services: Subcommittee on Digital Assets, Financial Technology, and Artificial Intelligence held a hearing entitled ‘‘Delivering for
American Consumers: A Review of FinTech Innovations and Regulations’’. Testimony was heard from
public witnesses.
DEFENSE THROUGH OFFENSE: EXAMINING
U.S. CYBER CAPABILITIES TO DETER AND
DISRUPT MALIGN FOREIGN ACTIVITY
TARGETING THE HOMELAND
Committee on Homeland Security: Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection held a hearing entitled ‘‘Defense through Offense: Examining
U.S. Cyber Capabilities to Deter and Disrupt Malign
Foreign Activity Targeting the Homeland’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on the Judiciary: Full Committee held a
markup on H.R. 1958, the ‘‘Deporting Fraudsters
Act of 2025’’; H.R. 6978, the ‘‘Preserving Integrity
in Immigration Benefits Act’’; H.R. 2853, the
‘‘Combatting Organized Retail Crime Act’’; and
H.R. 6998, the ‘‘Renewed Hope Act’’. H.R. 1958,
H.R. 6978, H.R. 2853, and H.R. 6998 were ordered reported, as amended.
LEGISLATIVE MEASURE
Committee on Natural Resources: Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources held a hearing on H.R.
5745, the ‘‘Marine Fisheries Habitat Protection
Act’’. Testimony was heard from Representative
Ezell; Bryan Domangue, Gulf of America Regional
Director, Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, New Orleans, Louisiana; Ryan Montegut,
Assistant Secretary of Fisheries, Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, Louisiana; and public witnesses.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:16 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0627

D73

HUNTING AND FISHING ACCESS IN THE
GREAT AMERICAN OUTDOORS
Committee on Natural Resources: Subcommittee on
Water, Wildlife, and Fisheries held a hearing entitled ‘‘Hunting and Fishing Access in the Great
American Outdoors’’. Testimony was heard from
Paul Johansen, Chief, Wildlife Resources Section,
Division of Natural Resources, West Virginia; Brian
Nesvik, Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Department of the Interior; and public witnesses.
CURBING FEDERAL FRAUD: EXAMINING
INNOVATIVE TOOLS TO DETECT AND
PREVENT FRAUD IN FEDERAL PROGRAMS
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform: Subcommittee on Government Operations held a hearing entitled ‘‘Curbing Federal Fraud: Examining Innovative Tools to Detect and Prevent Fraud in Federal Programs’’. Testimony was heard from Ken
Dieffenbach, Executive Director, Pandemic Response
Accountability Committee, Council of the Inspectors
General on Integrity and Efficiency; Renata Miskell,
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Accounting Policy
and Financial Transparency, Bureau of Fiscal Service,
Department of the Treasury; and Sterling Thomas,
Chief Scientist, Government Accountability Office.
FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL
GOVERNMENT AND NATIONAL SECURITY,
DEPARTMENT OF STATE, AND RELATED
PROGRAMS APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Committee on Rules: Full Committee held a hearing on
H.R. 7006, the ‘‘Financial Services and General Government and National Security, Department of State,
and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
The Committee granted, by a record vote of 8–2, a
rule providing for consideration of H.R. 7006, the
‘‘Financial Services and General Government and
National Security, Department of State, and Related
Programs Appropriations Act, 2026’’, under a structured rule. The rule waives all points of order
against consideration of the bill. The rule provides
one hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member
of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees. The rule provides that the bill shall
be considered as read. The rule waives all points of
order against provisions in the bill. The rule provides that clause 2(e) of rule 21 shall not apply during consideration of the bill. The rule makes in
order only those amendments printed in the Rules
Committee report. Each amendment shall be considered only in the order printed in the report, may be
offered only by a Member designated in the report,
shall be considered as read, shall be debatable for the

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D13JA6.REC

D13JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

D74

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

time specified in the report equally divided and controlled by the proponent and an opponent, shall not
be subject to amendment, and shall not be subject
to a demand for division of the question. The rule
waives all points of order against the amendments
printed in the Rules Committee report. The rule
provides one motion to recommit. Finally, the rule
provides that the chair of the Committee on Appropriations may insert in the Congressional Record not
later than January 16th, 2026, such material as he
may deem explanatory of H.R. 7006. Testimony was
heard from Chairman Cole, and Representatives
DeLauro, Moylan, Hoyer, and Stansbury.
FROM ORBIT TO OPERATIONS: HOW
WEATHER SATELLITES SUPPORT THE
NATIONAL SECURITY MISSION
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology: Subcommittee on Environment held a hearing entitled
‘‘From Orbit to Operations: How Weather Satellites
Support the National Security Mission’’. Testimony
was heard from Irene Parker, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Systems, National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; Colonel Bryan
Mundhenk, Chief, Weather Operations Division,
U.S. Air Force; and Christopher Ekstrom, Deputy
Chief of Naval Operations for Information Warfare
(N2N6), and Deputy Director, Oceanography and
Navigation, U.S. Navy.
DRUGS, THUGS, AND FISH: EXAMINING
COAST GUARD LAW ENFORCEMENT
EFFORTS
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure: Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation held a hearing entitled ‘‘Drugs, Thugs, and
Fish: Examining Coast Guard Law Enforcement Efforts’’. Testimony was heard from Vice Admiral
David C. Barata, Deputy for Operations Policy and
Capabilities, U.S. Coast Guard; and Heather
MacLeod, Director, Homeland Security Programs,
Government Accountability Office.
LEGISLATIVE MEASURES
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs: Subcommittee on
Health held a hearing on legislation on the BEACON Act; H.R. 6444, the ‘‘Blast Overpressure Research and Mitigation Task Force Act’’; H.R. 6526,
the ‘‘Clarity on Care Options Act’’; legislation on the
Data Driven Suicide Prevention Act; H.R. 2283, the
‘‘RECOVER Act’’; legislation on the Health Desert
Reform Act; H.R. 2426, the ‘‘Veterans Mental
Health and Addiction Therapy Quality of Care Act’’;
H.R. 6652, the ‘‘U.S. Vets of the FAS Act’’; H.R.
4509, the ‘‘NOPAIN for Veterans Act’’; H.R. 5999,
to amend title 38, United States Code, to direct the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:16 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 0627

January 13, 2026

Secretary of Veterans Affairs to furnish an opioid antagonist to a veteran without requiring a prescription or copayment; H.R. 6001, the ‘‘Veterans with
ALS Reporting Act’’; and legislation on the Whole
Health for Veterans Act. Testimony was heard from
Representatives Fallon, Mackenzie, Landsman, and
Deluzio; Mark Koeniger, Acting Assistant Under
Secretary for Health for Patient Care Services, Department of Veterans Affairs; Maria Llorente, Acting
Assistant Under Secretary for Health for Integrated
Veteran Care, Department of Veterans Affairs; H. E.
Charles Rudolph Paul, Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary, Embassy of the Republic of the
Marshall Islands; and public witnesses.
MAINTAINING AMERICAN INNOVATION
AND TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP
Committee on Ways and Means: Subcommittee on
Trade held a hearing entitled ‘‘Maintaining American Innovation and Technology Leadership’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR WEDNESDAY,
JANUARY 14, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions: to
hold hearings to examine chemical abortion drugs, 10
a.m., SD–430.
Committee on the Judiciary: Subcommittee on Border Security and Immigration, with the Subcommittee on
Crime and Counterterrorism, to hold hearings to examine
Biden’s Afghan parolee program, 2:30 p.m., SD–G50.
Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship: to hold
hearings to examine growing the small business agricultural economy, 2:30 p.m., SR–428A.
Select Committee on Intelligence: to receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence matters, 3 p.m., SH–219.
Special Committee on Aging: to hold hearings to examine
made in China and paid by seniors, focusing on stopping
the surge of international scams, 3:30 p.m., SH–216.

House
Committee on Education and Workforce, Full Committee,
hearing entitled ‘‘Building an AI-Ready America’’, 10:15
a.m., 2175 Rayburn.
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Subcommittee on
Communications and Technology, hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Federal Communications Commission’’,
10:15 a.m., 2123 Rayburn.
Committee on Financial Services, Subcommittee, on National Security, Illicit Finance, and International Financial
Institutions, hearing entitled ‘‘Evaluating the Operations

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D13JA6.REC

D13JAPT1

January 13, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States (CFIUS)’’, 10 a.m., 2128 Rayburn.
Task Force on Monetary Policy, Treasury Market Resilience, and Economic Prosperity, hearing entitled ‘‘Striking the Right Balance Sheet’’ 2 p.m., 2128 Rayburn.
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Full Committee, hearing
entitled ‘‘Winning the AI Arms Race Against the Chinese Communist Party’’, 9:30 a.m., 2172 Rayburn.
Committee on House Administration, Full Committee,
markup on legislation on the Stop Insider Trading Act;
and H.R. 5891, the ‘‘Withhold Member Pay During
Shutdowns Act’’, 10 a.m., 1310 Longworth.
Committee on the Judiciary, Select Subcommittee to Investigate the Remaining Questions Surrounding January
6, 2021, hearing entitled ‘‘Examining the Investigation
into the DNC and RNC Pipe Bombs’’, 2 p.m., 2141
Rayburn.
Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, Artificial Intelligence, and the Internet, hearing entitled ‘‘Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Protecting the U.S.
Stone Slab Industry from Lawfare’’, 10 a.m., 2141 Rayburn.
Committee on Natural Resources, Subcommittee on Indian
and Insular Affairs, hearing entitled ‘‘Implementation of
the Compact of Free Association Amendments Act of
2024’’, 10 a.m., 1324 Longworth.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:16 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 0627

D75

Subcommittee on Federal Lands, hearing on H.R. 926,
the ‘‘Fort Pillow National Battlefield Park Study Act’’;
H.R. 3922, the ‘‘Cross-Boundary Wildfire Solutions Act’’;
H.R. 4038, the ‘‘Wildfire Response and Preparedness Act
of 2025’’; H.R. 4684, the ‘‘Star-Spangled Summit Act of
2025’’; H.R. 6300, the ‘‘Grasslands Grazing Act of
2025’’, 2 p.m., 1324 Longworth.
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee
on Research and Technology, hearing entitled ‘‘Advancing America’s AI Action Plan’’, 10 a.m., 2318 Rayburn.
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, Full Committee, hearing entitled ‘‘Member Day’’, 10 a.m., 2167
Rayburn.
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, Subcommittee on Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs, hearing entitled
‘‘Reevaluating the Rating Schedule: Examining VA’s Efforts to Modernize Disability Benefits’’, 2:15 p.m., 360
Cannon.
Committee on Ways and Means, Full Committee, markup
on H.R. 6956, the ‘‘Barcode Automation for Revenue
Collection to Organize Disbursement and Enhance Efficiency Act’’; H.R. 6903, the ‘‘Ensuring Children Receive
Support Act’’; H.R. 6431, the ‘‘New Opportunities for
Business Ownership and Self-Sufficiency Act’’; and H.R.
6945, the ‘‘Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women
and Families Act’’, 9:30 a.m., 1100 Longworth.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D13JA6.REC

D13JAPT1

D76

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 13, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

10 a.m., Wednesday, January 14

10 a.m., Wednesday, January 14

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Wednesday: Senate will continue consideration of H.R. 6938, Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy
and Water Development; and Interior and Environment
Appropriations Act.

Program for Wednesday: Consideration of H.R.
7006—Financial Services and General Government and
National Security, Department of State, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2026 (Pursuant to a Rule).

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE

Issa, Darrell, Calif., E35
Kamlager-Dove, Sydney, Calif., E31, E34, E37
Kean, Thomas H., Jr., N.J., E35
Krishnamoorthi, Raja, Ill., E37
Liccardo, Sam T., Calif., E35
McClellan, Jennifer L., Va., E33
Moylan, James C., Guam, E37
Pettersen, Brittany, Colo., E33
Rutherford, John H., Fla., E32

Bergman, Jack, Mich., E36
Boyle, Brendan F., Pa., E33
Casar, Greg, Tex., E31
Garamendi, John, Calif., E34, E36
Gonzalez, Vicente, Tex., E32
Hill, J. French, Ark., E32
Himes, James A., Conn., E32

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Scholten, Hillary J., Mich., E31
Scott, Robert C. ‘‘Bobby’’, Va., E35
Smucker, Lloyd, Pa., E31
Thompson, Bennie G., Miss., E32
Tran, Derek, Calif., E36
Valadao, David G., Calif., E32
Van Duyne, Beth, Tex., E31, E31, E32, E33, E34, E36,
E37, E37

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:16 Jan 14, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D13JA6.REC

D13JAPT1

