UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, FRIDAY, JANUARY 9, 2026

No. 7

Senate
The Senate was not in session today. Its next meeting will be held on Monday, January 12, 2026, at 3 p.m.

House of Representatives
FRIDAY, JANUARY 9, 2026
The House met at 9 a.m. and was
called to order by the Speaker.
f

PRAYER
Major General William Green, Jr.,
Chief of Chaplains, U.S. Army, Washington, D.C., offered the following
prayer:
O God, our help in ages past, our hope
for years to come, in the quiet before
this session begins, we lift our eyes to
You. Beneath the weight of duty and
the press of time, we need Your grace.
Help us hear the whisper of conscience,
the voice of the forgotten, and wisdom
from above.
Remind us that our labor is not for
ourselves alone, but our words and
work shape the soul of a nation and
echo through unborn generations. Let
us not grow weary in well-doing.
Breathe into this Chamber, O Lord, a
spirit of humility, courage, and hope.
May we walk this day by the light of
Your eternal truth.
Grant wisdom to our legislators and
let liberty’s light shine brightly on our
Nation.
In Your holy name we pray.
Amen.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER. The Chair has examined the Journal of the last day’s proceedings and announces to the House
the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER. Will the gentleman
from Illinois (Mr. SCHNEIDER) come forward and lead the House in the Pledge
of Allegiance.
Mr. SCHNEIDER led the Pledge of
Allegiance as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
The SPEAKER. The Chair will entertain up to five requests for 1-minute
speeches on each side of the aisle.

Department for their continuous efforts to keep us safe here in our Nation’s Capital. I am grateful for the law
enforcement officers in my home State
of Pennsylvania and the local officers
who safeguard the communities across
Pennsylvania’s 15th Congressional District.
Our officers know that they can be in
harm’s way at any moment. They answer the calls in times of distress.
They follow rules, and they wear the
badge proudly.
Mr. Speaker, I thank all our law enforcement officers for answering the
call to serve our communities.
f

f

RECOGNIZING NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT APPRECIATION DAY
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize
National Law Enforcement Appreciation Day, which is observed annually
on January 9.
Established in 2015, this day allows us
to recognize the brave men and women
who serve and protect in the line of
duty.
I extend my deepest gratitude to the
more than 900,000 sworn officers serving across the United States, who dedicate their lives to keep our communities safe.
I thank the Capitol Police, the Secret
Service, and the Metropolitan Police

THE LIGHT WILL WIN
(Mr. SCHNEIDER asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Mr. Speaker, yesterday morning the House Abraham
Accords Caucus hosted Rabbi Yehoram
Ulman and Ahmed al-Ahmed, survivors
of the terrorist attack at Bondi Beach
last month.
When terrorists began massacring
Jews during a Hanukkah celebration—
Rabbi
Ulman’s
son-in-law
among
them—Ahmed, a Muslim who was at
the event by serendipity, rushed to
cover.
As one of the terrorists approached
his position, rather than fleeing,
Ahmed heroically rose to the moment,
charged, and singlehandedly disarmed
the attacker, saving countless lives.

b
This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
H593

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:53 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A09JA7.000

H09JAPT1

H594

The Abraham Accords are premised
on a simple tenet. Arabs and Jews belong to the same land and that, by elevating the people, we will separate the
land and bring peace to the entire region.
Today, Rabbi Ulman and Ahmed alAhmed showed that the spirit of the
Abraham Accords extend far beyond
the Middle East.
As I told Ahmed, he not only is a
hero to us all, he teaches us that love
of the stranger will lift us all and defeat hatred. Rabbi Ulman and Mr. AlAhmed have titled their visit around
the world: ‘‘The Light Will Win.’’
f

HONORING SENATOR BEN
NIGHTHORSE CAMPBELL
(Mr. HURD of Colorado asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. HURD of Colorado. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of former United States Senator
Ben Nighthorse Campbell of Colorado
who passed away at the age of 92.
Senator Campbell lived a remarkable
life. He was a decorated veteran, a
champion for Native American communities, and a trailblazer in Congress. He
was the first Native American elected
to the Senate in more than 60 years,
and he never forgot who he was or who
he served.
He represented Colorado’s Third Congressional District in this Chamber and
then served two terms in the Senate.
He was always guided by integrity,
independence, and a deep sense of duty.
He didn’t care about party lines. He
cared about doing what was right.
Colorado has lost a great leader. Our
country has lost a great public servant.
I join many in keeping his wife, Linda,
and their family in our prayers.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

CELEBRATING EAST CAROLINA
UNIVERSITY FOOTBALL
(Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, our dynamic band, die-hard
fans, Steve the Pirate, Pirate Marissa,
and ECU brought it in Annapolis.
I am honored to recognize Coach
Blake Harrell and the entire East Carolina University football team. Their remarkable back-to-back Military Bowl
wins make eastern North Carolina incredibly proud.
These victories reflect the hard work,
discipline, grit, resilience, and heart
that define Pirate football. They represented eastern North Carolina with
toughness and determination against a
well-respected, well-coached, and talented Pitt football team.
Their success is a testament to teamwork, leadership, and the unshakeable
belief in one another. Pirate Nation
stands united in celebrating what they
have accomplished and what is still
ahead.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

Go Pirates. Arrrgh.
f

SUPPORTING AFFORDABLE
HOUSING
(Mr. EDWARDS asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in support of H.R. 5184, the Affordable HOMES Act. I thank Representative HOUCHIN for her leadership
in advancing this important piece of
legislation.
Housing affordability is one of the
top issues that I hear about in western
North Carolina. Working families, seniors on fixed incomes, first responders,
and young people are often priced out
of the communities where they live and
work because housing supply just
hasn’t kept up with demand. This bill
will help change that.
It cuts the unnecessary red tape that
slows construction and increases costs.
It modernized outdated regulations and
gives local communities greater flexibility to build the housing that they
need.
For western North Carolina, that
means more workforce housing, attainable options for seniors, and fewer
workers forced into long commutes.
Mr. Speaker, this legislation focuses
on solutions and not bureaucracy, and
I urge my colleagues to support H.R.
5184.
f

b 0910
HONORING FOOD MARKET LA
CHIQUITA
(Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today to honor Food Market La
Chiquita on their 40th anniversary. In
1986, Alfredo Linares, an immigrant
from Mexico, took a chance. He got a
loan and bought a corner store in my
neighborhood of Little Village.
Four decades later, you can find La
Chiquita stores throughout the metro
Chicago area, and it continues to be a
family-owned business that makes each
customer feel welcome and part of the
family.
When you walk into any of their
stores, you are greeted by the vibrant
colors of the fresh produce and the unmistakable aromas coming from the
kitchen, an invitation not just to shop
but to feel at home.
It is almost impossible to go shopping and not get some tacos from La
Chiquita’s in-store restaurants. Some
days, you will find me chowing down
on a torta and chatting with constituents on their break from work.
The secret to their success is simple
but powerful: high-quality products,
exceptional service for their customers, and a deep understanding of
the community.

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

I look forward to many more decades
of success for La Chiquita. I congratulate them.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF DARRELL WALKER
(Ms. HAGEMAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. HAGEMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize and honor the life
and legacy of Mr. Darrell Walker, who
dutifully served his Sublette County
community across many roles for over
50 years.
As the longest serving conservation
district board supervisor in Wyoming,
Darrell showed a lifelong commitment
to conservation, ranching, and many of
the values we hold near and dear in the
Cowboy State.
In recognition of Darrell’s decades of
selfless leadership, the Wyoming Association
of
Conservation
Districts
named the Darrell Walker Outstanding
Supervisor Award in his honor.
Darrell leaves behind a legacy of
service, dedication to conservation,
and many loving children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren.
Please join me in recognizing the legacy of Mr. Darrell Walker as we send
our condolences to his family.
f

GREATEST CASUALTY IS TRUTH
(Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend her remarks.)
Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Speaker, perhaps the greatest casualty
of the Donald Trump administration is
the truth.
The President and the courtiers who
encircle him traffic, intentionally and
carelessly, in falsehoods, misinformation, and lies.
Consider just the last 7 days.
On Venezuela, they lied when they
said it was about drugs. It never was. It
was about oil. Witness the January and
December Presidential pardons of the
two biggest narcotraffickers. Whether
it was the repeated murder of unidentified people in small boats or last Saturday’s extraordinary capture of Maduro,
they lied, saying they would not attack
Venezuela before going to Congress.
On this week’s fifth anniversary of
January 6, the President continues his
dangerous lies, supported by the
Speaker of the House. The White House
is going so far as an attempt to whitewash history on the official website of
the White House, even blaming Capitol
Police for the President’s deadly insurrection.
Now, on the deadly ICE shooting of
Renee Good, a 37-year-old mother in
Minneapolis, they are grotesquely
lying and misidentifying a woman they
did not know, even before her family
could identify her body.
Mr. Speaker, we are better than this.
America is better than this craven
crowd.

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.002

H09JAPT1

January 9, 2026

The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
BOST). Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the President.
f

MARKING 125TH ANNIVERSARY OF
SPINDLETOP
(Mr. WEBER of Texas asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. WEBER of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
January 10 marks the 125th anniversary of Spindletop, located in Texas’
14th District, which I am proud to represent.
In January 1901, the Spindletop gusher produced up to 100,000 barrels of oil
per day and flowed for 9 straight days,
making it the largest oil discovery in
the world at the time and the first
major oil field in the Gulf of Mexico. I
should say the Gulf Coast, or should I
say the Gulf of America?
That discovery launched the modern
American oil industry and transformed
southeast Texas into a national energy
hub. Over the decades, Spindletop
helped drive industrial growth, supported national defense, and built a
foundation for the energy infrastructure that exists along the Texas Gulf
Coast today.
My district is now home to some of
the largest refineries in the U.S., three
LNG export terminals, major ports,
and thousands of energy workers whose
labor keeps fuel moving across the
country and to our allies.
That impact traces directly back to
Spindletop: one discovery, one district,
125 years of American history.
f

AFFORDABLE
HOUSING
OVER
MANDATING EFFICIENCY STANDARDS ACT
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, Pursuant
to House Resolution 977, I call up the
bill (H.R. 5184) to prohibit the Secretary of Energy from enforcing energy
efficiency standards applicable to manufactured housing, and for other purposes, and ask for its immediate consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 977, the
amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee on Energy and Commerce,
printed in the bill, is adopted and the
bill, as amended, is considered read.
The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:
H.R. 5184
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Affordable
Housing Over Mandating Efficiency Standards
Act’’ or the ‘‘Affordable HOMES Act’’.
SEC. 2. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REVISIONS TO
STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED
HOUSING.
(a) RECOMMENDATIONS.—Section 413 of the

Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007
(42 U.S.C. 17071) is amended—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H595

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
‘‘(a) RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REVISIONS TO
STANDARDS.—The Secretary may transmit to the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
recommendations for revisions to the preemptive
energy conservation standards established
under section 604(g) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C.
5403(g)).’’;
(2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
‘‘(b) CRITERIA FOR RECOMMENDATIONS.—Any
recommendations for revisions to a preemptive
energy conservation standard transmitted under
this section shall—
‘‘(1) be based on a determination of the costeffectiveness of such standard as proposed to be
revised, taking into consideration life cycle construction and operating costs;
‘‘(2) include estimates of the impact of such
standard as proposed to be revised on the initial
purchase price of manufactured homes; and
‘‘(3) be developed taking into consideration—
‘‘(A) factory construction techniques and limitations unique to manufactured homes;
‘‘(B) climate zones established by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development;
‘‘(C) alternative methods that achieve equivalent or improved energy performance as compared to such standard as proposed to be revised; and
‘‘(D) estimated payback periods for any added
costs arising from such standard as proposed to
be revised.’’; and
(3) by striking subsection (c).
(b) NO FORCE OR EFFECT.—The final rule titled ‘‘Energy Conservation Program: Energy
Conservation Standards for Manufactured
Housing’’ published by the Department of Energy in the Federal Register on May 31, 2022 (87
Fed. Reg. 32728), shall have no force or effect.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill,
as amended, shall be debated for 1 hour
equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking minority member of
the Committee on Energy and Commerce or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Ohio (Mr.
LATTA) and the gentleman from New
Jersey (Mr. PALLONE) each will control
30 minutes.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio (Mr. LATTA).
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks on the legislation
and to insert extraneous material on
H.R. 5184.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Ohio?
There was no objection.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, since 2020, it is estimated that America’s housing market
has climbed 57 percent, sidelining firsttime home buyers and impacting communities across the country. In fact,
polls show that more than four out of
five Americans agree that housing affordability is a problem in the area in
which they live, with median-priced
homes costing more than 50 percent of
a typical household’s income.
There are many contributing factors
to the surge in prices, such as a demand shift and material costs. Inappropriate and duplicative regulatory

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

structures have compounded these
issues for the construction of manufacturing housing.
The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 required the Department of Energy to set energy efficiency
standards for manufactured housing.
This duplicates the Department of
Housing and Urban Development’s
longstanding jurisdiction, first granted
in the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards
Act, over these standards.
The law also required the DOE to
base these new standards on the International Energy Conservation Code,
the IECC, which is intended for sitebuilt homes. Builders of site-built
homes build according to that specific
region, and the IECC reflects those
unique characteristics. On the other
hand, manufactured homes are built
without knowledge of the final location
of that home.
Manufactured homes play an essential role in meeting our Nation’s demand for affordable housing. In fact,
the average income of a manufactured
home buyer is $63,000, while the average income for a site-built home buyer
is about $143,000.
We must ensure regulatory morass
does not deteriorate access to these
homes. H.R. 5184, bipartisan legislation
led by the gentlewoman from Indiana,
eliminates DOE’s authority to issue energy efficiency standards for manufacturing housing. Instead, HUD will
maintain full regulatory authority,
and DOE may provide recommendations throughout the rulemaking process.
This legislation will not diminish the
energy efficiency of these homes. Our
colleague from the other side of the
aisle, the gentleman from Massachusetts’ Fourth Congressional District,
issued a Dear Colleague and put it well
by saying: This bill in no way diminishes the importance of energy efficiency. It simply ensures HUD, under
its affordability mission, is the authoritative voice.
Consumers will continue to be protected by HUD’s existing process, and
manufacturers will have a regulatory
process that will facilitate the efficient
construction of affordable homes in the
United States.
Homeownership remains a significant
aspect of achieving the American
Dream. H.R. 5184 helps bring that
dream closer to reality for millions of
Americans.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this legislation, and I reserve
the balance of my time.
b 0920
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, the affordability crisis
has spread to nearly every facet of
American lives. Utility bills are skyrocketing across the country. Trump’s
disastrous tariffs are being passed on
to the American consumer. Grocery
prices are up, making it hard for families to put food on the table, and Republicans delivered their latest blow

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.004

H09JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H596

with failing to extend the Affordable
Care Act enhanced premium tax credits
which will result in soaring healthcare
premiums for more than 20 million
Americans. In many cases, Americans
are seeing monthly premiums either
two, three, or four times higher than
they were last year for their healthcare
insurance.
To make matters worse, we are in
the midst of a housing crisis that is
crushing American families’ dreams.
We are witnessing historically high
home prices, coupled with a devastating shortage of housing. The cost
of buying a home feels out of reach for
too many, while rent is simultaneously
ballooning at an unsustainable rate.
Manufactured homes, however, are an
important component of our affordable
housing stock.
We should all be concerned about the
cost of buying a new home, but this bill
does not solve this crisis. In fact, it
only makes housing affordability
worse.
First, it revokes the Department of
Energy’s May 2022 energy conservation
standard for manufactured housing,
robbing residents of $5 billion in savings. Manufactured homes are often far
less efficient than other homes, costing
owners about 70 percent more per
square foot in utility bills. Many lowincome residents have reported foregoing basic necessities like food or
medicine in order to keep their lights
on.
To suggest that the Department of
Energy standards for manufactured
homes negatively impact affordability
is entirely false. As I stressed, it is entirely false. When talking about affordability, it is imperative that we also
consider the cost of actually living in
these homes, and energy use is a big
part of that. This is even more important at a time when electricity costs
are up 13 percent nationwide.
If my Republican colleagues really
want to get at the root cause of the
current housing affordability crisis,
they should look at Trump’s disastrous
tariffs on essential building materials
and appliances, not energy efficiency
standards that actually lower monthly
energy bills.
Now, this bill also strips the Department of Energy of its congressionallydirected authority to set efficiency
standards for manufactured homes and
sends the responsibility to the Department of Housing and Urban Development, or HUD, an agency with a history of failing to protect manufactured
housing residents from high energy
costs.
Prior to the passage of a bipartisan
bill called the Energy Independence
and Security Act in 2007 when George
Bush was President, he signed that
into law, and HUD was then responsible
for setting energy efficiency standards
for manufactured homes. However, the
agency, HUD, failed to act, leaving
residents without an updated energy
code since 1994. It is no wonder that 44
percent of manufactured housing residents face a high energy burden.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

Now, the Department of Energy in
May 2022 set a standard that was long
overdue that said that manufactured
housing residents had gone without a
modern standard for nearly 30 years before the Department of Energy issued a
final rule, and they did so. As a result,
the standard that exists now, which
this bill would repeal, essentially saves
about $475 a year in savings on utility
bills; but this bill repeals those savings. It repeals the DOE standards, and
that is what is unacceptable about this
bill. We should be fighting to raise the
standard of living of manufactured
housing residents, not lowering it with
higher costs.
That is why I strongly oppose the
bill. The affordability crisis is quite
literally hitting home for millions of
Americans, and H.R. 5184 would only
saddle residents with even higher utility bills at a time when they can least
afford it.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘no’’ on the bill, and I reserve the
balance of my time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, Republicans have been
working to make sure we bring down
utility costs and energy costs across
this country, and that means making
sure that we have that energy that has
been given us.
When we look at what we have been
able to do, especially in oil and natural
gas production, from the days of
Jimmy Carter when we were told that
we were supposed to shut down our
thermostats, make sure you put a
sweater on, walk to work, well, Republicans did something about it and put
the laws and regulations into place to
make sure.
However, people who live in certain
States are going to see their prices
going up. Looking at this chart, what
we see is when you look at California,
Hawaii, Maine, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, their prices
have gone up. We also know that we
had the Governors up in New England
this year who stated that they were
fearful that their consumers were
going to pay 40 percent more for power
this winter.
Republicans want to do something
about that in this country and make
sure we get the permitting laws done
that we have been working on in committee.
At this time I yield 1 minute to the
gentleman from Georgia (Mr. CARTER).
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding
and for hosting us today.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support
of the Affordable HOMES Act.
Manufactured homes are an essential
part of our effort to meet the demand
for affordable housing in America. Unfortunately, manufactured homes are
currently subject to burdensome and
unnecessary Biden-Harris regulations
that are raising prices.
This commonsense bill would eliminate the Department of Energy’s dupli-

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

cative authority over manufactured
home energy efficiency standards while
ensuring the Department of Housing
and Urban Development maintains full
regulatory authority. This creates less
red tape without sacrificing quality
and efficiency.
When energy efficiency standards are
streamlined, it can lower costs and ensure that more Americans can afford
homes.
Congress owes it to the next generation of Americans to make buying a
home as affordable and accessible as
possible, and this bill helps to do that.
Mr. Speaker, I thank my friend, Representative HOUCHIN, for introducing
this bill, and I urge its immediate
adoption.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
such time as she may consume to the
gentlewoman from Florida (Ms. CASTOR), who is the ranking member of the
Subcommittee on Energy.
Ms. CASTOR of Florida. Mr. Speaker,
I thank the gentleman from New Jersey for yielding the time.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
H.R. 5184 because it will lead to higher
costs for hardworking American families, especially higher electric bills
that are spiking under Republican policies.
Despite President Trump’s promise
that he was going to lower electric
bills, he was going to cut them in half,
electricity prices are up by over 13 percent over last year and much higher in
many places. Americans have been
hammered with about $86 billion in
rate increases. In Florida, the Republican utilities commission just passed
along the highest rate increase in the
history of our State. Some are characterizing this as the largest rate increase in the history of the country.
The Republican big, ugly bill is also
driving prices higher, along with
Trump’s illegal interference with clean
energy projects that were ready to
come on line and help lower prices.
That is just not smart, and neither is
this bill that would gut the Department of Energy’s ability to set energy
efficiency standards for manufactured
homes. These were goals given by Congress in a bipartisan way years ago to
help our neighbors save money back
home.
Yes, Americans are facing a housing
affordability crisis, but they are also
facing an energy affordability crisis.
Republicans are using this bill to try
to prevent a false choice between tackling both of those problems, but Republicans have done nothing to address the
economic instability of hardworking
American families.
Just ask my neighbors back home in
Florida. Florida has more manufactured homes than any State in the
country, about 800,000 manufactured
homes, so that is 10 percent of all manufactured housing in the United States.
What the Republicans will not tell you
is that manufactured homes often have
very poor insulation. They use about 50
percent more electricity than other
types of construction.

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.007

H09JAPT1

January 9, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Utilities in Florida do not offer any
efficiency programs designed for manufactured homes, so there is no help
there. As a result, it is incredibly difficult for the people living in these
homes to pay their electric bills. It is
only getting worse with longer, hotter
summers fueled by climate change.
At the end of the year, my hometown
newspaper actually took a look at the
soaring electric bills for manufactured
homes. Mr. Speaker, I include in the
RECORD the Tampa Bay Times article
of December 30, ‘‘For Tampa Bay’s mobile home residents, high electric bills
can be a crisis.’’
FOR TAMPA BAY’S MOBILE HOME RESIDENTS,
HIGH ELECTRIC BILLS CAN BE A CRISIS
(By Emily L. Mahoney and Max Chesnes,
Dec. 30, 2025)
Energy efficiency standards for mobile
homes haven’t been updated in decades, allowing leaky walls to sap budgets.
Rebecca Parris rushes to the bank before it
closes.
The power could be shut off soon to her 960square-foot mobile home in St. Petersburg,
she fears, if she doesn’t pay Duke Energy her
overdue bill. The deep red ‘‘Action Required:
Bill Past Due’’ banner on a Dec. 16 email
from the company—and the handful that
came before it—makes her heart pound.
A neighbor chips in $95, and she speeds over
to Bank OZK to cash the check. This
month’s crisis is narrowly averted. But she’s
already thinking about next month.
‘‘I’ve worked my ass off my whole life,’’
said Parris, 67, still sitting in the driver’s
seat of her car from her dash to the bank.
‘‘But it’s been really hard.’’
Mobile homes have long been an affordable
option for people with fixed or lower incomes, when a big down payment and mortgage are out of reach. But beyond the smaller purchase price lurks a hidden danger: Because of outdated manufacturing standards,
mobile homes can have much higher electric
bills than traditional houses.
For a series of stories on energy affordability, the Tampa Bay Times asked readers
to submit information about their electric
bills. Hundreds responded, and many said
they paid higher bills this year than ever before. Yet even in this climate, mobile home
residents stood out—some with bills ranging
from $300 to $500, roughly comparable to
houses twice their size.
Retired and on a fixed income, Parris has
struggled this year to keep up.
After Hurricane Helene’s storm surge
flooded her home last fall, she lost her car,
her furniture, a new washer and dryer. The
salt water also damaged her air conditioner,
which she replaced about a month after the
storm.
Then she watched this year as her Duke
charges climbed:
$170.09 in May.
$258.06 in June, a payment she missed.
$314.85 in July, which ballooned to more
than $500 counting what she still owed.
‘‘It’s so so stressful and daunting,’’ Parris
said. ‘‘I deal with financial pressures every
day like this.’’
Rebecca Parris, 67, is struggling to keep up
with high power bills in her 960-square-foot
mobile home in St. Petersburg. ‘‘It’s so
stressful and daunting,’’ she said. ‘‘I deal
with financial pressures every day like this.’’
Lowell Ungar, director of federal policy for
the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, a national advocacy group,
said that while codes for traditional houses
have been constantly improving to require
builders to make them more efficient, mo-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H597

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

bile home regulations haven’t budged in decades.
‘‘In terms of their energy equipment and
components, they’re not built very well,’’ he
said, referring to the homes’ insulation, windows and water heaters, for example. ‘‘The
federal code hasn’t been changed since 1994—
and it wasn’t very strong then.’’
Unlike other types of housing, mobile
homes are only subject to federal energy
standards, not state building codes. In 2007,
Congress recognized that these requirements
were too weak and passed a law directing the
U.S. Department of Energy to update them.
That still hasn’t happened.
The agency released updated rules in 2022,
but delays to their compliance date, bureaucratic back-and-forth and pressure from the
manufactured home industry has led to a
‘‘long saga’’ of delays, Ungar said.
A bill in Congress called the Affordable
HOMES Act, a Republican-sponsored measure that is advancing with the support of
some Democrats, would roll back the Department of Energy’s most recent attempt to update the standards and block the agency
from setting future ones.
Proponents contend that stricter standards
will make new homes cost more for consumers, an agrument that Ungar said is outweighed by the larger savings on energy
bills, which result in lower monthly costs
even with a slightly higher mortgage.
‘‘It is beyond frustrating that this has
dragged on now for, depending how you
count, 30 years since the energy code was
last updated and 18 years since Congress told
the Department of Energy to fix the problem,’’ Ungar said. ‘‘Every year, there’s tens
of thousands of new homes that stick their
residents with these bills for the decades
that people are in those homes.’’
Parris blames the poor insulation in her
1970s home for leaching cool air in the summer. She’ll set her air conditioning to 77 degrees, but the temperature inside rises to
around 87.
Duke representatives have told her that
her new air conditioning may have been installed improperly, Parris said, and have explained that her kilowatt usage is double
what they would expect of a home her size.
Poor insulation exacerbates costs that are
already rising because of hikes to base rates
and—particularly stark this year—steep hurricane recovery fees from 2024’s disastrous
season.
Brad Coath paid more when he bought his
mobile home to get it upgraded with extra
insulation. It’s paid off, he said, as he’s noticed it holds its temperature well in the
summer. Still, Coath, a 66-year-old retired
nurse, has seen the bills for his St. Petersburg mobile home swell.
He’s enrolled in Duke’s budget billing program, which averages out bills across each
quarter to make them more predictable.
They went from around $150 to over $200 this
summer, prompting him to cut back on travel and put off bigger expenses.
‘‘I get so tired of the PSC just rubberstamping everything that comes across their
desks,’’ Coath said, referring to the Florida
Public Service Commission that approves
utility hikes. ‘‘Do these people not get bills?
How do I get that job?’’
Duke Energy has emphasized that the
storm cost recovery charge, which is around
$32 monthly for a household using 1,000 kilowatt-hours, will fall off bills in March, which
is also when a separate seasonal discount
kicks in. Tampa Electric’s hurricane fee,
which is about $20 per month for the same
energy use, will last longer, until September
2026.
Both companies noted they have programs
to help mobile home residents improve their
efficiency, like home energy audits that can

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

lead to discounts. Duke, for example, offers
rebates up to $600 for air conditioner replacements to qualifying mobile homeowners, and
smaller rebates for duct repair. They are
funded by all Duke customers through a
charge on their bills.
Edward Cifelli, 83, moved to Dade City
with his wife almost 20 years ago because the
rolling pastureland reminded them of their
longtime New Jersey home.
Electric bills for their double-wide usually
hover around $200, an amount they can manage even as the rent for the lot their home
sits on continues to creep upward.
But in August, their Duke bill hit $300 for
the first time Cifelli can remember. He
doesn’t understand why utilities charge residents for hurricanes when those should be an
expected part of doing business in Florida.
‘‘It doesn’t seem right to me that we pay a
certain amount of money, and when it gets a
little expensive for them, they make us pay
extra,’’ he said. ‘‘Old people are always concerned about outliving their savings, and
that’s where we are.’’

Ms. CASTOR of Florida. Mr. Speaker,
it says: ‘‘Energy efficiency standards
for mobile homes haven’t been updated
in decades, allowing leaky walls to sap
budgets.’’
They profile an older woman, a retiree on a fixed income in St. Petersburg, who lives in a 960-square-foot
manufactured home. After Hurricane
Helene, she has really been struggling.
She lost her car. She lost her furniture,
her washer and dryer, and her air-conditioning.
b 0930
Now, her electric bills are soaring because of the costs of hurricane recovery and these longer, hotter summers.
Her electric bills this year went from
$170 in May to $258 in June to $314 in
July. That is not affordable. Energy efficiency standards are needed for future residents so they can save money
over the long term.
In this story—and I will recommend
it to everyone that is concerned about
this issue—there is one expert that
goes into this and says that in terms of
their energy equipment and components, manufactured homes are not
built very well. ‘‘The Federal code
hasn’t been changed since 1994—and it
wasn’t very strong then.’’
It goes on and says: ‘‘Unlike other
types of housing, mobile homes are
only subject to Federal energy standards, not State building codes. In 2007,
Congress recognized that these requirements were way too weak and passed a
law directing the U.S. Department of
Energy to update them. That still
hasn’t happened.’’ And it needs to happen.
This expert says that people are saying we need more affordable housing,
but if you let folks off the hook for future improvements to manufactured
homes, you are simply going to weigh
down the people who live in them over
time. You are not doing them any favors.
This expert says that every year
there’s tens of thousands of new homes
that stick their residents with these
bills for decades. That is not right. We
can do better than that.

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.008

H09JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H598

This bill also would move the authority to set these standards from the Department of Energy to the Department
of Housing and Urban Development.
Well, HUD hasn’t set energy standards
for manufactured homes since 1994, and
it was a bipartisan Congress that
moved it back to DOE where they have
the expertise to do it.
If these standards were to take effect, the DOE standard would save residents an estimated $475 a year on their
electric bill. That is not peanuts, especially for that retiree in St. Petersburg
who could use every cent right now.
If anything, Congress should be
pressing DOE to strengthen standards.
Energy efficiency standards are not the
barrier to building affordable manufactured homes. Mr. Speaker, more than
58,000 homes already have been built to
higher DOE Zero Energy Ready Homes
criteria, most in 2025, because many
want to do better for their residents.
The technology is there and the building materials are there.
These are the people also mostly
being hurt primarily by the Republican
policies raising the cost of living,
whether it is arbitrary tariffs—and
maybe the Supreme Court will give us
a little relief from these arbitrary tariffs. People are paying, according to
one analysis, up to $1,200 to $1,600 more
because of arbitrary tariffs every time
they go to the grocery store or for construction materials, canceled energy
projects, and the big, ugly bill and cuts
to healthcare.
While speaking of healthcare, thanks
to the American people speaking out,
along with hospitals, doctors, and
nurses, every House Democrat and 17
Republicans yesterday voted to extend
the ACA tax credits and lower costs. I
hope this is catching. I hope this would
catch on with our Republican colleagues because people are feeling very
insecure when it comes to their family
budgets.
You add on something like this
where there is no hope for the future to
help save money if you are going to
live in a manufactured home, your arbitrary tariffs, all this is weighing
down on people. If Republicans actually wanted to lower household costs,
they would restore tax credits, as well,
related to residential clean energy that
they gutted as part of the big, ugly
bill. They were working to help people
save on the high cost of electricity,
saving them thousands of dollars on
appliances like their AC and heating
systems and helping them install solar
and batteries or helping them make
other home efficiency improvements.
But the Republicans have rejected all
of that. They said that is not important. It is more important to give a
pass or do a favor for Big Oil companies
or the Big Utility companies. Well, we
are on the side of the people because
they deserve so much better.
Unfortunately, we know the tone the
Republicans set last year. I just hoped
at the beginning of the year the Republicans would turn the page. Mr. Speak-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

er, 17 did yesterday on healthcare tax
credits. I would hope on energy bills
they would also look to partner with us
to help lower the cost of living. That
may be too much to ask for, otherwise
they wouldn’t be offering bills like
these that heap more costs and pain
onto our neighbors back home.
Mr. Speaker, American families deserve so much better. This bill needs to
be rejected. You need to stand on the
side of the people and their pocketbooks for a change.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Georgia (Mr. ALLEN). He represents Georgia’s 12th District.
Mr. ALLEN. I thank my friend from
Ohio for yielding. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in support of H.R. 5184, the Affordable HOMES Act.
Mr. Speaker, for many years, including when I first got started in my career in the construction industry, buying and owning a home was reachable
and a significant achievement for
American workers. In fact, just 6 years
ago it was achievable, but unfortunately, in today’s economic conditions,
many young Americans are realizing
that the dream of homeownership has
become just that: a dream.
This all happened in the 4 years of
the Biden-Harris administration. In
fact, if you were born after 1982 in this
country, you had never seen inflation
before. It created high interest rates.
Simply, these people don’t know what
they are talking about.
Like I said, I come from the business
world. I lived through these last 4
years, and it has been devastating to
this country.
What we are trying to do here is turn
the tide. For example, in the State of
Georgia, the average home is valued at
over $320,000. Just 6 years ago, you
could buy that home for $250,000. It is
just simply out of reach for countless
young families.
Under current law, the Department
of Housing and Urban Development and
the Department of Energy have the authority to set energy efficiency standards for manufactured homes.
Authorizing two Federal agencies to
accomplish the same goal only serves
to create conflicting standards and
confusion, overcomplicating the regulatory process for builders, and making
it more difficult to construct and ultimately purchase affordable homes.
We are listening to the housing industry.
Mr. Speaker, with my over 40 years
of experience in the construction industry, I can tell you firsthand just
how overbearing and expensive and
burdensome Federal regulations can
be. Let’s listen to the American people.
Let’s listen to the people that build
these homes.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Georgia.
Mr. ALLEN. Mr. Speaker, the Affordable HOMES Act, offered by my friend

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Representative HOUCHIN, is a commonsense bill that removes duplicative
housing regulations and will decrease
housing costs in America.
Specifically, it eliminates DOE’s authority to issue energy standards for
manufactured houses while maintaining HUD’s full regulatory authority. In
doing so, we will streamline the standard-setting process, which will lower
the cost of manufactured housing.
We should be able to agree in Congress that we need to take this action
to address rising costs. I strongly urge
a ‘‘yes’’ vote on H.R. 5184.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from Oregon (Ms. BONAMICI).
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
opposition to H.R. 5184, the Affordable
HOMES Act. This bill does not make
housing more affordable. Instead, it
will lock in higher utility bills.
We know and we understand there is
an affordable housing crisis, and that is
true in the district I represent in the
State of Oregon and across the country. Too many people cannot afford
homes, but here is the truth: Low-cost
homes with expensive utility bills
aren’t affordable.
Manufactured homes are a critical
source of affordable housing, and that
is especially true for seniors, veterans,
and working families.
b 0940
These homes might cost less upfront,
but monthly utility bills can determine
whether families can afford to stay in
them.
Before I came to Congress, I served in
the Oregon legislature, and I chaired
the Senate Consumer Protection Committee. I had in the district I represent, and still have in my congressional district, the largest manufactured home park in Oregon, with more
than 450 homesites. Back then, and it
is still true today, the largest complaint was about utility costs. Once
people get in their homes, they can’t
afford rising utility costs.
In Oregon, demand for energy is rising. We have colder winters and hotter
summers. Sometimes, wildfire smoke
can trap families indoors, forcing air
systems to run longer and harder. Oregonians may need more energy, but
they certainly don’t need higher costs.
When homes are energy inefficient,
families pay more. However, energy efficient homes mean lower costs and
homes that are safer, healthier, and
more resilient.
This legislation will increase costs,
reduce protections, and shift responsibilities away from manufacturers and
onto families who are already struggling with high costs for groceries,
healthcare, and housing.
I understand the concern about HUD
because they have had the responsibility since 1994. Finally, DOE enacted
some standards. Giving that responsibility to HUD is not reassuring.
Mr. Speaker, let’s defeat this bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.010

H09JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 9, 2026

Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 1 minute to the gentlewoman from Oregon.
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, let’s
work together. Let’s defeat this bill
today. Instead, let’s consider legislation that will really lower costs, not
raise them. Let’s ensure that the
standards are enacted before we start
passing these costs on to consumers.
Mr. Speaker, I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote
today.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. AUCHINCLOSS).
Mr. AUCHINCLOSS. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the chairman for yielding.
Housing affordability is the number
one issue in the United States economy
right now, and manufactured housing
is part of the solution. It is housing in
the range of $100,000 to $200,000. New
manufactured homes are HUD energy
code compliant, and some of them even
are meeting Energy Star certification
standards.
However, we have a challenge. In
2022, under the Biden administration,
with the Department of Energy and the
Department of Housing and Urban Development sharing enforcement authority for energy efficiency standards
for manufactured housing, the Department of Energy put forward energy efficiency standards that the Biden-era
HUD said they could not enforce.
I want to reiterate that for my
Democratic colleagues. The Biden-era
HUD said they could not enforce because of what they would do to housing
affordability with manufactured housing.
It was projected that at least 25,000
fewer homes would be constructed over
the next 10 years, and one Biden-era Office of Management and Budget official
said it could add $5,000 to $10,000 of additional costs per key for manufactured housing, all to save what could
be a teaspoon of greenhouse gas emissions, about what one Ford F–150 would
emit on one visit to a construction
worksite.
This is not a workable scenario because when you have shared enforcement between two agencies that disagree, nothing happens. What this bill
does is it puts accountability for housing affordability with the Department
of Housing and Urban Development.
The Department of Housing and
Urban Development still needs to incorporate the expertise of the Department of Energy. I want to be clear
about this. This does not necessarily
lower energy efficiency standards. In
fact, HUD could very well decide that
they want to raise energy efficiency
standards, but they are going to make
that decision holistically. They are
going to look at the costs.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 1 minute to the gentleman
from Massachusetts.
Mr. AUCHINCLOSS. They are going
to look at the total cost of ownership,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H599

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

including the initial purchase price
plus the cost of utilities over long-term
usage, understanding that many purchasers of manufactured housing don’t
live there for the 30 years that the Department of Energy was using to amortize the energy costs.
This bill streamlines bureaucracy,
and it clarifies accountability. It does
not lower energy efficiency standards,
but it does lower prices. This is why
the National Housing Conference,
which is a continuum of affordable
housing stakeholders, has endorsed
this legislation. I encourage my Democratic colleagues to do so, as well.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, while I appreciate that
my colleague from Massachusetts offered an amendment to improve the
bill during the subcommittee markup,
unfortunately, his amendment fell
short of addressing the fatal flaws in
this underlying bill.
The amendment allows the Department of Energy to make efficiency recommendations to the Department of
Housing and Urban Development on energy conservation standards. While
this change is better than completely
writing the Department of Energy out
of the process like the original bill did,
the fact of the matter is that this bill
still nullifies the Department of Energy’s manufactured housing rule standard for energy efficiency and, therefore, jeopardizes billions in savings for
American families.
Additionally, the bill, as amended,
does not specify what HUD should do
with the recommendations from the
Department of Energy. Even if the Department of Energy submitted recommendations, HUD is likely to ignore
them. Let us not forget that when HUD
had sole authority to issue energy
codes for manufactured housing prior
to 2007, the agency failed to act.
Again, it is important to ask: Why
should we entrust HUD to act differently now?
This bill undermines the Department
of Energy’s authority to set efficiency
standards and will rob much-needed
and long-overdue savings from manufactured housing residents. I still
strongly oppose the bill, as amended.
Families who live in manufactured
housing deserve to have efficient and
safe homes. Let’s fight to raise their
standard of living, not lower it.
My colleague from Massachusetts
mentioned support from the housing
group. Mr. Speaker, I include in the
RECORD a letter from five major organizations that deal with manufactured
homes: Americans for Financial Reform, Grounded Solutions Network,
National Association for State Community Service Programs, Next Step Network, and ROC USA.

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Hon. JOHN THUNE,
Majority Leader, U.S. Senate,
Washington, DC.
Hon. CHUCK SCHUMER,
Minority Leader, U.S. Senate,
Washington, DC.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
Hon. HAKEEM JEFFRIES,
Minority Leader, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
DEAR LEADER THUNE, LEADER SCHUMER,
SPEAKER JOHNSON, AND LEADER JEFFRIES: We
write to you as representatives of organizations that advocate for and support the production of affordable homes for lower-income
families, urging you to oppose H.R. 5184, the
Affordable HOMES Act. This bill would result in high energy costs for families who
live in new manufactured homes, undermining their affordability at a time when
those families are having trouble paying
their bills.
Manufactured homes have long been—and
must remain—a key source of housing for
many limited-income residents. Yet some of
these homes are built with poor insulation,
air sealing, and windows, leaving residents
with unaffordable monthly energy bills.
These costs are a burden for the residents,
who have a median household income of
roughly $40,000.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) last updated energy requirements for manufactured homes more
than three decades ago in 1994. Unfortunately, those outdated rules have allowed
the continued construction—up to the
present day—of homes that are poorly insulated and sealed. In response to HUD’s inaction, Congress stepped up in 2007 by directing
the Department of Energy (DOE) to set energy efficiency standards for the homes.
Standards finalized by DOE in 2022 would significantly improve affordability, with energy
bill savings that far exceed the modest added
construction costs.
While DOE and its national labs have much
greater building energy expertise, HUD already has an active compliance program for
its manufactured home standards, and cooperative use of that infrastructure would improve compliance with the DOE standards
and ease the compliance burden for manufacturers by creating one enforcement mechanism. Unfortunately, the timely and effective implementation of the cost-saving
standards has faced opposition, including
litigation, from segments of the industry.
H.R. 5184 would revoke the 2022 DOE standards, and it would go further, eliminating
DOE’s authority to set standards for manufactured homes altogether. This would leave
only HUD’s three-decade-old code in place,
along with the unlikely prospect that HUD
and the Manufactured Housing Consensus
Committee would suddenly update energy efficiency standards after decades of inaction.
While many manufactured homes already
are built well above the DOE standard, many
others are still built to the baseline HUD
Code level.
Congress can and must take steps to improve housing affordability, including expanding production of homes in which families can afford their energy bills and be safe
and comfortable during extreme weather.
H.R. 5184 would have the opposite effect,
locking in the unaffordable and harmful status quo for too many families who live in
manufactured homes.
For these reasons, we urge you to vote
against H.R. 5184.
Sincerely,
AMERICANS FOR FINANCIAL
REFORM.
GROUNDED SOLUTIONS

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.012

H09JAPT1

H600

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

NETWORK.
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR
STATE COMMUNITY
SERVICES PROGRAMS.
NEXT STEP NETWORK.
ROC USA.

Mr. PALLONE. I don’t want to read
the whole thing, but this was addressed
to the House bipartisan leadership.
It says: ‘‘We write to you as representatives of organizations that advocate for and support the production
of affordable homes for lower income
families, urging you to oppose H.R.
5184, the Affordable HOMES Act. This
bill would result in high energy costs
for families who live in new manufactured homes, undermining their affordability at a time when those families
are having trouble paying their bills.’’
I won’t get into the rest of it, but I
just wanted to point out that many
more organizations that deal with
manufactured homes, than what was
cited by my colleague from Massachusetts, oppose this bill.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from the
10th District of Michigan (Mr. JAMES).
Mr. JAMES. Mr. Speaker, right now,
the median cost of a new home in
Michigan is over $430,000, and more
than 78 percent of households cannot
afford it. Nearly 8 in 10 Michiganders
are losing their shot at homeownership. They are locked out, priced out,
and pushed away from the American
Dream.
Now, after 4 years of Bidenflation,
which saw home costs double, Michigan
Democrats are pushing new building
codes, expecting to add another $15,000
to the cost of a new home. Regulatory
costs already add $93,870 per home, and
for every $1,000 increase, Mr. Speaker,
3,393 households are already priced out
of the market.
That is why I am very pleased that
my colleagues and I on the Energy and
Commerce Committee are taking this
issue seriously and advancing real,
practical solutions.
Through efforts like my Path to Affordable Homes Act and the important
legislation
that
Congresswoman
HOUCHIN introduced today, we are
working to cut unnecessary regulatory
barriers, expand housing affordability,
and ensure families, seniors, and future
generations have a fair shot at homeownership and building generational
wealth.
Mr. Speaker, this is how we restore
common sense. This is how we restore
affordability. This is how we give the
American people a chance to get ahead,
stay ahead, and have an ownership
stake in their future.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support H.R. 5184.
b 0950
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, may I
inquire as to how much time remains
on both sides?
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from New Jersey has 111⁄2 min-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

utes remaining, and the gentleman
from Ohio has 181⁄2 minutes remaining.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I continue to reserve the balance of my
time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from Indiana (Mrs. HOUCHIN), the bill’s sponsor,
who represents Indiana’s Ninth District.
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, the
American Dream starts with owning a
home, but today families are being
priced out by unnecessary Federal regulations.
The Affordable HOMES Act fixes a
simple but costly mistake in Washington: two Federal agencies regulating the same homes in different
ways.
The Department of Housing and
Urban Development has regulated manufactured housing for decades. It
knows the market, and it understands
how these homes are built and the families who live in them.
However, in 2022, the Biden administration layered on a new Department
of Energy rule that raised costs on
manufactured housing without regard
for any of these factors.
The rule raised costs by $5,000 to
$10,000 per door, with little to no environmental benefit. It simply made
homes harder to afford. I ask my
Democratic colleagues: What difference
does it make if a home is more energy
efficient if you can’t afford to buy it?
For families looking to buy a manufactured home, affordability comes
down to one thing: whether the monthly payment fits their budget and
whether they can actually qualify for a
loan. Even a few thousand dollars in
added up-front costs can be the difference between owning a home or
being shut out entirely.
When a policy raises costs and locks
families out of homeownership without
improving outcomes, it is a failure.
The Cicero Institute said it well in a
2021 article critical of the Biden-era
rule. It stated: ‘‘The government isn’t
magically providing consumers ‘savings’; it is merely forcing them to buy
more expensive things.’’
The bill restores clarity and common
sense. HUD sets the standards as Congress intended while the Department of
Energy maintains and continues to
provide technical expertise.
The bill eliminates overlapping mandates that drive up prices and slow construction, which is why it passed the
Energy and Commerce Committee with
strong bipartisan support. We aren’t
aiming to weaken standards. We are
ensuring as standards are enacted they
work for the people they are meant to
serve.
When regulations price families out
of homeownership, Congress has a duty
to step in.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from Indiana.

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, the Affordable HOMES Act does exactly that
by cutting red tape, restoring clarity,
and helping builders build and families
buy.
Despite claims made by my Democratic colleagues about the Affordable
HOMES Act, it does not raise existing
rates for homeowners.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote in favor of H.R. 5184.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I continue to reserve the balance of my
time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Colorado (Mr. EVANS), who represents Colorado’s Eighth District.
Mr. EVANS of Colorado. Mr. Speaker, today I rise in strong support of the
Affordable HOMES Act. Housing affordability is top of mind for my constituents, and this bill helps deliver.
It cuts red tape by streamlining duplicative regulations for manufactured
homes, which improves housing affordability for millions of Americans.
This commonsense approach is the
exact opposite of what Colorado Democrats have done. Last year, Colorado
adopted the Model Low Energy and
Carbon Code, which forces homebuilders into electricity-only for residential energy, along with demand response controls.
What is demand response control?
Literally, the government requiring
utilities have the power to lock you
out of your thermostat, freeze your
water heater, and turn off your lights
in response to energy efficiency mandates.
Mr. Speaker, that is government
overreach my constituents cannot afford. Bills like the Affordable HOMES
Act help fix the problem by cutting red
tape, lowering costs, and increasing the
inventory of affordable homes.
I urge my colleagues to join me in
voting ‘‘yes.’’
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
I listened to the gentleman from Colorado, but I just want to stress that
this bill isn’t about resolving conflicting standards or regulatory confusion on the part of the Federal Government.
This is about the fact that the Department of Housing and Urban Development failed to act for decades on energy efficiency, leaving a 1994 energy
code untouched for over 30 years.
Now, when the Department of Energy
is seeking to put in place a standard,
well, what happens? First of all, when
it was supposed to go into effect, President Trump this summer basically
postponed it.
Now, they are trying to remove the
standard entirely, but removing the
Department of Energy’s authority to
set efficiency standards will only leave
residents unprotected from high energy
costs.
The Department of Energy is required by statute to consult with HUD
in setting efficiency standards, and

E:\CR\FM\A09JA7.004

H09JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 9, 2026

DOE has worked extensively with HUD
on this for years.
Technically, HUD can still update
the energy code for manufactured
homes, but they have been severely delinquent in doing so. Just as I mentioned, HUD has had over 30 years to
set a stronger standard, and they just
choose not to.
H.R. 5184 does not magically rewrite
history. Giving HUD sole authority
now does not take away the fact that
the agency left manufactured housing
residents with energy bills that are 70
percent more per square foot compared
to site-built homes for decades.
DOE’s energy sector experts are best
positioned to set efficiency standards
for manufactured homes, and it is the
only agency that has successfully produced modernized standards. Those
standards would save $475 a year on
utility bills and have a real impact on
Americans’ wallets, safety, and security. Of course, though, President
Trump doesn’t want that, so he set
aside the standard, and now they want
to eliminate it completely. All that is
going to do is raise utility bills tremendously for people who live in manufactured homes.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from California (Mrs. KIM), who represents the
40th District.
Mrs. KIM. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to
stand in support of H.R. 5184, the Affordable HOMES Act.
This bill fixes a broken Federal process that has stalled sensible updates to
housing standards for years. While the
issue is clear in manufactured housing
energy standards, the lesson applies
across the housing market: Overlapping regulations increase costs without
delivering better outcomes for families.
As a champion of the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, I fought to deliver real
relief for hardworking families by raising the State and local tax deduction
cap to $40,000 so families can keep more
of what they earn and finally afford to
buy a home.
We must also bring the Housing for
the 21st Century Act to the House floor
as soon as possible to help workingclass American families get ahead.
The Affordable HOMES Act is a practical step forward that helps families
without sacrificing safety or efficiency.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this bill.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I continue to reserve the balance of my
time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Nebraska (Mr. FLOOD), who represents the
First District.
Mr. FLOOD. Mr. Speaker, first I
thank the gentlewoman from Indiana
(Mrs. HOUCHIN), my friend, for her leadership on this very important issue. It
has been an absolute pleasure working
with her on this bill, which makes

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H601

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

manufactured housing less expensive
and more accessible to Americans.
I also serve as the Housing and Insurance Subcommittee chairman with the
Financial Services Committee. Our
Committee has jurisdiction over the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, which is responsible and
should be solely responsible for manufactured housing codes.
Manufactured homes are more affordable than site-built and even modular
homes, in part because they are built
to one single Federal code. Regulatory
streamlining isn’t just a bonus for
manufactured housing; it is at the core
of what makes these homes cost effective.
That is why this legislation is so important. Inviting a second regulator
into the business of manufactured
housing codes really undermines a key
value proposition for manufactured
housing.
Since legislation passed in 2007 mandating the Department of Energy establish energy efficiency standards for
manufactured homes, the Department
of Energy has struggled to effectively
craft and implement these standards.
They released an Advance Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking in 2010, and it
took them 6 years to propose draft
standards in 2016. The final standards
were released 15 years after enactment
in 2022, but then the Department of Energy delayed implementation of the
rule because they were unsure of how
they would even enforce the rule. We
are now approaching 19 years since enactment, and the Department of Energy is still behind schedule.
Unfortunately, the actual content of
the final rule is also problematic. The
Department of Energy has been sued
for this rulemaking for both failing to
coordinate with HUD, which was mandated in the statute, and failing to adequately consider costs.
b 1000
The Department of Energy even admitted in their final rule that their
analysis has not ‘‘included any potential associated costs of testing, compliance, or enforcement’’ of the mandate.
That is downright embarrassing from
an agency tasked with taking cost into
account when implementing these
standards.
Suffice it to say, the Department of
Energy’s entry into manufactured
housing standards has not gone very
well. Their standards are a decade behind schedule, and their rulemaking
would significantly increase the costs
of these homes. This bill fixes the problem. It puts HUD back in charge of
manufactured housing standards, including those related to energy efficiency while still giving the opportunity for HUD to look into this.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this bill.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Indiana
(Mr. YAKYM).

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Mr. YAKYM. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the chairman for the time this morning.
Mr. Speaker, Indiana is proud to have
manufactured housing facilities across
the State that build hundreds of thousands of homes for Americans.
Manufactured housing is critical to
giving Hoosier families affordable
housing. It gives options and supports
our domestic manufacturing economy.
It makes homeownership attainable,
particularly in rural areas.
Democrats have allowed the Department of Energy and the Department of
Housing and Urban Development to
regulate these homes. This has led to
unnecessary and sometimes conflicting
regulations, which drive up costs for
homeowners and creates confusion for
manufacturers.
The Affordable HOMES Act, led by
my friend and Hoosier colleague, ERIN
HOUCHIN, eliminates this redundant
regulation and allows HUD to be the
sole regulator of manufactured housing.
Homeownership is the cornerstone of
the American Dream. We need to get
the government out of the way so that
housing is more affordable and more
Americans can achieve that dream.
This is a commonsense bill that will
lower housing costs.
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to voting
in favor of the bill, and I urge my colleagues to do the same.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I think we can all agree
that we need to do a lot more to address housing affordability, but let me
assure everyone that this bill is not the
solution because it doesn’t do anything
to bring down costs. In fact, it only
raises costs on hardworking American
families, particularly hurting low-income, rural, and senior households.
I think there is a misunderstanding
on the other side of the aisle about the
Department of Energy’s process in setting efficiency standards for manufactured homes, so let me just clear a few
things up.
The Department of Energy would not
issue an energy conservation standard
if the benefits of the rule did not far
outweigh the costs. DOE is required by
statute to consult with the Department of Housing and Urban Development. It is also specifically required to
ensure that the standards are cost effective based on the impact on the purchase price of the home as well as the
total life cycle construction and operating costs.
Affordability is really at the core of
the statute that directs the Department of Energy to set efficiency standards for manufactured homes, and as
such, affordability is a guiding principle in the Department’s May 2022
final rule that set the efficiency standards.
In fact, in order to accommodate
price-sensitive, low-income purchasers,
DOE adopted a tiered approach in the

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.015

H09JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H602

final rule based on the size of the manufactured home. This standard is projected, as I have said, to save manufactured housing residents $5 billion, even
when you include the upfront costs.
In fact, in the first year of home ownership, energy savings greatly exceed
the marginal increase that might come
from the initial purchase. The bottom
line is that the benefits in energy savings to the consumer immediately offset any increase in purchase price. I
think it is important to reiterate that
affordability is about more than just
the purchase price.
A lower purchase price doesn’t mean
anything if you are spending 70 percent
more per square foot on energy bills
like manufactured housing residents
currently are. Over 40 percent of manufactured housing residents face a high
energy burden, meaning that more
than 6 percent of their income is going
toward energy costs.
Given the recent trends in energy
costs, it is more important now than
ever that we maintain the Department
of Energy’s standard to protect these
residents from even higher energy bills.
I think if my Republican colleagues
really wanted to address housing affordability, they would be speaking out
against Trump’s tariffs. These are tariffs that the President has put on essential building materials. That is the
problem right now. Hopefully, today,
the Supreme Court eliminates these
tariffs, but right now the increased
costs of manufactured housing is primarily based on the tariffs. That is
what is driving up the costs.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from Wyoming (Ms. HAGEMAN).
Ms. HAGEMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
in support of H.R. 5184, the Affordable
HOMES Act.
H.R. 5184 would eliminate the Department of Energy’s authority to impose
redundant energy efficiency standards
for manufactured housing that are already undertaken by other Federal
agencies. The cost of living is on everyone’s minds right now, which makes
this bill especially timely.
Let’s be clear, overburdensome and
duplicative Federal regulations make
life more unaffordable for all Americans whether it is housing, energy
costs, or everyday necessities. Meanwhile, demands for affordable housing
persist across the country, particularly
in rural communities in Wyoming
where my State continues to attract
new industries and our reliable energy
sector expands.
Manufactured housing is one of the
many innovative solutions that can
help bridge the gap and provide hardworking families and growing communities with access to quality housing.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Representative
HOUCHIN and Chairman GUTHRIE for
their steadfast leadership on this legislation, and I urge all of my colleagues
to support the Affordable HOMES Act.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Indiana
(Mr. SHREVE).
Mr. SHREVE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in support of the Affordable
HOMES Act. Indiana ranks fourth in
the Nation in manufactured home production and in Indiana’s Sixth District,
7,000 manufactured homes provide key
housing to our citizens.
For Hoosier families, the dream of
owning a home has slipped out of
reach. To right this ship, we need less
Washington red tape in our own backyards and the freedom for families to
choose the type of housing that works
for each of them.
That is what this bill does. It cuts
unnecessary Federal regulation. It
streamlines the rules. It lowers the
cost of manufactured housing, thereby
making the American Dream a little
more attainable for more families.
I thank my colleague, Congresswoman ERIN HOUCHIN, for leading on
this legislation. She and I know Hoosiers want common sense coming out of
Washington.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues on the
other side keep talking about efficiency standards driving up costs but,
in fact, it is not the case. The costs
that are driving up manufactured home
prices is because of Trump’s disastrous
tariffs.
President Trump has issued tariffs on
essential building materials on inputs,
like lumber, gypsum, steel, and even
appliances and cabinets. These tariffs
are driving up the costs of new construction, renovations, and affordable
housing development.
Tariffs are raising construction and
renovation costs and disrupting supply
chains, placing upward pressure on
home prices. Trump’s tariff policies are
not only undercutting the supposed
goal of reducing the cost of living for
Americans but they are also exacerbating the housing crisis by slowing
the production of housing and adding
exorbitant costs to the process.
The ever-changing tariff landscape,
because we don’t even know what it is
from one day to the next with him, is
creating uncertainty for homebuilders
and putting the dream of buying a new
home out of touch for perspective home
buyers. Even the National Association
of Home Builders has criticized
Trump’s tariffs as harming housing affordability and driving up costs. American consumers are feeling the pinch
and paying the price for Trump’s tariffs.
Mr. Speaker, I think it is time for my
Republican colleagues to look in the
mirror because what is really contributing to the housing crisis in a major
way is Trump’s tariffs, not energy conservation standards that save American consumers money. Stop demonizing efficiency standards, not only in
this bill but on so many occasions, and

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

start addressing the root of the problem.
b 1010
Mr. Speaker, that is President’s
Trump’s bad policies. I don’t know if
anything has come forward yet. Hopefully, today the Supreme Court is
going to throw these tariffs out, and
maybe we will have some relief. That is
the problem here.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from North
Carolina (Mr. MOORE).
Mr. MOORE of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today in support of H.R.
5184, the Affordable HOMES Act. America is facing a substantial housing
shortage. Right now, we are short more
than 8 million homes nationwide. In
North Carolina alone, that gap is projected to exceed 750,000 homes.
The reality is simple. The only solution is to build our way out of the problem. Building new housing right now is
slower and more expensive than it
should be, largely because of regulatory costs and outdated Federal requirements.
Regulations now, Mr. Speaker, add
over $93,000 to the cost of building a
single new home. The Affordable
HOMES Act takes a step to address
this problem by eliminating the duplicative Department of Energy regulations that drive up costs for manufactured housing.
Affordability requires more homes to
be built faster at a lower cost. I am
proud to support the Affordable
HOMES Act because I believe it makes
it easier for Americans to achieve the
dream of homeownership.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from New
Mexico (Ms. STANSBURY).
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, I
wasn’t planning on speaking on this
bill this morning, but I have to say
that I cannot stand when politicians
come into the Chambers of these hallowed Halls to represent the people of
this country, pretending to represent
the hardworking poor and working
families of this country, and actually
are doing the bidding of corporations
and industries that are asking them to
do things to cut cheap deals for them.
This is not about poor people. This is
not about working people. This is not
about making manufactured homes and
trailers better for people that live in
them. This is about doing the bidding
of corporations that ask them to carry
this bill.
As a low-income person who actually
grew up in a trailer, let me tell you
that efficiency standards and efficiency
programs and support programs that
make it possible for low-income people
to actually have high-quality utilities
and to be able to afford their utility
bills is what actually helps working
people.
We are tired of your hypocritical and
cheap bills that you are running on the
floor.

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.017

H09JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 9, 2026

I just want to say this, Mr. Speaker.
Yesterday was a good day for the
American people. What it looks like
when you work for working people is
you get shit done. Yesterday we passed
for the first time this Congress an extension of Affordable Care Act subsidies so that hardworking Americans
can
actually—actually
afford
healthcare.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded the use of profanity
on the floor is not within the rules.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, I want to stress again
the nature of this bill is totally the opposite of what the Republicans say. It
should be titled the unaffordable
homes act because electricity prices
are rising across the country. Americans are going into debt to heat their
homes this winter.
President Trump has failed on his
day one promise to bring down prices
for American families. Instead, his big,
ugly bill is projected to increase electricity prices by an additional 61 percent.
How are American families supposed
to shoulder the financial burden as
they struggle to afford the cost of their
daily necessities that have been inflated by his senseless tariff policies?
I hear from my constituents every
day that affordability is their top concern, and we should be focused on advancing bipartisan legislation to end
this affordability crisis. Instead, my
Republican colleagues are trying to repeal the Department of Energy’s energy efficiency standards for manufactured housing through this bill.
Mr. Speaker, these standards were
thoughtfully developed in consultation
with HUD to balance upfront costs and
long-term affordability. These standards are sorely needed as energy efficiency standards for manufactured
housing haven’t been updated for over
30 years.
As a result, electricity bills for manufactured homes are 70 percent higher
than site-built homes. It is cruel and
senseless to try to overturn energy efficiency standards for manufactured
housing as families are facing unprecedented increases in their electricity
bills.
The Department of Energy’s manufactured home efficiency standards are
estimated to save homeowners $475 per
year on their utility bills. Collectively,
these standards would save 17 million
Americans $10 billion over 30 years.
These efficiency standards are good
for our wallets, and they are good for
the economy. It is really unconscionable for Congress to consider overturning these standards amid this affordability crisis.
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to
oppose this legislation, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H603

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that
Energy and Commerce has been working on for years is to make sure that
we have more power out here for the
American people. Just this week in the
Energy Subcommittee, we had another
hearing on nuclear power to make sure
that we are bringing nuclear power
back online in this country.
We have got to make sure we have
energy out there for the American people so they can go out there and make
sure that when they turn on that
switch, it is not too expensive.
Once again, let’s look at this map of
the United States. It is kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker. If I live in California or Michigan or from Maryland
up to Maine, why is it that their kilowatt hours are more expensive than
the rest of the country?
It needs to be talked about, Mr.
Speaker. They need to talk to their
State Governors, and they need to talk
to their legislators and regulators.
They are raising the prices for their
citizens in those States. We have to
make sure we understand what is happening here.
We have to do our part this Congress,
but let’s look at these States. We are
making sure we are working hard in
the Energy and Commerce Committee
to ensure those rates are low for Americans.
As we have heard from both sides of
the aisle today, H.R. 5184 is a commonsense reform to unlock the construction of manufactured housing and increasing housing affordability for all
Americans.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support H.R. 5148, the Affordable
HOMES Act, and I yield back the balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 977,
the previous question is ordered on the
bill, as amended.
The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on passage of the bill.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 263, nays
147, not voting 21, as follows:
[Roll No. 12]
YEAS—263
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Budzinski
Burchett
Burlison
Bynum
Calvert
Cammack

Carbajal
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Correa
Costa
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davidson
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Figures
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Foster
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gosar
Graves
Gray
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Hill (AR)

Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
Landsman
Larson (CT)
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Massie
Mast
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Meeks
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Moskowitz
Mrvan
Nehls
Newhouse
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer

Adams
Aguilar
Ansari
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)

CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Davis (IL)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier

Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Perez
Perry
Peters
Pfluger
Pou
Quigley
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Sewell
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Spartz
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Suozzi
Sykes
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Titus
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Vasquez
Vindman
Wagner
Walberg
Wasserman
Schultz
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—147

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.019

H09JAPT1

Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Fields
Fletcher
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Goldman (NY)
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Hayes
Huffman

H604
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Larsen (WA)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum

Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Stansbury
Stevens
Subramanyam
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Underwood
Vargas
Velázquez
Walkinshaw
Waters
Watson Coleman
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—21
Baird
Casar
DeLauro
Dexter
Evans (PA)
Fong
Gottheimer

Higgins (LA)
Hunt
LaLota
Langworthy
McCaul
Mfume
Moulton

Murphy
Norman
Rutherford
Steube
Swalwell
Veasey
Womack

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1041
Messrs. MIN, SUBRAMANYAM, Mrs.
MCCLAIN DELANEY, and Ms. OCASIOCORTEZ changed their vote from
‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
Ms. BOEBERT changed her vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The title of the bill was amended so
as to read: ‘‘A bill to authorize the Secretary of Energy to transmit to the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development recommendations for changes
to preemptive energy conservation
standards applicable to manufactured
homes.’’.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
Stated for:
Mr. LANGWORTHY. Mr. Speaker, I was not
recorded due to unforeseen personal circumstances. Had I been present, I would have
voted YEA on Roll Call No. 12.
Mr. WOMACK. Mr. Speaker, I was unavoidably absent and unable to vote. Had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call
No. 12.
Ms. LEE of Nevada. Mr. Speaker,
during Roll Call No. 12 on H.R. 5184, my
vote was incorrectly recorded as NAY.
Had it been recorded correctly, I would
have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 12.
Stated against:
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, had I been
present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call
No. 12.
f

ADJOURNMENT
FROM
FRIDAY,
JANUARY 9, 2026, TO MONDAY,
JANUARY 12, 2026
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that
when the House adjourns today, it ad-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Menendez
Meng
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Pelosi
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pressley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

journ to meet at noon on Monday next
for morning-hour debate and 2 p.m. for
legislative business.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from South Carolina?
There was no objection.
f

RECOGNIZING THE LIFE OF
DONALD ‘‘CHIP’’ STUCKEY
(Mr. STUTZMAN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. STUTZMAN. Mr. Speaker, today
I rise to recognize the life of Donald
‘‘Chip’’ Stuckey from my hometown of
Howe, Indiana. Chip was a beloved
member of our community, who was
known for his warm, outgoing, and
generous nature.
Chip worked at the Howe Military
School and Bobilya Ford in LaGrange,
Indiana. I will always remember him as
one of the salesmen who sold me my
first new truck.
In his later years, he owned Happiness is Ice Cream, a summertime favorite of many families in our hometown.
In all that he did, his commitment to
excellence and his care for others left a
lasting impact on everyone that he
met.
Chip was a dear friend and the first
person to get me involved in politics
back in 2001. He led a life dedicated to
what is truly important: family, community, and finding joy in the simple
things. He never met a stranger and
was the kind of friend you could always
rely on for an encouraging word.
Chip’s legacy is one of compassion for
his fellow man, which inspired all who
were fortunate enough to know him.
We will miss Chip dearly. Rest in
peace.
f

RECOGNIZING FRANK BANALES
(Mr. CORREA asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Mr. CORREA. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Frank Banales who
has been a longtime community leader
and organizer in the interfaith partnerships and the Chicano culture.
Through his career, he has worked
with both Chicano and Muslim community activists who have been committed to preserving their cultures and
helping improve their neighborhoods to
make them a better place.
As chairman of the Hispanic Business
Council of Santa Barbara, he helped
local businesses adapt to modern technology, plan for the future, and succeed.
In 2001, he became a member of the
Islamic Society of Santa Barbara,
where he eventually became key to the
development and construction of a
local mosque.
Today, Frank sits on the board of the
Interfaith Initiative of Santa Barbara
County, and Frank continues to give
and give and give to make his community much, much better.

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

I thank Frank for a lifetime of commitment.
f

HONORING LIFE AND LEGACY OF
HONORABLE
CONGRESSMAN
DOUG LaMALFA
(Mr. LUTTRELL asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LUTTRELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life and legacy of
my friend Congressman Doug LaMalfa,
whose impact touched our Nation, his
community in northern California, and
this very Chamber.
Doug filled every room he entered
with life, passion, and personality.
Above all else, he was authentic and
unapologetically himself. That is exactly what made him such an effective
leader and beloved colleague. He gave
me guidance when I first arrived in
Congress and reminded me to never forget where I came from and who sent me
here to lead.
Whether he was conversing with constituents, passionately defending farmers from this very podium, or getting
to work on complex legislation, Doug
brought a genuineness to Congress. Everyone felt heard and valued by him.
Doug’s big heart matched his personality. Not only did he lift up farmers
across America, but he treated everyone with the same respect and dignity,
regardless of politics. My colleague,
ZOE LOFGREN, said yesterday he was
someone you could disagree with but
he was not disagreeable. That is certainly the mark of a true leader and a
good man.
To his wife, Jill, and their four children, I am terribly sorry for your loss.
We all mourn his death. May you find
peace in his memory and strength in
our words. We are here for you just as
Doug was here for all of us. May God
bless Doug and his family.
f

SALUTING THE DANNY FUND
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to salute the charitable work
and the great generosity of those in the
Pelham community that are the leaders and volunteers for The Danny
Fund.
The Danny Fund was formed over 30
years ago initially to raise needed
funds to help a young boy, Danny
Potocki, suffering from a rare form of
leukemia that was at the time considered fatal. Danny’s family could not
manage the mounting medical bills,
the need for donated blood, and so
much more to protect the young life of
their son.
Pelham came together on an ad hoc
basis to help Danny with fundraisers
and emotional support. Years later,
that young boy survived and grew up as
a man to have a family of his own.

E:\CR\FM\A09JA7.005

H09JAPT1

January 9, 2026

The spirit that saved Danny was
channeled into a nonprofit organization that raises funds for many other
such children who face similar issues
today.
On this day, The Danny Fund kids
come from all walks of life as young as
day-old infants who are diagnosed with
severe conditions that require assistance, as did Danny all those years ago.
In early February, on February 7,
The Danny Fund will celebrate at their
annual gala at the Surf Club On The
Sound in New Rochelle, raising funds
to continue to help those in severe
need.
From the floor of the House of Representatives, we salute The Danny
Fund and the people who work with it
and express our appreciation and gratitude for their charitable work.
f

b 1050
PLANNED TERRORIST ATTACK IN
MINT HILL
(Mr. HARRIS of North Carolina
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. HARRIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, North Carolina teen Christian
Sturdivant pledged his allegiance to
ISIS at just 14 years old.
Christian,
now
an
18-year-old,
planned to use knives and hammers to
attack people at a grocery store and
restaurant on New Year’s Eve in Mint
Hill, North Carolina, a suburban town
in my district.
I thank the Lord that his plan was
intercepted and thwarted by the FBI
and United States Attorney Russ Ferguson, with the help of Mint Hill law
enforcement and the mayor of Mint
Hill, Dale Dalton. As a result of their
work, they were able to stop Christian
before he could act.
This foiled attack should concern us
all. An impressionable American teenager was influenced by violent Islamist
ideology.
Let me be clear: Radical Islam is not
just a danger in places like Mamdani’s
New York. It is in my home State, and
it is quickly spreading across the
United States.
Mr. Speaker, imagine almost losing
your life on New Year’s Eve just for
celebrating in America. That is what
almost happened in my district.
This is the type of hate that radical
Islam inspires. It has no place in America. We must do more to push back and
stand up to hateful ideologies that
espouse violence against innocent people.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

ICE’S HORRIFIC KILLING OF
RENEE NICOLE GOOD
(Mr. CARBAJAL asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. CARBAJAL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to address ICE’s horrific killing
of Renee Nicole Good.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H605

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Like so many Americans, I am outraged by Renee’s murder, and I am disgusted by the disinformation campaign
the Trump administration has waged
to cover up their actions.
Secretary Noem called Renee a domestic terrorist, falsely claiming she
tried to run over an ICE officer, yet the
many videos of the incident clearly disprove this. This is a pattern, not an
isolated incident.
This administration has repeatedly
turned official channels of communication into engines of disinformation. I
saw it in my own district last summer
after I investigated a violent ICE raid.
They tried to muddy the waters then,
and they are trying to do it now.
Their attempt to smear Renee while
her loved ones are grieving is outright
cruel and outrageous. We must continue to shine a light on these abuses
and hold this administration accountable.
Today, I stand with the people of
Minnesota and every community that
has experienced ICE brutality.

founded in 1964 and has grown into one
of the largest and most sustained providers of services for people experiencing homelessness in the Phoenix
metro area.
Every night, UMOM provides safe
shelter and supportive services for
nearly 800 individuals, including 155
families and 130 single women, while
offering more than 900 units of affordable housing across the valley.
UMOM also provides employment and
job support through readiness programs, case management to help navigate the complexities of the housing
crisis, and onsite services for childcare
and healthcare.
By combining shelter services with
jobs, housing support, and wraparound
services, UMOM helps clients not just
survive crises but build sustainable and
happy futures.
Monique has been an incredible leader. Under her leadership, UMOM will
continue to shine in its mission to restore hope, rebuild lives, and end homelessness in Maricopa County.

f

f

RECOGNIZING RYAN SIGSBEE
(Mr. MCGUIRE asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. MCGUIRE. Mr. Speaker, today, I
rise to recognize a great achievement
by a student in Virginia’s Fifth District, one that honors both his college
and his country.
Ryan Sigsbee, a junior at HampdenSydney College, won gold while representing the United States in Panama
at the World Union of Karate-Do Federations’ Latin American Open Tournament this fall.
Ryan joined nearly 900 competitors
from 25 countries, with participants
ranging in age from 10 to 60 years old.
In an interview for his college paper,
Ryan said, ‘‘Global competitions are
incredible,’’ and require a lot of persistence while training for them. ‘‘Representing the United States and Hampden-Sydney was an unforgettable experience. . . . As president of [my fraternity], it also meant a lot to see my fraternity brothers . . . cheering me on.’’
It is an honor to represent students
like Ryan and their outstanding accomplishments that they contribute to
our great Nation and Virginia’s Fifth
Congressional District.

HONORING WALTER S. MITCHELL,
JR., ON HIS RETIREMENT
(Mr. BRESNAHAN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. BRESNAHAN. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to honor the retirement of
Walter S. Mitchell, Jr., a pillar of the
Bear Creek Village Borough community and an exemplary public servant.
For 32 years, Mayor Mitchell provided extraordinary leadership, guiding
the borough through its formative
years and decades of growth. As its
first and longest serving mayor, he has
demonstrated a deep commitment to
historic preservation, responsible governance, public safety, and environmental stewardship.
Mayor Mitchell’s service reflected his
understanding that great leadership extends beyond the office to fostering
community built on connection, tradition, and shared experiences. He is
widely known for his personal contributions to community life through
his involvement in theater and a barbershop quartet, as well as his legendary homemade pecan pies.
During his tenure as mayor, Bear
Creek Village achieved many important milestones, including placement
of the Bear Creek Village Historic District on the National Register of Historic Places, major flood mitigation
and roadway projects, and the preservation of 139 acres of land surrounding
the borough’s lake, just to name a few.
His conservation efforts were recognized in 2013 with the North Branch
Trust Community Stewardship Award.
In 2018, Mayor Mitchell received the
Carol Sambol Award from the Pennsylvania State Association of Boroughs
for his outstanding public service.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Mayor Mitchell
for his tireless commitment to serving
the people of the Bear Creek Village

f

RECOGNIZING MONIQUE LOPEZ,
CEO OF UMOM NEW DAY CENTER
(Ms. ANSARI asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. ANSARI. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
recognize the incredible accomplishments of one of my district’s most talented public servants and the amazing
organization that she helms.
Monique Lopez was recently appointed as CEO of UMOM New Day
Center. UMOM New Day Center was

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.023

H09JAPT1

H606

Borough and for setting such an inspiring example of community leadership.
f

CONGRATULATING CONSTITUENT
OF THE WEEK ANAND RAO
(Mr. VINDMAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. VINDMAN. Mr. Speaker, today, I
rise to congratulate my constituent of
the week, Professor Anand Rao, on
launching the Center for AI and the
Liberal Arts at the University of Mary
Washington.
As director, Professor Rao will lead
this new initiative, positioning UMW
as a leader in the national conversation around artificial intelligence.
Professor Rao is an emerging expert
in blending AI with the humanities and
ensuring AI is shaped in ethical,
thoughtful, and humanistic ways.
Students who take courses through
the center will have the opportunity to
build their own chatbots, conduct research, and contribute to building the
future of AI.
Mr. Speaker, again, I congratulate
the professor on all of his accomplishments. It is a privilege to highlight his
story on the floor of the U.S. House of
Representatives.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING THE LIFE OF GREG
BIFFLE
(Mr. HARRIGAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. HARRIGAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of Greg Biffle,
who passed away last month.
Greg was known internationally for
his NASCAR career, but back home in
North Carolina, people came to know
him for his heart and specifically his
actions after Hurricane Helene.
When roads were washed out, and
communities were cut off, Greg used
his own helicopter to reach the hardest
hit areas. He flew multiple missions a
day, delivering generators, food, water,
and medical supplies, and he helped
evacuate people who could not be
reached by any other means. Volunteers on the ground have said that
when they told Greg a family needed
help, he made it happen, often within
hours.
Greg’s life was centered on his family, and this loss also took his wife,
Cristina, and his children, Emma and
Ryder, as well as three friends. They
are all deeply missed by everyone who
knew them.
As we are here in Washington today,
our hearts are back home. On the racetrack or in the air, Greg Biffle will be
remembered exactly as he should be, as
a hero.
f

GO DUCKS
(Ms. HOYLE of Oregon asked and was
given permission to address the House

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

for 1 minute and to revise and extend
her remarks.)
Ms. HOYLE of Oregon. Mr. Speaker,
tonight the Oregon Ducks are fighting
for their first-ever national championship. After dominating Texas Tech in
only the third shutout victory of all 49
college football playoff games, the
Ducks are only two wins away from
celebrating in Eugene.
I want to shout out to Head Coach
Dan Lanning. In four seasons, he has
posted an incredible 48–7 record, and
our team has shined through his leadership.
Our quarterback, Dante Moore, has
thrown more than 3,200 yards this year,
and a true freshman, Brandon Finney,
Jr., is one of the Nation’s elite corners.
I am proud to say the Oregon Ducks
have one of the best records in the
country, 13–1, and that one loss was to
the Hoosiers. Tonight, we get to set
that record straight. We will be cheering them on against Indiana tonight,
and Go Ducks.
f

b 1100
REMEMBERING DOUG LAMALFA
(Mr. WILSON of South Carolina
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, it is an honor for me to be
able to recognize and appreciate our
dear friend, Doug LaMalfa, who served
so well here in Congress. He was such a
patriot that we all could appreciate.
He was a fourth-generation rice farmer from northern California; a champion for the people of northern California. I had the opportunity to campaign for him several years ago, and I
saw his love and appreciation of the
people of northern California. He never
gave up.
I am grateful, too, for the leadership
of Speaker MIKE JOHNSON, our vice
chair, BLAKE MOORE, and the different
tributes that have been paid to Doug’s
service, how important it is. Then putting that in context, too, President
Donald Trump issued a heartfelt statement of love and affection for our departed congressional Member.
With that in mind, Doug LaMalfa is
always going to be treasured as a
champion for limited government, expanded freedom, and peace through
strength.
f

MAKING THE MOST OF HARDEARNED COLLEGE CREDITS
(Mr. SUBRAMANYAM asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker,
college has become outrageously expensive and forced students and families to take out huge loans or forgo
higher education entirely. That is why
many high schoolers choose to take AP
and IB exams, where they can earn college credit at much less expense.

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Unfortunately, it is hard for students
to find information on which colleges
award credits for certain AP and IB
exams. A lot of students show up to
their chosen school and only then realize that their credits are worthless.
That is why I am introducing the
COURSE Credit Act with Representative JEFF VAN DREW. This commonsense, bipartisan legislation directs the
Department of Education to collect
and publish detailed information on AP
and IB credit policies at colleges and
universities.
It also requires colleges and universities to publish the same information
on their own websites. This will give
students, families, and counselors a
quick and easy way to see how much
credit they will receive for their AP
and IB exams at any given college, allowing students to choose a school
where they can make the most of their
hard-earned credit.
f

ICE HAS GONE ROGUE
(Mr. KHANNA asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Mr. KHANNA. Mr. Speaker, ICE has
gone rogue. I was sickened to see an
ICE officer shoot a 37-year-old mother,
leaving her 6 year old an orphan. That
officer needs to be arrested and prosecuted.
Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about
the human rights of people in ICE detention facilities. I visited the California City Immigration Detention
Center and spoke with 47 detainees.
They talked about rocks in their food.
They talked about having blood in
their urine and not being able to see a
doctor. They talked about freezing in
the night because they didn’t have
clothes.
These are human rights violations.
This is not the way America acts. We
need accountability to ICE, and we
need to act with our values.
f

EXTENDING ACA TAX CREDITS
(Ms. KAPTUR asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
applaud the House’s extension of the
enhanced Affordable Care Act premium
tax credits for an additional 3 years.
Bravo, House. Thank God we exist.
Please allow me to thank Leader
JEFFRIES for his ability to work across
the aisle to get this crucial vote
passed.
However, the majority leader should
never have played politics with millions and millions of American people’s
healthcare. There are 24 million Americans who face doubling of their insurance premiums. These tax credits will
help Americans who work in small
businesses and farmers to lower their
costs and be able to afford health insurance for their families. The majority refused to act for America’s working people.

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.025

H09JAPT1

January 9, 2026

Meanwhile, just months ago, these
same Republican leaders gave an average tax cut of $80,000 to every millionaire in this country. Do you think they
really need more? Yet, when the time
to came to stand up for hardworking
families, they ran away.
President Trump’s $40 billion bailout
of Argentina alone could have paid for
nearly 2 years of these tax credits.
Bravo, House of Representatives.
What an honor it is to serve with people who care about the American people.
f

HOLD THE ADMINISTRATION
ACCOUNTABLE
(Mr. MENENDEZ asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. MENENDEZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today because I could not leave Washington this week without calling out
House Republicans for their hypocrisy.
They have been silent while DHS
agents shoot Americans in broad daylight and then smear them as domestic
terrorists. At the same time, they try
to vanish the memory of January 6
from our collective memory, refusing
to put up a plaque to honor law enforcement officers who defended them
from actual domestic terrorists in this
very building.
They won’t hold this administration
accountable because it would make
them feel as unsafe as many Americans
feel right now. They all saw what happened when Marjorie Taylor Greene,
one of Trump’s staunchest supporters,
opposed the President and in doing so
saw her and her family’s safety threatened. This is the culture of fear this
President has created and which House
Republicans have been complicit in.
The American people deserve better,
and I will keep coming down here until
House Republicans finally speak up for
the American people and hold this administration accountable.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

A CONFESSION OF OUR VALUES
(Ms. SIMON asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. SIMON. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to speak about betrayal. Nearly 14,000
veterans who served this Nation will
sleep unsheltered tonight, not in beds.
They will sleep on concrete, in cars,
and under bridges.
There are 37 million American children who depend on Medicaid for their
healthcare, and this Congress just
signed $1 trillion in cuts to that lifeline. Also, 12 million Americans will
lose their health insurance, the largest
rollback of healthcare in American history.
Meanwhile, the Pentagon just failed
its eighth consecutive audit. There are
over $4 trillion in assets that they cannot account for. They are the only Federal agency who has failed to ever pass

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H607

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

an audit, not once. We have got money
for war, but we can’t feed the poor. We
refuse to fully fund cancer research. We
refuse to house low-income elders in
their final years, and we refuse to shelter the very soldiers we sent to die in
wars that we keep funding.
This is a confession of our values.
f

FOLLOW THE MONEY
(Ms. STANSBURY asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
her remarks.)
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, as
they say, follow the money: invading a
foreign country, stealing their oil, extortion, violence, giveaways to corporate America, American oil and gas
companies, and, yes, Trump donors.
What is going on here? Today, Donald Trump will convene the CEOs of
some of the largest oil and gas companies in America, the same individuals
who promised to raise a billion dollars
in campaign donations for him when he
was a candidate.
In fact, this week I was shocked to
learn that the White House and the
President are not only planning to sell
the oil of Venezuela, but to place it in
foreign bank accounts that only the
President controls.
We are asking what is going on here:
endangering the lives of our servicemembers, unauthorized use of the military, extorting foreign countries, invading foreign countries and taking
their leaders, and, yes, stealing their
resources.
I will say this to you, Mr. President:
We are watching. We will follow the
money, and we will hold you to account.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MOORE of West Virginia.) Members are
reminded to address their remarks to
the Chair.
f

b 1110
FEARING FOR OUR LIVES
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. GREEN of
Texas was recognized for 60 minutes as
the designee of the minority leader.)
Mr. GREEN of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
and still I rise, and still I rise, a liberated, unbought, unbossed, unafraid
Democrat.
And still I rise, and I rise today because I have grave and great concern
for the American people. I fear for the
lives of the American people.
I do so, Mr. Speaker, because if the
President of the United States and his
underlings and his persons who are in
charge of very powerful agencies within the Federal Government can convince this country or some significant
portion of the people in this country
that Ms. Renee Good was a terrorist, I
fear for the lives of the people in this
country.
In fact, I fear for my own life. I am
not afraid to speak truth to power. I

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

am not afraid to speak truth about
power. I am going to speak truth about
power today, but I can tell you that I
fear for our lives because if you can
justify what happened to Ms. Good
after seeing with your very own eyes
what took place, and if we can allow
the king’s men to conclude that only
they can investigate this and remove
the local constabulary from the process, if this can happen, I fear for our
lives.
We are now living in a country where
people are expected to believe that this
mother of three, a Christian woman,
seated in her vehicle—yes, the vehicle
was across the roadway—that somehow
she was a terrorist. The head of Homeland Security has as much as said so, a
terrorist.
Mr. Speaker, I fear for our lives because what we saw when this lady, this
woman, was accosted—and I say ‘‘accosted’’ because men who had on masks
in police regalia, I suppose, approached
her rather aggressively, it seems to me,
and one of them, in approaching, said:
‘‘Get the f out of the car.’’ I am not
using the profanity, but that is what
was said.
You can see it for yourselves, and
you can hear it for yourselves. That is
what was said: ‘‘Get the f out of the
car.’’ When men can approach a female
in a car and say this to her and expect
her to immediately respond in a positive manner, and if she does not and attempts to drive away, if they can take
her life, I fear for our lives.
Do not assume that it can happen
only to her. They aggressively approached her. Cars were going around
her in various ways, but when she made
her move to extricate herself, to move
along, to move her car, officers started
to shoot. She was shot. One officer shot
through the side window as she was
moving away.
You don’t have to know this lady. I
don’t know her. I don’t know who she
was other than what I have seen and
what I have read, but the truth is, officers ought not be allowed to do what
was done to this lady. There should be
an investigation that includes the local
constabulary.
If you truly want to be transparent,
if you truly believe in liberty and justice for all, if you want the people in
this country to believe that what occurred was the right thing, then you
would want the local constabulary to
be involved, but no. This administration is shutting out the local investigation, and they are including only the
Federal investigation, which means, by
some thought processes, that they have
no desire to let this go to trial.
There are people who believe that
this administration has no desire to let
this case go to a trial. For edification
purposes, I am one of them. I don’t believe that they want this case to go to
a trial.
I think that this is why they have decided that only the Federal authorities
will investigate. I also believe that if
the case goes to a trial and if there is

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.027

H09JAPT1

H608

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

a conviction and it is a Federal conviction, I believe this President will do for
the person or persons convicted, I believe he will do for them what he did
for the people who assaulted the citadel of democracy on January 6. I believe he will pardon, and I believe he
will do it without question, reservation, or hesitation, just as he did for
those persons who assaulted this Capitol. He did it immediately after being
sworn in.
Mr. Speaker, I fear for the lives of
the American people, and again, I say
that includes me. I think we have a
reckless, ruthless outlaw who has
found his way into the Presidency.
To further validate my thinking, I
have here the words of the President of
the United States of America, Donald
John Trump. Here are his words when
asked if there were any limits on his
international power. I know what happened within the country was national.
This deals with international power.
Give me just a moment, please, of your
time so that I might connect these
dots.
When asked if there were any limits
on his international power, here is his
response: ‘‘My own morality. My own
mind. It’s the only thing that can stop
me.’’ Some things bear repeating: ‘‘My
own morality. My own mind. It’s the
only thing that can stop me.’’
Mr. President, what about Congress?
What about the Constitution? What
about the power to declare war and
where that power is vested? What
about it, Mr. President? Only your
mind? Only your morality?
I won’t go into the President’s moral
standards. I will leave that to you.
b 1120
Mr. Speaker, what the President is
saying is, this joint resolution, S.J.
Res. 90, over in the Senate—here is a
copy of it—permit me to read some excerpts.
Mr. Speaker, it reads: ‘‘Joint Resolution—To direct the removal of the
United States Armed Forces from hostilities within or against Venezuela
that have not been authorized by Congress.’’
S.J. Res. 90, it goes on to say: ‘‘Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives.’’
Eventually, if it passes the Senate, it
has to come to the House for our approval.
‘‘Resolved by the Senate and House
of Representatives of the United States
of America in Congress assembled,
‘‘Section 1. Findings. Congress makes
the following findings: (1) Congress has
the sole power to declare war under article I, section 8, clause II of the United
States Constitution.’’
Mr. President, the Constitution still
has some relevancy. The Constitution
is not meaningless.
It goes on to say: ‘‘(2) Congress has
not yet declared war upon Venezuela or
any person or organization within Venezuela, nor enacted a specific statutory
authorization for use of military force
within or against Venezuela.’’

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, it is only his mind and
his morality. That is the only thing
that can stop him. This resolution
won’t stop him.
Here is what he knows. He knows
that if it passes the Senate and he
knows that if it passes the House, he
knows that he has a vote. He knows
that if he votes ‘‘no’’ with his veto, he
knows or believes that it will not be
overridden.
Mr. Speaker, I still say this is the
right thing to do. I say this because
you cannot allow a President to do
what he has done in terms of going to
another country, bombing the country,
to do this and not put some check on
him. At least you have to try. You
can’t just allow it to happen and decide
we will wait until we can override his
veto.
Pass it in the Senate even if it never
passes the House. You ought to pass it
in the Senate. The House should pass
it. If the House doesn’t, the Senate is
doing the right thing. Pass it. Let him
know that there are some people who
are watching.
By the way, the President has also
gone on to say that the five Republicans who voted for this to move forward shouldn’t hold public office again.
Threats and intimidation, this President spells the word ‘‘respect’’ f-e-a-r.
That is respect. He wants people to fear
him.
I don’t fear you, Mr. President. I am
concerned about your behavior. I am
concerned about what you might have
your underlings in some way do to me.
I want you to know I will not be deterred, just as these Senators are not
being deterred. Yes, they are doing the
right thing, notwithstanding the fact
that you have a vote in this process.
They did it, and they are doing it. I
support what they are doing.
In doing what he has done, the President is doing the following. He is using
the noble ends—not always noble—to
justify ignoble means. They are noble
ends to justify ignoble means. That is
what is happening in Venezuela. Only
it is noble ends to justify unconstitutional means.
I think some Senators seem to agree
with me on that: Unconstitutional
means to justify what are perceived to
be ignoble ends. The President of Venezuela is a part of this, but it is not
about him. It is about the Constitution. It is about whether we will have a
Constitution.
If we are going to allow what are perceived to be noble ends to justify unconstitutional means, at some point
the Constitution of the United States
of America will become meaningless.
He is using noble, perceived ends to
justify unconstitutional means.
The President should have brought
this to the attention of the Congress.
He did not do so. He did, however, bring
it to the attention of the oil companies. Have the oil companies replaced
Congress in the United States of America? Is what they think more important than what we think, given that

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

the Constitution has given us the authority to declare war?
I know that this is a difficult topic
for some people to embrace, but this is
where we are. Congress has become irrelevant in the mind of this President.
It is not relevant. It is not. His own
morality, his own mind is the only
thing that can stop him.
Well, Mr. President, you are wrong.
Congress is relevant. Just as the Senate took this action, Congress, meaning the House of Representatives,
should take action. By definition, the
House and the Senate make up the
Congress. The House of Representatives should take action. We have the
power to do what has to be done. We
have the power. Before I go further
with that power, I want to come back
to, if I may, Ms. Good.
If the President believes this about
international law, if the President believes that the only thing is his mind,
I believe he believes the same thing
about domestic law. I think he believes
that the only thing that he has to concern himself with is whether he agrees,
whether he thinks it is right.
I believe he thinks that what those
officers did can be justified simply because they are officers of the law. I
support officers of the law. I don’t support outlaws who are pretending to be
officers of the law when they are committing crimes.
My uncle was a deputy sheriff. I support officers of the law, but I am not
going to support officers who would do
what happened to this lady and the
President is then going to immediately
back them up. The head of Homeland
Security immediately backs them up.
The Vice President of the United
States immediately backs them up.
They set the narrative to allow the
exoneration of the persons who did
these dastardly things. They have put
in motion immediately without an investigation.
Well, you say: AL, you didn’t investigate.
No, but I am investigating by virtue
of seeing what happened and having
read news articles and having looked
into it. They didn’t do as much. They
just immediately concluded that this
lady was a terrorist.
I am not a terrorist, but if you can
conclude that she is, I am not sure that
anybody is safe from being captioned,
labeled, or designated a terrorist. I am
not sure.
I am standing up for her today. I am
standing up for the American people
today. I am standing up for those good
law enforcement officers who would
have approached that lady with a
kinder gesture and not as bullies. They
would have approached her and simply
said: Ma’am, would you please step out
of the car.
What is wrong with being kind? You
have got the gun. What is wrong with
being respectful? No, the President as a
bully has passed on his tendencies to
those who are under him. It starts at
the top. The tone and tenor starts at

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.029

H09JAPT1

January 9, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

the top. It starts with a bullying President.
b 1130
Now, you have officers who believe
that they can bully people into doing
things. I imagine this lady was frightened. I would have been, rushing up to
me, mask on, ‘‘Get out of the f’ing
car.’’ That may have been the last
thing I would want to do. It may have
been the last thing she wanted to do.
The President, in his thinking, believes he is above and beyond the law,
whether it is international law or
whether it is domestic law. That is his
thinking.
I come back to where I was when I
said the Senate is doing the right
thing, and they are. I said the House
should do the right thing, and we can.
The President fears what the House
can do. He fears it because he knows
that this is where an indictment can
take place, right here in this House. He
knows it. He knows that that indictment can be very harmful to him, very
harmful to him.
He is afraid of what the House can
do. He has as much as said it without
using those explicit words. He said it.
He has said it. He said that they will
find some reason to impeach him, find
some reason.
Mr. President, it is easy to find the
reasons because you have given them
to us. Venezuela is a reason. We don’t
have to look very far or very hard to
find a reason. It is right before our
eyes. The reasons are there. It is not
about whether we can find the reasons.
The question is whether we can find
the will. It is the will. Do we have the
willpower to do what should be done?
I am talking about bipartisan effort.
It should be bipartisan. But if it can’t
be bipartisan, that doesn’t mean we
shouldn’t try to stop this reckless,
ruthless President.
If the Senate can go forward knowing
the rules and how things are likely to
play out, if we can pass legislation here
just yesterday that I supported going
over to the Senate—there is a good
likelihood that their behavior is not
going to be acceptable to me. If we can
do this, we can also do the same thing
with the one thing that can stop a
reckless, ruthless, outlaw President,
the one thing. That one thing, my
friends, is what the President fears
most. He fears even having votes on it
take place.
There are people who will say: ‘‘Well,
if you can’t pass it, why vote on it?’’
Because the American people need to
know that there are some people who
see the wrong and who are willing to
take a stand against the wrong. They
see the injustice, and they are willing
to take a stand against the injustice,
even when that stand may not result in
what is the desired end. A noble end, a
noble cause, ought not be avoided simply because you can’t bring it to fruition today. It ought not be.
Yes, this thing that we can do is almost sacred. Yes, it requires consider-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H609

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

able thought. Yes, it is something that
we should do when we have the evidence. Well, friends, I guess the evidence is comparable to the evidence
that we had on January 6 when we saw
it before our very eyes. After all, this
is an indictment here. The trial will
take place in the Senate.
There is this one thing that he fears,
and he is very much concerned about it
and what we will do.
I can’t speak for anybody else. I don’t
speak for any of my colleagues who are
in Congress. I don’t speak for anybody
outside of Congress. I speak for one
person, so do not now say that the
Democrats are doing something. Just
say AL GREEN. Tell the truth.
On some issues, I believe that it is
better to stand alone than not stand at
all, so I am going to take a stand. I am
going to agree with what the Senate
has said. By the way, I would invite
you to read all of it because there is
much more to it than what I read to
you.
I agree with what the Senate has said
when they said that Congress has the
power to declare war. They go on to
say Congress has not yet declared war.
You had no right, under the Constitution, to do what you did, but you do
have the right to do it if the standard
is your mind and your morality.
We should not assume that this applies only to international affairs. It
applies to domestic affairs as well. I
am going to do what the Senate has
done, as best as I can, but it will just
be me. It is not the Democratic Party.
I believe that these are votes of conscience. Let your conscience be your
guide, Members. Don’t follow my lead,
Members. Don’t do it because I am
doing it. I don’t think that there are
very many who would. Do it because
you believe. If you don’t believe, do not
do it.
I am not asking anybody to vote for
it when I bring it to the attention of
Congress. I am not asking you to.
Don’t vote for it if your convictions
don’t command that you do so. Do
what you think is right.
The Senate has done what they believe to be correct, and I assure you—
without question, I assure you of this—
I will bring Articles of Impeachment
against the President of the United
States of America for taking our military to war against Venezuela, for
doing it based upon some theory that
in and of itself does not align with the
Constitution, some theory that if you
have an indictment, you can now send
in the police or the Justice Department
and various officers associated, you can
send them in to do something—in this
case, to seize the President of a country—and use the military to back them
up.
I marvel at how people will say:
‘‘Well, they did it in Panama. If we did
it in Panama, we can do it here.’’ God,
the list is endless of things that have
been done that were wrong that at
some point we had to stop. It was
wrong to bring folks to this country in

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

chains. They thought it was lawful at
the time, I suppose, in their minds, but
we stopped it.
Regardless as to what has happened
prior to this second in time, I say to
you the Constitution still rules. The
Constitution is above indictments. The
Constitution is above the things that
are in the mind of a President that he
believes would give him the authority
to do these things. It is the Constitution that counts.
If you are going to have a Constitution, you have to make it count. It
doesn’t count because the words are on
paper. It is how we react and behave in
response to the words that are on
paper. It is the Constitution that
counts.
An indictment is no constitutional
reason to send the military, to send a
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, to
send planes in large numbers, or to
send other military paraphernalia. Indictments don’t accord you that, Mr.
President.
b 1140
The only way we can stop this is with
impeachment because that is the only
thing. Why is it impeachment? Because, friends, it would say to the next
Donald John Trump we will not tolerate unconstitutional means that are
justified. You can’t decide that you are
going to use some sort of means-justifies-the-ends theory to go to war. He
needs to be impeached. He needs to be
convicted, and he needs to be removed
from office; impeached, convicted, and
removed.
However, if we can’t do it now, that
doesn’t mean that the process can’t
start now. If we can’t do it now or
sometime in the near future, it doesn’t
mean that we should not let the American people know that we know that
what has been done is wrong. We
should protect the Constitution, not
allow this to happen. The only way we
can do it—while I believe that this is
good and I support it, S.J. Res. 90. I
support it. I believe it is good; but the
real remedy, the remedy that can make
the difference is to impeach, convict,
and remove Donald John Trump from
the Presidency.
Friends, this is where I stand. I don’t
do these things to make friends. I do
them because I care about my country.
I do it because I believe it when I salute the flag in liberty and justice for
all. I do it because I believe in government of the people, by the people, for
the people, and that includes the people who have the authority to enforce
the Constitution. We are the people.
We are the ‘‘we’’ in we the people. I believe we have to do whatever we can
when we can, and this is something I
can do, and I will do.
By the way, those who say: Well, you
are just taking up time. We take up
more time in between votes than it
takes to vote on Articles of Impeachment. We took up more time just recently in between votes than it takes
to vote on Articles of Impeachment. It

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.030

H09JAPT1

H610

doesn’t take up the time that prevents
us from doing other things.
All of these things that people will
say now in terms of why we can’t do it,
when we get the opportunity to by
their standards, they will push all of
these things aside and move forward.
Well, I will be there with you. I am not
asking you to be here with me, but I
will be there with you. I will be there
because it is the country, it is the Constitution, and it is the Republic that
we must protect.
I promise you, friends, I will not be
deterred. There is no need, not that
anybody would, but there is no need to
try and dissuade me. What happened in
Venezuela was an act of war. The
President doesn’t have the authority to
do that without consulting with the
Congress. The Congress may very well
conclude that you shouldn’t do it.
Maybe the Congress doesn’t want to
take over Venezuela. Maybe the Congress doesn’t want to do this to provide
the oil companies with greater revenues. Maybe the Congress has a different point of view. Your point of view
is but one. The Congress has the right
to have its point of view recognized as
well. I must—others can do what they
may. I must take this stand. I will take
this stand.
This President will face Articles of
Impeachment for his declaration of war
based on his moral standards and his
mind, based upon what he thinks he
can do without congressional input. I
will take a stand. I will bring the Articles of Impeachment.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MESSMER). Members are reminded to
refrain from engaging in personalities
towards the President and direct their
comments to the Chair.
f

RECOGNIZING ALACHUA COUNTY
FIRE RESCUE CHIEF HAROLD
THEUS
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mrs. CAMMACK of
Florida was recognized for 60 minutes
as the designee of the majority leader.)

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL LEAVE

Mrs. CAMMACK. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days in which to
revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on this Special Order.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Florida?
There was no objection.
Mrs. CAMMACK. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize an exceptional public servant, a trusted leader and a dear
friend to myself and everyone around
him, Alachua County Fire Chief Harold
Theus.
Chief Theus was recently named
Florida’s Career Fire Chief of the Year,
an honor that truly reflects his lifetime commitment to service, leadership, and his community.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

For many years now, Chief Theus and
I have worked side by side on issues
that matter deeply to our Alachua
County community. Whether it is public safety, emergency preparedness,
disaster response, or ensuring that our
first responders have the tools, training, and support they need to do their
jobs safely and effectively, Harold is
there. Through hurricanes, wildfires,
medical emergencies, and moments of
unimaginable loss, Chief Theus has
been a steady and trusted presence,
quite literally the definition of a phone
call away.
Under his leadership, Alachua County Fire Rescue has set a standard for
excellence, emphasizing readiness, innovation, and above all, care for the
very people who wear the uniform
every single day. Chief Theus understands that a strong department is
built by investing in people, by mentoring young firefighters, prioritizing
safety, and fostering a culture where
every team member knows that they
matter.
That kind of leadership doesn’t happen by accident. It comes from lived
experience, from showing up day after
day, and from the understanding of the
weight of responsibility that comes
with the badge.
I also want to speak personally for a
moment. As the wife of a first responder, I know the quiet sacrifices
that families, particularly fire families, make, the missed holidays, the
overtime shifts, the late-night calls,
the constant awareness that danger is
just always part of the job. Leaders
like Chief Theus don’t just protect
communities, they look out for our fire
families too. Chief Theus understands
that behind every firefighter there is a
family praying for his safe return.
Mr. Speaker, Florida’s Career Fire
Chief of the Year is simply not an
award for operational excellence. It is
a recognition of character. It honors
someone who embodies integrity, resilience, and service above self. With
Florida being the third most populous
State in the Union, that is one heck of
an achievement.
For the people of Alachua County,
Chief Theus is more than just the fire
chief. He is a leader in a time of crisis,
a team builder, and man who has
earned the trust of the community
that he serves.
For me, he is a friend, someone
whose counsel I value, whose commitment I admire, and whose example reminds us all of what public service is
meant to be.
Today, I ask my colleagues to join
me in congratulating Fire Chief Harold
Theus on a well-earned recognition and
thank him for his service.
On behalf of the families that he protects, the firefighters that he leads,
and the community that is safer because of his service, I thank Chief
Theus. May his example continue to inspire the next generation of first responders.

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

b 1150
HONORING LIFE AND LEGACY OF MARY SUE RICH

Mrs. CAMMACK. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life and legacy of a
remarkable public servant, trailblazer,
and beloved member of our Ocala community, former Ocala councilmember
Mary Sue Rich.
At the end of last year, at the age of
85, Mary Sue Rich passed away. Ms.
Mary left behind a legacy that helped
shape the city of Ocala for generations.
She was a woman of courage and conviction, and her life reminds us that
progress is often driven not by loud
moments but by steady, faithful service over time.
In 1995, Mary Sue Rich made history
when she became Ocala’s first Black
councilmember. At a time when representation
mattered
deeply
and
change did not come easily, she stepped
forward with grace and determination.
She was ready to serve her community,
but more importantly, she opened
doors.
Mary Sue Rich remained on the
Ocala City Council until 2019, becoming
the longest serving councilmember in
the city’s history. Her longevity was
not just a matter of years but a testament to the trust that her community
placed in her and the respect that she
had earned through her leadership.
Ms. Mary was a mentor, a role model,
and a living example of what it means
to lead with integrity. She believed
that progress comes when we bring
people together, not when we divide
them. Her leadership style was always
rooted in listening, collaboration, and,
of course, with a deep love for the city
that she called home.
Her impact is not measured in titles
alone, but it is reflected in the
strengthened institutions that she
helped guide, the voices that she elevated, and the countless residents
whose lives were improved because she
cared enough to serve.
I remember meeting her for the first
time many years ago. I was a young,
freshly elected Congresswoman, and
she was just so gracious and kind. I recall thinking to myself how remarkable she was, someone whose tiny
shoulders—she is not that tall—had
been so small, but she carried so much.
She was a force, a tiny titan, if you
will.
That meeting that we had was actually a groundbreaking for a building
that today bears her name. The dirt
that we dug that day still sits on my
desk.
As we extend our sincere condolences
to her family, her friends, and the entire Ocala community, we mourn her
passing, but we choose to use this as a
moment to celebrate a life well lived
and a legacy that will endure long after
this moment.
Mr. Speaker, Mary Sue Rich’s story
reminds us why public service matters,
and I ask my colleagues to join me in
remembering and honoring the extraordinary life of Ms. Mary Sue Rich.

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.032

H09JAPT1

January 9, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

REMEMBERING LIFE AND SERVICE OF JAMES
BENNETT

Mrs. CAMMACK. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today with a heavy heart to remember
the life and service of James Bennett, a
devoted public servant from Baker
County, Florida, whose life was tragically cut short. His sudden loss is a
painful reminder for how fragile life
can be and how deeply one’s individual
service can touch the lives of so many.
James Bennett was first elected as a
Baker County commissioner in 2014,
and he approached that responsibility
with seriousness, humility, and an unwavering commitment to the people
that he served.
He understood that local government
is where public service is most personal. It is where decisions affect families, neighborhoods, and livelihoods
very directly.
As a commissioner, he worked diligently to represent the interests of
Baker County, always striving to do
what he believed was right for his
neighbors.
In addition to his service in Baker
County, James was also the chief operating officer for JAXPORT. In that
role he played a key part in supporting
one of Florida’s most vital economic
assets. The port of Jacksonville is not
only a driver of commerce and trade
but a source of countless jobs, thousands of jobs, and the support system
for families all across northeast Florida.
James understood the importance of
that mission and brought his skills and
leadership to bear in service of our
State’s economic future, and he always
did it with a smile.
In fact, I will never forget on my last
trip to JAXPORT, James put on a good
smile, one that he probably would have
busted into laughter if he could have,
as I drove one of the cranes in a dress.
For those that know about those
cranes in our Nation’s ports, they are
very tall, and they tend to have some
interesting components. He was a great
sport showing me all of the latest
things that they were doing at
JAXPORT.
Beyond titles and positions, James
will be remembered most for his character. He was somebody who believed
deeply in public service, and he respected his fellow elected officials.
More importantly, he listened to his
constituents, the people who had elected him. He was always working to try
to find a solution or an opportunity
that would make Baker County stronger.
His passing is felt deeply by his family, his friends, his colleagues, and, of
course, Baker County. They have lost a
leader, a neighbor, a friend, someone
who cared deeply about a place that we
call home.
To his loved ones, I extend my deepest condolences and prayers for them
during this very difficult time. No
words will ever do justice for their pain
and loss, but I hope they find comfort
in knowing that James’ life and his

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H611

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

service truly mattered, and that his
contributions will not be forgotten.
Mr. Speaker, today we pause to remember James Bennett not only for
how he died but for how he lived: dedicated to service and dedicated to his
community. His legacy is reflected in
the work that he did and the people he
served. May we honor his memory by
continuing to serve with the same integrity, humility, and dedication that
James demonstrated throughout his
life and his career.
HONORING LIFE AND LEGACY OF FLOYD ‘‘SONNY’’
TILLMAN

Mrs. CAMMACK. Mr. Speaker, today
I rise to honor the life and legacy of
Floyd Tillman, or as most of us know
him, ‘‘Sonny.’’
Sonny Tillman, a Gainesville native,
a visionary entrepreneur, and a man
who knew his barbecue was a deeply
beloved member of our Florida community whose impact will be felt for generations to come. You can’t drive
through south Georgia or north Florida
without driving past Sonny’s BBQ.
In 1968, Sonny Tillman opened a
small family-owned barbecue restaurant on Waldo Road in Gainesville,
Florida. In fact, it is still there today.
What began as a humble neighborhood
gathering place where you have picnic
benches became something that was
greater than just a menu. It became
something where people gathered and
talked about values. It was a place
where people would share not just a
good meal but a great meal.
Sonny believed in good food made the
right way. He believed in hard work,
and he believed in treating customers
like family. Those simple but powerful
principles became the foundation of
what we now know as Sonny’s BBQ.
Just 9 years later, that single Gainesville restaurant grew into not just a
small franchise but a big franchise, and
today, Sonny’s BBQ is now recognized
nationwide for its signature barbecue,
southern hospitality, and commitment
to quality. Yet despite the company’s
growth and success, Sonny never lost
sight of what mattered most: community, family, kindness, and connection.
Sonny’s story is a powerful reminder
of the American Dream that with determination, integrity, grit, and heart,
one person can create something lasting that brings people together. Those
who knew him remember him not just
for his vision but for his warmth, his
generosity, his ability to make people
feel welcomed and valued. It became
more than a business. He created a
place where families gathered, where
momentous occasions took place,
friendships were formed, and memories
were made.
On behalf of Florida’s Third Congressional District, I want to extend my
deepest condolences to Sonny’s family,
to his friends, and all those that were
touched by his life. We are so grateful
for his contributions, more proud than
you can imagine to call him one of our
own, and committed to remembering
the example that he said.

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

May we honor Sonny’s memory by
carrying forward the values that he
lived by: hard work, generosity, grit,
and love for community and some good
barbecue.
b 1200
RECOGNIZING THE LIFE AND LEGACY OF BILL
QUINLAN, METEOROLOGIST

Mrs. CAMMACK. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize and honor the life
and legacy of former TV20 Chief Meteorologist Bill Quinlan.
Bill joined the TV20 family in 1996
and dedicated 27 years of service to the
north central Florida community. For
many families in our region, Bill was
more than just a weatherman. He was a
familiar face that became part of people’s childhoods, like my own husband’s. He grew up watching Bill every
single day.
Quite literally, generations of viewers have grown up watching Bill. They
trusted his forecast before school and
planned weekends around his predictions.
Beyond the forecast, Bill was a trusted voice and steady presence during
moments of uncertainty. In a region
and neighborhood like ours, which is
often impacted by severe storms, hurricanes, and extreme weather, meteorologists play a vital role in protecting lives and property. They are
educators, scientists, and public servants who help communities prepare, respond, and recover.
Bill was unique because he not only
embraced that responsibility with
great care, knowing that his work was
making a real difference for families
across north central Florida, but he
was committed to accuracy, warm professionalism, and friendly public service and mentorship.
Bill helped our neighborhoods stay
informed for nearly three decades.
When storms threatened, Bill’s steady
demeanor and calm smile brought reassurance and clarity to countless households.
Bill also understood that mentorship
was important. He took pride in explaining complex weather systems in
ways that were accessible and engaging, inspiring curiosity and understanding among viewers of all ages.
Many young people who watched him
on TV grew up knowing that Bill was a
trusted teacher and role model, and
some went on to pursue that interest in
science and meteorology because of
him. I know today my husband has a
weather app on his phone because of
Bill.
We honor Bill today not only for his
remarkable career but for his compassion and dedication to the people
around him. He took great pride in
educating viewers, and he inspired
many young people. His legacy will
continue across our community for
years to come, leaving a lasting impact
on his colleagues, viewers, the TV20
family, and friends alike.
HONORING THE LIFE AND SERVICE OF
CONGRESSMAN DOUG LAMALFA

Mrs. CAMMACK. Mr. Speaker, today,
I rise to honor the life and service of

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.034

H09JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H612

Doug LaMalfa. He was not just a Member of Congress, but, more importantly,
he was a farmer, a husband, a father,
and my friend. He was a man whose
character was shaped long before he
ever set foot in Washington.
Doug LaMalfa was about as salt of
the earth as you can get. For him,
farming was not just something he
talked about in speeches. It wasn’t a
paycheck. It was something that he
lived. For the last few days, I have
been looking back on our text exchanges and have watched and rewatched the videos that he sent me
from the tractor while he was harvesting rice and being a bit of a
goofball.
That was what was unique about
Doug. He understood the dignity of
hard work because he did it himself.
Long days, unpredictable seasons, and
quiet responsibility of caring for land
and providing for others formed the
foundation of who he was. That background grounded him. It gave him patience, perspective, and a deep respect
for the people who keep this country
fed and moving forward.
The same principles he embodied as a
farmer and steward of the land were in
the same sense of stewardship that
guided him here in public service. He
approached leadership the way a farmer approaches the land: thoughtfully,
practically, and with an eye toward the
future. He believed that you leave
things better than you found them, Mr.
Speaker, not just for today, but for the
next generation.
I truly believe that what set Doug
apart was his kindness. Every time I
saw him, I was greeted with a loud and
booming—if you knew Doug, Mr.
Speaker, then you know it was going
to be a booming voice: ‘‘Hey, KAT
CAMMACK.’’ He also made a point to say
my name right, and he put an emphasis
on the ‘‘mack’’ because he was always
flustered and frustrated when he would
hear other people say it and couldn’t
say my name right.
When he wasn’t doing that, he was
asking me about how Big Daddy
Garlits was doing, the drag racing
titan who calls my district home, or
how sweet baby Auggie, my newborn
daughter, was doing. He was always
teeing up some goofy story or taking a
funny selfie, and it was those same
goofy and wholesome selfies that have
dotted the photo album on my phone
for the last 5 years.
Mr. Speaker, those who knew him
best will tell you that his compassion
was quiet but genuine. He listened
more than he spoke, and he treated
people with respect, regardless of who
they were or where they came from.
Whether he was meeting with a constituent, helping a neighbor, or working alongside our colleagues, Doug
never forgot that public service was
about people, not politics.
When the news broke about his passing, a constituent of his wrote a note
to me, sharing a story of how she had
just lost her husband and was in shock.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

She had ordered a flag to be flown over
the Capitol in honor of the birthday of
a friend who had been with her through
the loss of her husband, but due to a
mixup, her flag had never arrived. She
said she had ‘‘given up on it.’’
Fast forward to a Sunday morning.
She answered a knock at her door. She
was in her PJs and a hoodie, and she
found Doug LaMalfa standing there,
flag in hand. He explained it had been
returned to his office due to a mixup in
the mail, but he knew that she would
want it. She was so impressed that not
only did he get her the flag, but that he
delivered it personally and on a weekend.
What Congressman does that?
While it seems like the exception
today, things like that were more of a
rule for Doug. His kindness wasn’t
performative. It showed up in small
moments like taking the time to return a phone call or show up on a Sunday to deliver a flag, checking in on
families during hard times and seasons,
or just standing up for communities
that often feel unseen or unheard.
Doug LaMalfa carried the values of
rural America into the Halls of Congress: faith, hard work, generosity, and
resilience. He never lost sight of who
he was or where he came from, and because of that, he never lost sight of
whom he served.
Today, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully
every day, we remember a farmer who
answered the call to serve his country,
a public servant who led with integrity, and a man whose legacy will live
on in the lives he touched. May we
honor him by carrying forward those
same values of caring deeply, working
hard, and treating one another with
the kindness that he so naturally gave,
because Doug would want it that way.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

EXAMINING FRAUD IN
CALIFORNIA
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. KILEY of
California was recognized for 30 minutes.)
Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment this morning to examine the biggest fraud scandal in the history of California and
probably in the history of the United
States, and that was the fraud in unemployment benefits that occurred in
California during the COVID years,
amounting to a minimum of $32 billion—$32 billion.
It is easy to kind of throw these
numbers around and lose sight of what
they really mean, so just to put that in
perspective, that was one-half of the
education budget in California at the
time, and it is more than the entire
State budget of the vast majority of
States in the country.
b 1210
Now, the reason that this scandal
bears scrutiny right now is threefold.

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

First, a State audit just found 2 weeks
ago that this unemployment fraud in
California is ongoing to this day continuing to cost taxpayers billions of
dollars.
Second, the Senate still has not
passed a bill that we passed in the
House to hold some of these fraudsters
accountable by extending the statute
of limitations.
Third, the Newsom administration,
perhaps sensing the political peril following the events in Minnesota, has
come out and absurdly tried to deny responsibility for this scheme, for this
scandal, and even more absurdly tried
to blame the Federal Government for
it.
I want to go through exactly what
happened because I believe it is important to show why taxpayers were so
thoroughly defrauded and to assure
that this does not continue to happen
going forward.
The reality is that the fraud that occurred in California took place despite
the repeated warnings of the Federal
Government, and it was uncovered not
by State officials but, rather, by local
prosecutors.
On November 23, 2020, a group of nine
county prosecutors disclosed what they
called the most serious significant
fraud of taxpayer funds in California
history. Now, at the time, they said
they could only prove $1 billion. So $1
billion was already the biggest fraud of
taxpayer dollars in California history.
Now we know that it was at the very
least $32 billion.
Contrary to what the Newsom administration is trying to say now, at the
time, the district attorney of Sacramento County, Anne Marie Schubert,
said: ‘‘We have asked and implored the
Governor to turn the spigot off.’’ She
said the Governor’s Employment Development Department was not doing
commonsense things, like cross-checking claims with prison rolls, something
that the vast majority of other States
were doing and that the Federal Government had advised.
She said this made the scheme ‘‘relatively easy.’’ She called the Governor’s response slow and nonexistent.
She advised Governor Newsom to ‘‘look
to other States for solutions.’’
The district attorney of Fresno County, Lisa Smittcamp, said: ‘‘(Newsom)
did nothing until the elected district
attorneys brought it to the media.’’
She added that she did not think the
State has a handle on it. Those were
comments made back in November of
2020.
The following January, the State
auditor came out with a report that
laid forward in very precise detail exactly how significant the failures of
the Newsom administration were, specifically with their unemployment office, known as the EDD.
A heading in that audit said: ‘‘Significant Weaknesses in EDD’s Approach to Fraud Prevention Have Led

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.036

H09JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 9, 2026

to Billions of Dollars in Improper Benefit Payments.’’ Among the key findings: Despite repeated warnings, despite repeated warnings, EDD did not
bolster its fraud detection efforts until
months into the pandemic, and it suspended a critical safeguard.
The audit goes on to list examples of
where suspicious addresses were simply
ignored in the claims process. In one
case, more than 1,700 claims came from
a single address. From one address 1,700
claims, and yet the checks were issued.
One of the problems, as mentioned, is
there was no crossmatch system to
crossmatch the claims against the prison rolls, so you actually had checks
that were being sent to State penitentiaries, the State prisons.
Here is a timeline of the aforementioned warnings that actually came
from the Federal Government. Now,
this is significant, again, because the
Newsom administration is now claiming somehow that it was California
that warned the Federal Government
when, in fact, it was exactly the opposite. Other States followed these warnings, but California didn’t.
In April of 2020, the United States
Department of Labor sent instructions
for implementing the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program and told
States to take reasonable steps to
deter and detect fraud, including audits.
The following month, in May of 2020,
there was a second notice from the U.S.
Department of Labor, warning the
States to maintain the integrity of the
unemployment program.
Later that month, in May, the U.S.
Department of Labor requested data
from California, and the Office of the
Inspector General warned California
that the State was likely to see at
least a billion dollars in fraud based on
new claims for March and April.
During this time, the Newsom administration’s EDD office had exactly two
staff members who were responsible for
reviewing suspicious claims.
Newsom’s EDD also allowed the
backdating of claims until September
of that year, so if you were a fraudster,
you could simply claim that you had
worked a certain number of weeks, previous weeks that had already passed,
and there was no verification needed at
all.
The problem of suspicious addresses
got even worse. The audit reports there
were 26,000 addresses listed as suspicious, with more than 500,000 associated claims.
The audit concludes: Our review illustrates that EDD continues to pay
claims despite having evidence that
they are very likely fraudulent. Again,
this is a finding. This is a talking
point. This is not from the Governor’s
political adversaries or from people on
social media, this is a report from the
nonpartisan California State auditor in
January of 2021 saying: ‘‘Our review illustrates that EDD continues to pay
claims despite having evidence that
they are very likely fraudulent.’’

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H613

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

The audit continues: Between March
of 2020 and early January of 2021, more
than 2.2 million claimants did not satisfactorily answer requests that they
provide identity verification. In fact,
there was another problem that then
emerged from this that people became
victims of identity theft, and then they
ran into issues like they had to pay
taxes on wages they hadn’t actually received.
As mentioned, the audit also notes
that ‘‘EDD was unprepared to detect
and handle the hundreds of millions of
dollars in fraudulent claims associated
with incarcerated individuals.’’ I mean,
how crazy is that? That you had claims
coming in from State prisons, and
those claims let out hundreds of millions of dollars.
As the auditor says: ‘‘As we describe
throughout this report, EDD’s approach to fraud prevention and detection demonstrates the weaknesses
caused by its poor planning and program management.’’
Local media reports at the time substantiated all of these claims, including in publications like The Sacramento Bee and the Los Angeles
Times.
What is even worse is that the criminals who are purloining our State
Treasury of these taxpayer funds in
many cases were using those dollars—I
mean, what do you think they are
using them for? We talk about waste,
as in this money is just squandered,
but it is actually much worse than that
because the criminals who get these
funds, they are not then giving them to
charity. They are using them for further criminal activities.
One example from The Sacramento
Bee is about how these funds were used
to buy guns illegally. For example, a
report from The Bee reported that multiple fraudulent EDD cards were discovered along with firearms in the
hands of convicted felons, results that
law enforcement officials say leads
them to one conclusion: Criminals are
using funds from the growing EDD
fraud scandal to buy weapons. Mind
you, this was at a time when violent
crime rates were soaring in California
and far outpaced the rest of the country.
Just to give you a couple examples,
the Torrance police found that more
than two dozen people had been arrested in the fall of 2020 for alleged unemployment benefits fraud and identity theft. The 27 suspects used stolen
identities to obtain over 130 EDD cards.
When they recovered these, the authorities also found $150,000 and four
handguns, including two without serial
numbers.
The Glendale police, in early 2021, arrested a man who was in possession of
a so-called ghost gun, along with ammunition, drugs, several fraudulent
EDD cards, and other illicit items.
To summarize, you had the largest
fraud of taxpayer dollars, likely in the
history of the United States. The nonpartisan State auditor in California,

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

along with nonpartisan prosecutors
from throughout California, clearly
identified the negligence of the
Newsom administration as enabling
this fraud to occur which far outpaced
anything that occurred anywhere else
in the country.
b 1220
You then had the criminal syndicates
and other criminals, more run-of-themill criminals, who obtained these
funds and used them to spawn further
criminal activity that victimized even
more Californians.
Now, 5 years later, the fraud continues. The administration still hasn’t
learned its lesson. The same State
auditor just found that EDD remains
one of eight high-risk agencies in California, a number that has doubled during the Newsom administration, finding that the EDD continues to allow
millions in fraud, alongside millions
that are being lost in fraud in connection with SNAP benefits, with improper Medi-Cal determinations, not to
mention community college fraud and
fraud basically everywhere you look
throughout the California government.
Now you have the Governor insisting
that no, none of this was his fault.
California did nothing wrong. He has
even made up bogus numbers like he
somehow prevented $125 million in
fraud.
The concern is this: If the Governor
and his administration are unwilling to
admit any responsibility whatsoever
despite the clearly established evidence
of their responsibility, how can we expect this problem to ever be fixed?
I will tell you. I am working in a bipartisan way here in Congress to bring
accountability for the vast fraud that
continues to take place in California so
that our taxpayers do not have to see
their hard-earned money going to
criminals and can finally start getting
a reasonable return on their investment in our State government.
CALIFORNIA LEADS NATION IN OUTBOUND UHAUL RENTALS

Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, U-Haul has just released its annual
growth index for all 50 States, which is
a measure of U-Hauls coming in versus
going out. In other words, which States
are people moving out of and which
States are people moving into.
For the sixth straight year, 6 years
running, California is ranked 50th. In
other words, we rank first when it
comes to people leaving the State. This
is truly an astonishing fact. The greatest State in the country, the most
beautiful State in the country, has become the most popular State to leave.
This is reflected in the fact that California lost a Member of Congress in the
2020 reapportionment and we are projected to lose four or five in the 2030 reapportionment.
Indeed, for 170 years of California history, our State’s population grew each
and every year. It was only during the
administration of the current Governor
that that trend reversed itself and the
State continues to lose people.

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.038

H09JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H614

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

It is a very sad thing when you look
at the boundless potential of our State,
the unmatched beauty, the incredible
people and companies and culture. We
have everything. Yet for too many
Californians, it has become too difficult to get by in California or it is the
crime or it is the homelessness. It is
the inability to buy a house. It is the
price of gas or electricity or water. It
is the fact that our State leads the Nation in unemployment, in homelessness, in poverty, in illiteracy. These
are all politically created problems.
The good news is there is a coalition
for common sense emerging in California, and we have started to see
progress in circumventing our State’s
political class and bringing real
change. For example, we passed a
measure in 2024, the voters did, to restore some consequences for criminal
activity. It passed with almost 70 percent of the vote, despite the Governor
and the State legislature’s leaders opposing the measure every step of the
way.
We won a decision at the Supreme
Court that has restored the ability of
our communities to clear homeless encampments and ensure people get into
shelters and don’t wither on our
streets. As a result, we are starting to
see some modest improvements in
crime and homelessness in California,
but unfortunately, we still have a long
way to go in order to make sure that
next year California does not, once
again, for a seventh straight year lead
the Nation in outbound U-Haul rentals.

country in California, so it really
doesn’t help that now the State is
causing even more job creators to leave
the State. But what is especially
threatening about this is that our
State’s tax structure is essentially a
house of cards. Even the Governor acknowledged in his state of the State
yesterday that we have a system that
is incredibly volatile, where the top 1
percent of earners account for 50 percent of the tax revenue.
If you have this wealth tax that is
suddenly going to cause the highest
earners not to want to have anything
to do with California, the State’s finances will collapse. The entire house
of cards will come tumbling down.
This is not to mention the myriad
constitutional problems with this proposal, not the least of which is the idea
that they are going to try to apply it
to former residents.
It also isn’t to mention the problems
of administrability, which is why if
you look to other countries that have
tried to impose some form of a wealth
tax, they have quickly rescinded the
policy because it turned out to be a disaster.
I will be fighting against this latest,
misguided, insane proposal in every
way that I can and that includes using
the legislative authority that we have
here in Congress under clauses such as
the Commerce Clause to prevent a renegade proposal like this from, at the
very least, ensnaring taxpayers who
have already gone to other States.

WEALTH TAX IN CALIFORNIA

b 1230
Mr. Speaker, California has for too
long gone down the road of overtaxing
its citizens, overregulating its businesses, and overburdening its citizens.
This would simply be a bridge too far.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.

Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, there is currently a proposed ballot
measure in my State of California to
impose the Nation’s first-ever wealth
tax. In response to this proposal, you
are already seeing an exodus from California because, while the measure
won’t be presented until November and
won’t take effect until next year, the
language of it ensnares anyone who
was a resident of California until January 1 of this year. It would actually try
to apply itself to former residents.
Now, California already has the highest income tax of any State in the
country, the highest gas tax, the highest overall tax burden. However, a
wealth tax is something unique because a wealth tax is not merely the
taxation of earned income, it is the
confiscation of assets.
They are saying it is just for billionaires. Of course, it starts with billionaires and then they continue to lower
the threshold, ensnaring more and
more people. Even for billionaires, presenting a 5 percent tax on all of your
assets is problematic because, number
one, it requires actually having liquid
assets amounting to 5 percent of one’s
net worth, but number two, what you
are already seeing happen is entrepreneurs and job creators are simply
leaving the State to avoid this unique
penalty.
Now, we already have the highest unemployment rate of any State in the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

f

ENROLLED BILL SIGNED
Kevin F. McCumber, Clerk of the
House, reported and found truly enrolled a bill of the House of the following title, which was thereupon
signed by the Speaker:
H.R. 224. An act to amend section 102(a)(20)
of the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974 to require the exclusion of service-connected disability compensation when
determining whether a person is a person of
low and moderate income, a person of low income, or a person of moderate income, and
for other purposes.
f

ADJOURNMENT
Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do now adjourn.
The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 12 o’clock and 30 minutes
p.m.), under its previous order, the
House adjourned until Monday, January 12, 2026, at noon for morning-hour
debate.

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS,
ETC.
Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive
communications were taken from the
Speaker’s table and referred as follows:
EC–2618. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Safety
Zone; Fireworks Display, Lower Mississippi
River, Natchez, MS [Docket Number: USCG2025-1062] (RIN: 1625-AA00) received January
7, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2619. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Safety
Zone; Sandusky Bay, Sandusky, OH [Docket
Number: USCG-2025-1039] (RIN: 1625-AA00) received January 7, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2620. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Safety
Zone; La Quinta Channel, Ingleside, TX
[Docket Number: USCG-2025-1123] (RIN: 1625AA00) received January 7, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2621. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Safety
Zone; Fireworks Display, Ohio River Mile
Marker 73 to 74, Wellsburg, WV [Docket
Number: USCG-2025-1099] (RIN: 1625-AA00) received January 7, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2622. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Safety
Zone; West of Cyril E. King Airport, St.
Thomas, VI [Docket Number: USCG-20251110] (RIN: 1625-AA00) received January 7,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2623. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Security Zone; Coast
Guard Base San Juan, San Juan Harbor,
Puerto Rico [Docket Number: USCG-20250366] (RIN: 1625-AA87) received January 7,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2624. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Safety
Zone; Port of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA
[Docket Number: USCG-2025-1066] (RIN: 1625AA00) received January 7, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2625. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Safety
Zone; Patapsco River, Baltimore, MD [Docket Number: USCG-2025-1045] (RIN: 1625-AA00)
received January 7, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.

E:\CR\FM\K09JA7.040

H09JAPT1

January 9, 2026

801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2626. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Fixed and
Moving Safety Zone; Vicinity of the M/V
SAMPOGRACHT; Houston Ship Channel and
Seabrook, TX [Docket Number: USCG-20251052] (RIN: 1625-AA00) received January 7,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2627. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Safety
Zone; Santa Barbara Harbor, Santa Barbara,
CA [Docket Number: USCG-2025-0997] (RIN:
1625-AA00) received January 7, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2628. A letter from the Administrative
Assistant, U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s temporary final rule — Safety
Zone; Detroit River, Detroit, MI [Docket
Number: USCG-2025-1042] (RIN: 1625-AA00) received January 7, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following
titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:
By Mr. STANTON (for himself, Mr.
FITZPATRICK, Mr. LICCARDO, and Mr.
GOODEN):
H.R. 6992. A bill to establish in U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services of the Department of Homeland Security an EB-5 Regional Center Program Advisory Committee;
to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. BERGMAN (for himself, Ms.
ELFRETH, Ms. KING-HINDS, Mr. DAVIS
of North Carolina, Mr. VAN ORDEN,
and Mr. LUTTRELL):
H.R. 6993. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs to carry out programs to
award grants to eligible entities to conduct
research with respect to treatments for traumatic brain injury prospective randomized
control trials for neurorehabilitation treatments, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. DUNN of Florida:
H.R. 6994. A bill to amend the Controlled
Substances Act to modify requirements relating to the prescription of controlled substances by means of the Internet, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on the Judiciary, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. EZELL (for himself, Mr. KELLY
of Mississippi, Mr. GUEST, and Mr.
THOMPSON of Mississippi):
H.R. 6995. A bill to designate the facility of
the United States Postal Service located at
825 Highway 198 in Beaumont, Mississippi, as
the ‘‘Jeremy Malone Post Office’’; to the
Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform.
By Mr. FINE:
H.R. 6996. A bill to facilitate the export of
United States artificial intelligence systems,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

H615

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

computing hardware, and standards globally;
to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania (for
himself, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania,
Mr. FITZPATRICK, Ms. HOULAHAN, Mr.
SMUCKER, Mr. BRESNAHAN, and Ms.
SCANLON):
H.R. 6997. A bill to amend the Passport Act
of June 4, 1920 to authorize certain public libraries to collect and retain a fee for the execution of a passport application; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Ms. LEE OF FLORIDA (for herself and
Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ):
H.R. 6998. A bill to enhance hiring authorities at the Department of Homeland Security, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MILLER of Ohio (for himself
and Mr. SUOZZI):
H.R. 6999. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to repeal the limitation on
deductions for personal casualty losses and
to provide for increased taxpayer relief with
respect to theft losses involving fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation; to the Committee
on Ways and Means.
By Mr. MOORE of Alabama (for himself, Ms. FEDORCHAK, Mr. RULLI, Mr.
HURD of Colorado, and Mr. ROSE):
H.R. 7000. A bill to amend the Clean Air
Act to exclude a portable fuel container from
the definition of a consumer or commercial
product, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. PATRONIS:
H.R. 7001. A bill to amend title 10, United
States Code, to provide for an exception to
certain provisions of title 31, United States
Code, with respect to a flight demonstration
or training event of the United States Navy
Flight Demonstration Squadron near Pensacola, Florida, commonly referred to as the
‘‘Blue Angels’’; to the Committee on Armed
Services.
By Ms. SCHOLTEN (for herself, Mr.
MACKENZIE, Mr. GOLDMAN of New
York, Mr. THANEDAR, Mr. LANDSMAN,
Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI, Ms. NORTON,
and Ms. TITUS):
H.R. 7002. A bill to amend the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938 to provide for enhanced penalties for child labor violations;
to the Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Mr. SHREVE (for himself and Ms.
KAMLAGER-DOVE):
H.R. 7003. A bill to authorize the Under
Secretary of Commerce for Industry and Security to appoint certain personnel in order
to attract highly qualified experts, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Foreign
Affairs, and in addition to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform, for a period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. TORRES of New York (for himself, Ms. TITUS, Mr. LATIMER, Ms.
Mr.
SHERMAN,
Mr.
NORTON,
Mr.
MOULTON,
Ms.
THANEDAR,
MCBRIDE, Ms. ADAMS, Ms. BYNUM, Mr.
STANTON, Ms. PETTERSEN, Ms. SEWELL,
Mr.
FOSTER,
Mr.
SUBRAMANYAM, Ms. PELOSI, Mr.
CASTEN, Mr. GOLDMAN of New York,
Mr.
CARSON,
Mr.
Mr.
BELL,
Mr.
LEVIN,
Mr.
HORSFORD,
MCGARVEY, Mr. DELUZIO, Ms. MCDONALD RIVET, Mr. VARGAS, Mr. SOTO,
Mr. HERNÁNDEZ, Ms. TLAIB, Mr. RILEY
of New York, Mr. VINDMAN, Ms.
MENG, and Ms. MCCOLLUM):
H.R. 7004. A bill to prohibit a covered individual from engaging in covered transactions
involving prediction market contracts, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

Oversight and Government Reform, and in
addition to the Committee on House Administration, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN (for herself, Mr. TONKO, Mr. POCAN, Ms.
CROCKETT, Ms. NORTON, Mr. PETERS,
Ms. TLAIB, Mr. MULLIN, Mr. JOHNSON
Mr.
of
Georgia,
Mr.
CARSON,
THANEDAR, Mr. TAKANO, Ms. GARCIA
of Texas, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY, Ms.
JAYAPAL, and Mr. CARTER of Louisiana):
H.R. 7005. A bill to prohibit discrimination
in public accommodations on the basis of
sex, gender identity, and sexual orientation,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
the Judiciary.
By Mr. BIGGS of Arizona:
H.J. Res. 139. A joint resolution proposing
an amendment to the Constitution of the
United States requiring a balanced budget
for the Federal Government; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MOORE of North Carolina (for
himself, Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina,
Mr. MOORE of Alabama, Mr. KEAN,
Mr. EZELL, Mr. WIED, Mr. CARTER of
Georgia, Mr. WEBSTER of Florida, Mr.
SIMPSON, Mr. LANGWORTHY, Mr. HARRIGAN, Mr. NEHLS, Mr. SCHMIDT, Mr.
GROTHMAN, Ms. TENNEY, Mr. VAN
ORDEN, Mr. BERGMAN, Mr. RULLI, Mr.
KUSTOFF, Ms. SALAZAR, Mr. HILL of
Mr.
Arkansas,
Mr.
MCDOWELL,
FLEISCHMANN, Mr. OWENS, Mr. NORMAN, Mr. TAYLOR, Mr. HUDSON, Mr.
Mr.
BARR,
Mrs.
FITZPATRICK,
FISCHBACH, Mrs. KIM, Mr. SCOTT
FRANKLIN of Florida, Mr. BACON, Mrs.
KIGGANS of Virginia, Mr. FEENSTRA,
Ms. FEDORCHAK, Mr. FINSTAD, Mr.
THOMPSON of Pennsylvania, Mr. HURD
of Colorado, Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS, Mr.
ROGERS of Alabama, Mr. MOYLAN,
and Mr. MCGUIRE):
H. Res. 984. A resolution supporting the
recognition of January 9, 2026, as ‘‘National
Law Enforcement Appreciation Day’’; to the
Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. NADLER (for himself, Mr. CARSON, Mr. CLEAVER, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania, Ms. DEXTER, Ms. JAYAPAL,
of
Georgia,
Mr.
Mr.
JOHNSON
KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mr. LIEU, Ms. LOFGREN, Ms. NORTON, Mr. QUIGLEY, Ms.
RIVAS, Ms. SIMON, Mr. SOTO, Ms.
TITUS, Ms. TLAIB, and Mr. VINDMAN):
H. Res. 985. A resolution expressing opposition to the use of onychectomy, also known
as declawing, for elective surgery in cats; to
the Committee on Agriculture.
f

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers
granted to Congress in the Constitution to enact the accompanying bill or
joint resolution.
By Mr. STANTON:
H.R. 6992.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1
By Mr. BERGMAN:
H.R. 6993.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 of the United
States Constitution

E:\CR\FM\L09JA7.000

H09JAPT1

H616

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

By Mr. DUNN of Florida:
H.R. 6994.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
clause 3 of section 8 of article I of the Constitution
By Mr. EZELL:
H.R. 6995.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, clause 3 (Commerce
Clause)
By Mr. FINE:
H.R. 6996.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Commerce Clause, Article I, Section 8,
Clause 3
Necessary and Proper Clause, Article I,
Section 8, Clause 18.
By Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania:
H.R. 6997.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution, Commerce Clause
By Ms. LEE of Florida:
H.R. 6998.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. MILLER of Ohio:
H.R. 6999.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Congress may enact this legislation
persuant to Article I, Section 8, Chapter 1.
By Mr. MOORE of Alabama:
H.R. 7000.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section VIII
By Mr. PATRONIS:
H.R. 7001.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 13 of the U.S.
Constitution.
By Ms. SCHOLTEN:
H.R. 7002.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. SHREVE:
H.R. 7003.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mr. TORRES of New York:
H.R. 7004.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 9, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

00:46 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

Article 1, Section 8.
By Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN:
H.R. 7005.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18: [The Congress shall have Power . . .] To make all
Laws which shall be necessary and proper for
carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United
States, or in any Department or Officer
thereof.
By Mr. BIGGS of Arizona:
H.J. Res. 139.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Pursuant to clause 7(c)(1) of Rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives,
the sponsor states that the constitutional
authority for this joint resolution is section
1 of Article V of the Constitution.
f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H.R. 128: Mr. BEGICH.
H.R. 390: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 429: Mr. THOMPSOn of California.
H.R. 793: Mr. FIGURES.
H.R. 842: Mr. JOYCE of Ohio and Mr. TRAN.
H.R. 1061: Mrs. BEATTY.
H.R. 1151: Mr. WIED.
H.R. 1936: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM.
H.R. 2033: Ms. MACE.
H.R. 2598: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 2878: Ms. GILLEN.
H.R. 2925: Mr. STEUBE, Mr. HARIDOPOLOS,
and Mr. FINE.
H.R. 2937: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 3184: Mr. SMITH of New Jersey, Mr.
GARBARINO, and Mr. VARGAS.
H.R. 3214: Mr. SOTO.
H.R. 3562: Ms. MALLIOTAKIS and Mr.
GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 3564: Mr. MANNION.
H.R. 3699: Mr. PATRONIS.
H.R. 3757: Ms. RIVAS.
H.R. 3843: Mr. BARR.
H.R. 3884: Mr. MACKENZIE.
H.R. 3959: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 4093: Mr. FEENSTRa.
H.R. 4103: Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 4176: Mrs. BEATTY.
H.R. 4206: Mr. MACKENZIE.
H.R. 4398: Ms. MACE.
H.R. 4506: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 4642: Mr. WOMACK and Mr. CASE.
H.R. 4662: Mr. AGUILAR.

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4636

Sfmt 0634

H.R. 4860: Mr. LIEU.
H.R. 4962: Ms. PETTERSEN.
H.R. 5055: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5130: Mr. FLEISCHMANN.
H.R. 5438: Mr. PFLUGER, Mr. GOSAR, and
Mr. TURNER of Ohio.
H.R. 5461: Mr. FIGURES.
H.R. 5519: Mr. GARBARINO.
H.R. 5653: Ms. PINGREE.
H.R. 5664: Mr. CARTER of Louisiana.
H.R. 5835: Mr. LIEU.
H.R.
5973:
Mr.
SUBRAMANYAM,
Ms.
BUDZINSKI, and Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY.
H.R. 5993: Mr. ISSA.
H.R. 6100: Mr. AUCHINCLOSS and Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 6181: Ms. RIVAS.
H.R. 6280: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 6336: Mr. CRENSHAW and Mr. BARR.
H.R. 6546: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6551: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6552: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6566: Mr. WEBER of Texas.
H.R. 6570: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6609: Mr. BERGMAN and Mr. SESSIONS.
H.R. 6610: Mr. BERGMAN and Mr. SESSIONS.
H.R. 6633: Mr. CRENSHAW.
H.R. 6646: Mr. GOLDMAN of New York.
H.R. 6683: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 6719: Mr. SCHMIDT.
H.R. 6730: Mr. BISHOP and Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 6854: Mr. KNOTT and Mr. RULLI.
H.R. 6857: Mr. LAWLER and Mr. SCHNEIDER.
H.R. 6876: Mr. RULLI.
H.R. 6896: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 6975: Mr. FEENSTRA.
H.R. 6980: Mrs. FOUSHEE, Mr. DOGGETT, Ms.
NORTON, and Ms. ANSARI.
H.R. 6987: Mr. FRY.
H.R. 6989: Ms. JAYAPAL.
H. Con. Res. 68: Ms. MATSUI, Mr.
ESPAILLAT, Ms. ADAMS, Mr. GOLDMAN of New
York, Mr. CLEAVER, Ms. BROWNLEY, Mr.
BERA, Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Ms. BONAMICI,
Mr. STANTON, and Ms. MCCOLLUM.
H. Con. Res. 69: Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania
and Ms. CLARKE of New York.
H. Res. 168: Ms. LOFGREN.
H. Res. 925: Mr. FEENSTRA.
H. Res. 956: Mr. CASE.
f

DISCHARGE PETITIONS—
ADDITIONS AND WITHDRAWALS
The following Members added their
names to the following discharge petition:
Petition 11 by Mrs. LUNA on House Resolution 725: Mr. Quigley, Mr. Thompson of
California, and Mr. Foster.

E:\CR\FM\A09JA7.011

H09JAPT1

January 9, 2026

E19

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS
RECOGNIZING CUB SCOUT PACK 545
OF BROOMFIELD, COLORADO

HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN
OF COLORADO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Friday, January 9, 2026
Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to congratulate Cub Scout Pack 545 of
Broomfield on their 25th anniversary.
Pack 545 has helped shape the lives of
many young people in Broomfield through programming focused on leadership, community
engagement, and appreciation for the outdoors. Their co-ed pack is one of the largest
in the Denver Metropolitan Area, averaging 90
scouts every year, and has included an impressive 30 former members who have gone
on to achieve the prestigious rank of Eagle
Scout.
Whether visiting the police and fire departments in the Broomfield Community or designing model rockets and cars for their annual
Pinewood Derby competition, for 25 years,
Pack 545 has instilled both a love of play and
a sense of responsibility in its members.
On behalf of the people of Colorado’s 7th
Congressional District, it is my honor to congratulate Cub Scout Pack 545 for its remarkable 25 years of service in our community and
thank them for their work.
f

HONORING MICHAEL REAGAN

HON. JOE WILSON
OF SOUTH CAROLINA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

Friday, January 9, 2026
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr. Speaker, visionary radio talk show host Michael
Reagan was appropriately recognized in The
Washington Times on January 8, 2026, with a
deserved tribute by former Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker:
A great man was born into eternal life this
week. Michael Reagan passed away Sunday
surrounded by his family. Many people knew
him as the eldest son of former President
Ronald Reagan.
He was certainly proud of that distinction,
but we at Young America’s Foundation knew
him as so much more. He was a wonderful inspiration. That was particularly true when it
came to the students who heard him at
YAF’s programs at the Reagan Ranch.
Michael did so much more than share stories about his father. He challenged the next
generation to share the values he stood for
throughout his public life. He called on them
to be happy warriors in the battle to uphold
the founding principles of our republic.
I first got to know Michael Reagan years
ago by listening to his radio show while driving to and from the state Capitol in Madison,
Wisconsin. I enjoyed his insights on the news
of the day.
Years later, I got to know him personally
after becoming president of YAF. He was a
fixture at our student programs in California. Michael and his family frequently re-

turned to Rancho del Cielo for public and
private events. He and his daughter, Ashley,
also headlined the very first program YAF
hosted in Dixon, Illinois, after our acquisition of the Ronald Reagan Boyhood Home.
Unfortunately for all of us, the Good Lord
decided to call Michael home sooner. He and
I discussed his faith and devotion to Jesus.
That should give us all comfort during this
difficult time, as Michael is with the Lord.
One of my colleagues, Andrew Coffin, knew
Michael even better, as he began working at
the Reagan Ranch in October 1998. Today,
Mr. Coffin is the director of the ranch and a
YAF vice president. Here is part of his moving tribute to Michael: ‘With Ronald Reagan,
what you saw was what you got. There was
no facade. You perhaps get the most profound sense of that authenticity when you
visit Rancho del Cielo, President Reagan’s
beloved Santa Barbara ranch home. His
faith, humility, patriotism and work ethic—
all are on display in very personal and poignant ways at the ranch.
No perspective on Ronald Reagan, though,
has been more important than that of his son
Michael. Since the earliest days of this
project, Michael worked alongside Young
America’s Foundation to share his father’s
legacy and ideas with new generations.
Among many other YAF activities, Michael was typically the opening speaker at
each of our high school conferences at the
Reagan Ranch. He did a remarkable job setting the stage for the entire week—especially in laying the groundwork for the experience young people have when they walk in
Ronald Reagan’s footsteps at Rancho del
Cielo. Michael helped these future leaders
better understand how Ronald Reagan’s life
at the ranch connects to his character and
values.
We were at the ranch one day several years
ago for a film project when Michael looked
around the simple, 19th-century adobe his father called home and said, ‘‘Without this
place, the Berlin Wall still stands.’
Michael understood well the way the ranch
gave his father a respite from the pressures
of his office and the courage to face the challenges ahead. Staying grounded at the ranch
is part of what made Ronald Reagan a transformational leader.
That simple turn of phrase is a reminder
that Michael, as well as his father, was a
uniquely gifted communicator. He never
spoke with notes, explaining that the few
times he tried to work from a script, the
speeches were failures.
Instead, Michael was a storyteller. He
would often explain that his father spoke in
parables, and Michael did the same. Vignettes from Michael’s childhood helped illuminate his father’s character, his faith, his
love for his country—even his tax policy.
(Michael once asked for a raise to his allowance, something his father promised to do
. . . once a president was in office who would
cut his taxes.)
Students who heard Michael speak gravitated to that same sense of authenticity that
made his father such a successful leader. Few
who had the privilege of listening to his stories will soon forget Michael’s describing
Ronald Reagan’s long-held desire to say,
‘‘Nyet’’ to a Soviet leader, something he was
finally able to do with General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev in Reykjavik.
There were few dry eyes in the room as Michael described his elderly, Alzheimer’s rid-

den father standing in the doorway, waiting
with arms outstretched, because Michael had
forgotten to give him a hug goodbye.
What a wonderful tribute to a great man.
When I told a friend that Michael had
passed, she noted that when her granddaughter came back from a high school conference at the Reagan Ranch years ago, she
said that Michael Reagan had been her favorite speaker. That, along with his family—
wife Colleen, son Cameron, daughter Ashley
and grandchildren—will be Michael Reagan’s
greatest legacy.
f

RECOGNIZING MAJOR JUSTIN
SMITH

HON. JOHN GARAMENDI
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Friday, January 9, 2026
Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to express my deep appreciation for Major
Justin Smith of the United States Air Force,
who has served with distinction as a Department of Defense Legislative Fellow in my office since January 2025. Major Smith has
brought invaluable insight, expertise, and dedication that have greatly contributed to the success of our work.
His background and experience directly informed my efforts as Ranking Member of the
House Armed Services Subcommittee on
Readiness, where we addressed critical issues
related to the preparedness of our Nation’s
military forces. His professionalism, knowledge, and judgment consistently strengthened
our understanding of these complex challenges.
Whether preparing for hearings before the
House Armed Services Committee, drafting
legislative proposals, or conducting in-depth
research, Major Smith could always be relied
upon to deliver work of the highest caliber. He
authored key provisions that were ultimately
adopted into the National Defense Authorization Act, ensuring that priorities for California’s
8th Congressional District were reflected in the
final bill.
Throughout the year, Major Smith provided
thoughtful, well-researched perspectives that
proved invaluable in supporting the mission of
Travis Air Force Base and in advancing the
well-being of servicemembers, their families,
and the broader community. His commitment
to strengthening U.S. Cyber forces was particularly noteworthy and played an important
role in shaping my approach to these vital
issues.
Major Smith’s passion for service and dedication to his profession were evident in all that
he did. His exceptional performance has left a
lasting impact on my office, and both I and my
entire team will miss his presence. The United
States Air Force is fortunate to count him
among its ranks, and I am confident he will
continue to advance its mission with distinction.
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of
California’s 8th Congressional District and a

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 10, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

E:\CR\FM\A09JA8.001

E09JAPT1

E20

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

grateful Nation, I extend my deepest appreciation to Major Smith for his dedicated service
and wish him every success in his future endeavors.
f

COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE;
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
SPEECH OF

HON. BETTY McCOLLUM
OF MINNESOTA

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Ms. MCCOLLUM. Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the FY2026 Energy and Water Development Appropriations bill, division B of H.R.
6938. This bipartisan agreement protects funding for Democratic priorities, reasserts
Congress’s power of the purse, and rejects
Republicans’ poison pill riders.
Due to the perseverance of my colleagues,
Ranking Members DELAURO and KAPTUR, the
legislation before us today provides a critical
$2.4 billion increase over FY2025 to address
rising energy costs for American families,
strengthen our water infrastructure, and improve climate resilience.
This bill represents a stark contrast to the
dangerous proposal that passed the House in
September. House Republicans previously advanced H.R. 4553, a fiscal year 2026 Energy
and Water bill that would have devastated
Minnesota families, Minnesota’s clean energy
economy, and advanced President Trump’s attacks on clean energy. I voted against that
harmful legislation, which would have raised
energy costs and weakened our national security.
The contrast is especially stark when it
comes to programs that help vulnerable Minnesotans. Last year, House Republicans voted
for a 44 percent cut to the Weatherization Assistance Program, which helps low-income
households lower their utility bills by improving
home energy efficiency. Thankfully, the bill before us today provides more than $3 million for
this program which will help roughly 1,200
Minnesotans weatherize their homes each
year, saving families about $372 annually on
their energy bills.
Our global competitors like China are investing hundreds of billions of dollars in clean-energy development. We must do the same. The
bill before us today makes the United States
competitive by investing $3 billion in energy
efficiency and renewable energy programs at
the Department of Energy, rejecting President
Trump and Congressional Republicans’ crusade on clean energy.
As more than 62,000 Minnesotans work in
clean energy, I am glad to see that this bill
protects Minnesota’s clean energy economy.
The clean energy sector in Minnesota has
been growing five times faster than Minnesota’s overall job growth and Federal investments in clean energy and energy efficiency
will directly support these good-paying jobs.
Since taking office, Trump has been jeopardizing clean-energy jobs in Minnesota by
terminating clean-energy incentives in his socalled ‘‘One Big Beautiful Bill,’’ canceling
grants, and illegally withholding funds from
state, local and tribal governments. These ac-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 10, 2026

Jkt 069060

tions are stalling clean-energy projects and
eliminating high-wage jobs.
We cannot afford to abandon these investments during a worsening climate crisis.
American families are already struggling with
high energy bills. But the need to develop our
own homegrown clean and sustainable energy
isn’t just a matter of economic security; it’s
also about our national security.
The Department of Defense considers climate change to be a top national security concern. Climate change is making nations
around the world more unstable and less safe.
It’s also hurting our military readiness here at
home, with sea-level rise and extreme weather
flooding our bases. Permafrost thaw is making
Alaskan runways unusable. Radar stations are
at risk of falling into the sea.
America can, and must, meet the new age
frontiers of energy and water, and invest in
our workers, protect our water, and power our
future. I thank my colleagues for their overwhelming bipartisan support for this bill, and I
urge the Senate to move with haste to get this
legislation to the President’s desk to be signed
into law.
We don’t have the luxury of ignoring the
very real effects of climate change happening
around us—especially when they’re affecting
our lives and livelihoods and our national security. Future generations will pay the highest
costs if we fail to act.
As your representative, I will continue to
fight for these critical investments because
Minnesotans deserve better. Our children and
grandchildren deserve better.
I urge my colleagues to support this bipartisan agreement.
f

RECOGNIZING JOE HENGSTLER

HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN
OF COLORADO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Friday, January 9, 2026
Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor Joe Hengstler, the Executive Director
of Olde Town Arvada Business Improvement
District, who sadly passed away on September 23, 2025 after his battle with esophageal cancer.
Joe was affectionately known as ‘‘The
Mayor of Olde Town.’’ He was instrumental in
establishing the heart and soul of Arvada’s
most iconic and historic destination. Friends,
family, and community members knew Joe as
a true leader who was always ready to pick up
a shovel and get to work to put his projects
into action.
Joe cultivated a thriving hub for local businesses. During the COVID–19 pandemic, Joe
transformed Olde Town to ensure that business owners had the tools and environment to
persevere through economic hardship. Olde
Town innovated and implemented new physical distancing rules and created unique
events to bring the community to Olde Town.
The community showed up for the small businesses while still prioritizing safety. This innovation and our community’s support for small
businesses had a lasting impact as Olde Town
continues to thrive.
Joe will be remembered for his enthusiasm,
ambition, and optimism. He is survived by his
wife, Megan, their daughter Juniper, his mother Camilla Hengstler, his sister Erika Huber,

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 9, 2026

and his brother Bob Hengstler. I know I join
our community in my hope that Joe’s loved
ones continue to find comfort in the stories
that friends and family are sharing. He undoubtedly had an impact on those around him,
and in that way, he’ll continue to live on with
us.
f

HONORING MRS. BARBARA ANNE
DORSEY’S 90TH BIRTHDAY

HON. SANFORD D. BISHOP, JR.
OF GEORGIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Friday, January 9, 2026
Mr. BISHOP. Mr. Speaker, I rise today with
immense pride and profound appreciation to
honor a remarkable woman on the momentous occasion of her 90th birthday—Mrs. Barbara Anne Dorsey. Mrs. Dorsey is more than
a friend; she is the embodiment of love, community service, and dedication to nurturing the
future. An event to honor her birthday will be
held on Saturday, January 10, 2026, in Columbus, Georgia at the Green Island Country
Club.
Mrs. Dorsey was born on January 10, 1936,
in Hawkinsville, Georgia, and spent her formative years in Winter Haven, Florida before
moving to Columbus, Georgia. It was here,
surrounded by family and the nurturing spirit of
her community, that her passion for music and
education first took root. Growing up, she became an active member of Fourth Street Baptist Church and a musician at Shady Grove
Baptist Church, where she discovered her love
for serving others and sharing her musical
gifts. From her earliest days, Mrs. Dorsey carried a melody in her heart, playing the clarinet
and captivating those around her with the joy
of music.
After completing her education at Spencer
High School, Mrs. Dorsey attended Fort Valley
State College, where she not only honed her
teaching skills but also began to shape her future as an educator and community leader.
She became a devoted mother, embracing the
roles that define family—one that has grown
cherished, with each name she earned—
Barbr’anne, Bootsie, Aunt Barbara, Mama Barbara, Grandma and Gigi. Each moniker captures not just her identity but the love and
bonds she has cultivated through the years.
In the span of her impressive career, Mrs.
Dorsey made her mark at Manly Taylor Elementary School, where she embarked on a
journey that would touch the lives of countless
young minds. Her devotion extended beyond
the classroom, as she served with passion in
the Project Head Start summer program. Mrs.
Dorsey understood that early education lays
the foundation for a lifetime of growth and success. Through her nurturing spirit, she empowered her students, instilled hope, and ignited
the flames of curiosity.
I am reminded of the inspiring words of
Mary McLeod Bethune, who said, ‘‘The true
measure of the success of any society can be
determined by the contributions of its women.’’
Mrs. Dorsey’s life resonates with this idea; her
unwavering commitment to education, service,
and community upliftment has forged a legacy
that will be felt for generations to come.
Mrs. Dorsey’s life has not been confined to
one place or role. With an indomitable spirit,
she embraced many responsibilities within her

E:\CR\FM\A09JA8.003

E09JAPT1

January 9, 2026

faith community, serving as a youth director,
choir director, pianist, and Girl Scout leader.
Her unwavering commitment shone brightly as
she transformed lives—not just by imparting
knowledge but by nurturing faith and confidence among young souls. She led the Columbus College Baptist Student Union choir,
instilling leadership and cultivating spiritual
growth that reverberated through her community.
As a schoolteacher, she shaped young
minds at Brown Avenue Elementary, Bibb Elementary, and St. Mary’s Road Elementary.
Her outstanding commitment led to her recognition as Teacher of the Year at St. Mary’s
Road Elementary—a celebration of her dedication, creativity, and tireless efforts in advancing education. With each lesson, Barbara
fulfilled a critical role in shaping not just knowledge, but also character, integrity, and selfworth among her students.
Even in retirement, Mrs. Dorsey’s passion
for teaching and music did not fade. After retiring from St. Mary’s Road Elementary in 1998,
she enriched young lives through private piano
lessons, igniting their imaginations and fostering a love for music. Sharing her talents at
Girls Inc. and the historic Liberty Theater, she
found joy in bringing smiles and laughter
through the power of song.
Mrs. Dorsey’s steps have truly been ordered
by God. In her later years, she became a
member of the South Columbus United Methodist Church where she continues to share
her love of God and people.
Mrs. Dorsey has accomplished great things
in her life but none of it would have been possible without the grace of God, her children:
Gayle Daniels, Faye Boyer, Veleta Pasley,
Belva Dorsey-Mott, Nicol Lewis, and Joni Dorsey, her nine grandchildren, eight great-grandchildren and one great-great-grandchild.
On a personal note, Mrs. Dorsey and her
family have been friends and supporters for
many years. She has been a beacon of hope
in my life, oftentimes providing meals for me
that nourished not only my body but my spirit.
I will be forever grateful for her and her family’s fidelity and friendship.
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join my
wife, Vivian and me, along with the more than
765,000 people of Georgia’s 2nd Congressional District in honoring Mrs. Barbara Ann
Dorsey on her 90th birthday. Mrs. Barbara
Anne Dorsey is not just a woman celebrating
a milestone; she is a treasure within our
hearts and our community. As we gather to
honor her 90th birthday, I extend my heartfelt
gratitude for her friendship, her unwavering
dedication to nurturing young minds, and the
profound love she has shared with everyone
who has had the privilege to know her.
I wish a happy 90th Birthday to Mrs. Dorsey. May her life continue to inspire those
around her, illuminating paths with her love
and wisdom, and may her legacy of kindness
and service endure for generations to come.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

f

RECOGNIZING RYAN NESSELRODT,
PH.D.

HON. JOHN GARAMENDI
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Friday, January 9, 2026
Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
in recognition and appreciation of Dr. Ryan

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 10, 2026

E21

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

Nesselrodt, Ph.D. upon his completion of the
American Association for the Advancement of
Science, Science & Technology Fellowship.
Dr. Nesselrodt served as a fellow in my Washington, D.C. office from September 2024 to
December 2025, displaying remarkable technical knowledge, flexibility, and creative thinking.
As an integral member of my legislative
staff, Dr. Nesselrodt assisted my work on the
House Committee on Armed Services and the
House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, particularly my work on the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation. His exceptional analytical skills
and scientific background made him an invaluable advisor for the office on a variety of
issues, ranging from plutonium pit production
to geothermal energy to the maritime industry.
Throughout his fellowship, Dr. Nesselrodt
was the driving force behind several critical
legislative efforts. He drafted key provisions on
nuclear weapons policy that were adopted as
part of the National Defense Authorization Act.
He also was responsible for drafting and introducing the ‘‘Geothermal Tax Parity Act,’’ which
would incentivize geothermal energy production. In addition, he was instrumental in building support among industry stakeholders and
Members for my ‘‘SHIPS for America Act.’’ His
work often required balancing competing legislative priorities, and he was always able to develop a range of sound policy options for my
consideration.
Beyond drafting legislative language, Dr.
Nesselrodt proved to be a critical voice in policy debate. He consistently offered thoughtful
perspectives often not considered by other
members of the team. His arguments, grounded in strategic realities, have been essential in
helping the office promote responsible, effective policies.
Dr. Nesselrodt is a dedicated public servant,
an extraordinary researcher, and a skilled
communicator. He is precisely the kind of future leader and innovative thinker we need. I
expect Dr. Nesselrodt’s fellowship in my office
will inspire and inform his future endeavors,
and I am confident he will make invaluable
contributions in his new role.
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of
California’s 8th Congressional district, I extend
our deepest appreciation to Dr. Nesselrodt for
his dedicated service as an AAAS Science &
Technology fellow. He will always remain a
deeply valued member of Team Garamendi.
f

HONORING EVA SCHLOSS

a profound if lesser-known impact upon
South Carolina and the Anne Frank Center.
Born in Austria on May 11, 1929, just 31
days before Anne Frank, Eva Geiringer fled
with her family to Amsterdam, living in the
same neighborhood as the Frank family. Betrayed on her 15th birthday and sent to
Auschwitz, Eva managed to survive with her
mother. When Auschwitz was liberated, she
searched for her father and brother, who had
been murdered, but recognized Otto Frank.
Eight years later, Otto would marry her
mother, Elfriede.
Eva bottled up her anger about what was
done to her, her family, and her community
for 40 years before beginning to speak. But
once she did, she spent the next 40 years
changing attitudes, changing lives.
Around 2015, Rabbi Hesh Epstein told me
that he had been trying to bring Eva to Columbia for years. I replied, ‘‘Let me see what
I can do!’’ I had been fortunate to get to
know Dr. Dienke Hondius, a historian at the
Anne Frank House, and the woman who first
nudged Eva to share her story, She reached
out directly, and we were exceptionally fortunate that Eva agreed to speak in South
Carolina both for the Jewish community,
interviewed by Dr. Lily Filler, and for school
children on the USC campus in 2017.
Eva had spoken to audiences of 200–300 people before, but when President Harris
Pastides interviewed her at the Koger Center, 56 busloads of school children, mostly
middle school students born in 2005, were in
attendance.
The Jerry and Anita Zucker Family Foundation generously donated 2,000 copies of
Eva’s autobiography (Eva’s Story) for the
students in attendance, and a signed nameplate was inserted into each copy. With 2,000
school students born in 2005, I imagined the
many hundreds of them who would also live
to 90, and in the year 2095 be able to tell
their great-grandchildren, ‘I personally
heard Anne Frank’s stepsister describe her
survival at Auschwitz.’ That will be 150 years
after Auschwitz was liberated. We’ve only recently reached 150 years since slavery. The
administration was understandably concerned about whether so many middle
schoolers would behave appropriately. They
gave her three standing ovations.
President Emeritus Pastides wrote that ‘I
have met several brave souls who survived
the darkest days of the Holocaust and all
demonstrated concern and love for persons
who have suffered in other times and places.
Eva epitomized that by delving into the history of slavery in our country and demonstrating a kinship with descendants of
enslaved people. Her visit to our university
was an honor for our community. May she
rest in eternal peace.’
Eva had a generous heart and an infectious
curiosity. She loved visiting the Horseshoe
and learning about the University.

HON. JOE WILSON

f

OF SOUTH CAROLINA

RECOGNIZING KEVIN JACOVETTA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Friday, January 9, 2026
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr. Speaker, in a heartfelt tribute, Dr. Doyle Stevick of
the Anne Frank Center of the University of
South Carolina paid tribute to Eva Schloss,
age 96, of London. King Charles cited ‘‘May
her memory be a blessing to us all.’’ I include
in the RECORD the following tribute:
The Anne Frank Center mourns the passing of Mrs. Eva Schloss, who left us on Saturday morning at the age of 96. Eva had a
profound impact around the world, co-founding the Anne Frank Trust in the United
Kingdom and speaking all over. She also had

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN
OF COLORADO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Friday, January 9, 2026
Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize retired firefighter Kevin Jacovetta,
who passed away on September 19, 2025
from cancer. Kevin, or ‘‘KJ’’, served Arvada
Fire for over 33 years. He joined as a volunteer in 1988, was hired as a full-time firefighter
in 1999, and held the roles of firefighter/EMT,
engineer, and acting officer throughout his career.

E:\CR\FM\A09JA8.006

E09JAPT1

E22

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

Kevin’s death has been designated as a
Line of Duty Death—Illness (LODD–I), connected to severe burns that he sustained in
2011 while rescuing a fellow firefighter during
a devastating house fire. His bravery that day
earned him the Medal of Valor. While he courageously recovered and returned to duty,
complications from his injuries eventually led

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 10, 2026

Jkt 069060

to his retirement in 2021 and a cancer diagnosis in 2023.
Kevin’s passing is a solemn reminder of the
risks our firefighters ensure to keep our
friends, family, and neighbors safe. As a firefighter, husband, and father, Kevin’s selflessness carried through every aspect of his life.

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 9, 2026

His legacy of kindness, dedication, and service to our community will not be forgotten.
On behalf of the people of Colorado’s 7th
Congressional District, I am honored to recognize firefighter Kevin Jacovetta’s legacy and
extend my deepest condolences to his family,
friends, and the entire Arvada Fire Department.

E:\CR\FM\A09JA8.009

E09JAPT1

Friday, January 9, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate
Chamber Action

Committee Meetings

The Senate was not in session and stands adjourned until 3 p.m. on Monday, January 12, 2026.

No committee meetings were held.

h

House of Representatives
Chamber Action
Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 14 public bills, H.R. 6992–7005; and 3 resolutions, H.J.
Res. 139; and H. Res. 984–985, were introduced.
Pages H614–615

Additional Cosponsors:
Page H616
Reports Filed: There were no reports filed today.
Guest Chaplain: The prayer was offered by the
Guest Chaplain, Major General William Green, Jr.,
Chief of Chaplains, U.S. Army, Washington, DC.

at noon on Monday, January 12, 2026 for morninghour debate.
Page H604
Quorum Calls—Votes: One yea-and-nay vote developed during the proceedings of today and appears
on page H603.
Adjournment: The House met at 9 a.m. and adjourned at 12:30 p.m.

Committee Meetings
No hearings were held.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Page H593

Affordable Housing Over Mandating Efficiency
Standards Act: The House passed H.R. 5184, to
prohibit the Secretary of Energy from enforcing energy efficiency standards applicable to manufactured
housing, by a yea-and-nay vote of 263 yeas to 147
nays, Roll No. 12.
Pages H595–604
Agreed to amend the title so as to read: ‘‘To authorize the Secretary of Energy to transmit to the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development recommendations for changes to preemptive energy
conservation standards applicable to manufactured
homes.’’.
Page H604
Pursuant to the Rule, the amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee
on Energy and Commerce now printed in the bill
shall be considered as adopted.
Page H595
H. Res. 977, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 4593), (H.R. 5184), and (H.R.
6938) was agreed to Wednesday, January 7th.
Meeting Hour: Agreed by unanimous consent that
when the House adjourns today, it adjourn to meet

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR MONDAY,
JANUARY 12, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
No meetings/hearings scheduled.

House
Committee on Rules, Full Committee, hearing on H.R.
2262, the ‘‘Flexibility for Workers Education Act’’; H.R.
2270, the ‘‘Empowering Employer Child and Elder Care
Solutions Act’’; H.R. 2312, the ‘‘Tipped Employee Protection Act’’; H.R. 2988, the ‘‘Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act’’; and H.R. 4366, the
‘‘Save Local Business Act’’, 4 p.m., H–313 Capitol.
D57

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:09 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D09JA6.REC

D09JAPT1

D58

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 9, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

3 p.m., Monday, January 12

12 noon, Monday, January 12

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Monday: Senate will resume consideration
of the motion to proceed to consideration of H.R. 6938,
Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations Act,
2026, and vote on the motion to invoke cloture thereon
at 5:30 p.m.

Program for Monday: To be announced.

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE
Bishop, Sanford D., Jr., Ga., E20
Garamendi, John, Calif., E19, E21
McCollum, Betty, Minn., E20
Pettersen, Brittany, Colo., E19, E20, E21
Wilson, Joe, S.C., E19, E21

E PL

U

IB
U

NU

M

S

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Congressional Record

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

VerDate Sep 11 2014

00:09 Jan 11, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D09JA6.REC

D09JAPT1

