UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, TUESDAY, JANUARY 20, 2026

No. 13

House of Representatives
The House met at noon and was
called to order by the Speaker pro tempore (Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas).
f

DESIGNATION OF SPEAKER PRO
TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Speaker:
WASHINGTON, DC,
January 20, 2026.
I hereby appoint the Honorable ROGER WILLIAMS to act as Speaker pro tempore on this
day.
MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
f

MORNING-HOUR DEBATE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of January 6, 2026, the Chair will now recognize
Members from lists submitted by the
majority and minority leaders for
morning-hour debate.
The Chair will alternate recognition
between the parties, with time equally
allocated between the parties and each
Member other than the majority and
minority leaders and the minority
whip limited to 5 minutes, but in no
event shall debate continue beyond 1:50
p.m.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

ONGOING PROTESTS IN IRAN
(Mr. SUBRAMANYAM of Virginia was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker, I
rise to address the ongoing protests in
Iran.
For decades, the Iranian people have
faced
human
rights
abuses,
extrajudicial killings, and economic
turmoil.
Protests have been going on for almost a month. The military is cracking down, and at least thousands have
died. The Iranian people are not back-

ing down, and they deserve the right to
protest for changes. They deserve the
right to decide whether they want a
freer, secular future.
That is why I have joined my colleagues on the bipartisan FREEDOM
Act to expand internet freedom in Iran.
I also sent a letter to the administration urging immediate action to maximize resources to protect internet freedom.
I have also written directly to Secretary Rubio in support of the Iranian
people, while highlighting the worsening human rights abuses, which are
also affecting people back here who
have Iranian family there.
We support the Iranian people and
their efforts to determine their own futures, and we will continue to support
them.
BANNING IMMIGRANT VISA PROCESSING

Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker,
the administration has decided that,
starting tomorrow, January 21, they
are going to implement an indefinite
ban on immigrant visa processing for
more than 75 countries.
This sweeping action has created a
crisis for so many Virginia families
who have followed the law to see or reunite with their loved ones. Some of
these stories that my office has seen of
people who have been affected are really heartbreaking. These are spouses
still waiting to reunite, engaged couples who have had to pause or cancel
their wedding plans, children waiting
for parents, and parents waiting to
care for their families.
We even had a couple reach out who
were in the final stages of adopting a
child from Thailand, which is on the
list. Because of the pause on what is
going on, the adoption is now frozen indefinitely.
It seems there are no exceptions to
this ban. It is just a straight-up ban,
and the reason seems kind of flimsy, to
be honest. It is apparently because
they are a drain on our social system.

I will just say that the only drain on
our social system has been Congress,
with cuts to Medicaid and SNAP.
In any case, I would love to see the
math on how these particular countries
were chosen and why this administration thinks banning visas from Fiji is
going to help out social services or pay
down the debt.
This blanket ban, with no exceptions,
does nothing more than separate families and create hardship. Our constituents deserve better.
MEDICARE TELEHEALTH COVERAGE

Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker,
we have been talking a lot in this
Chamber about rising healthcare costs.
One of the things that we are doing
really well as a country to lower costs
is telehealth, which allows people to
see their providers faster and more
often, and even see specialized providers from out of State. It saves time
and money, and it is great for doctors,
nurses, and seniors.
Unfortunately, we are heading toward a telehealth coverage cliff because, on January 30, Medicare telehealth coverage will end, and many patients will have to see their doctors in
person only.
That is why I am urging my colleagues to pass the CONNECT for
Health Act and make telehealth coverage permanent. This is common
sense. It lowers costs, and it means less
emergency room visits. Everyone wins.
We must save telehealth coverage
and pass this bill before the end of the
month.
f

STREAMLINING REVIEW PROCESS
FOR FEDERAL PROJECTS
(Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to speak on the
importance of my bill, the RED Tape
Act, which will be marked up by the

b This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
H927

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:42 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.000

H20JAPT1

H928

Committee on Energy and Commerce
tomorrow.
The RED Tape Act amends the Clean
Air Act to streamline the review process for Federal projects. The U.S. is
facing a rapidly growing demand for
energy production and domestic manufacturing. Meeting these escalating
needs requires efficiency in deploying
new infrastructure.
The RED Tape Act would eliminate
duplicative reviews that serve only to
delay the permitting and construction
of these needed projects. This reform
will provide timely and predictable
outcomes for new projects, helping to
ensure that America remains competitive in the global economy.
As we work to fulfill President
Trump’s goal of energy dominance, I
look forward to seeing this bill advance
through the full committee and proceed to the floor for a vote.
RISING HEALTHCARE COSTS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to address the
issue of rising healthcare costs. As no
surprise, data released from the final
full year of the Biden administration
reflected that healthcare spending has
grown at an unsustainable pace, far
outpacing inflation.
Since the passage of the Affordable
Care Act, healthcare costs across all
markets have spiked for patients, while
large insurance companies continue to
profit. Under excessive ACA regulations, we entered an era of unprecedented mergers of insurers, providers,
and pharmacies.
This imbalance has contributed to a
dire crisis for small community-based
pharmacies, particularly in rural areas
like Pennsylvania’s 13th Congressional
District, leading to closures and leaving many communities to be pharmacy
deserts.
This week, Congress will begin to deliver on producing meaningful transparency for the American patient as we
consider
comprehensive
legislation
that curbs PBM abuses and includes
legislation that I authored to expand
telehealth access to cardiac and pulmonary rehabilitation and requires
unique provider numbers at every hospital outpatient department.
This package forms a key downpayment on delivering meaningful health
cost reduction for all Americans.
Last week, President Trump announced the Great Healthcare Plan,
which focuses on lowering costs by increasing price transparency and holding big insurance companies accountable.
These proposed reforms by President
Trump, coupled with action by Republicans in Congress, will bring muchneeded
reform
to
our
broken
healthcare
system
and
reduce
healthcare costs for all Americans.
RECOGNIZING GARY PAUL

Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to honor Gary
Paul, who has concluded three decades
of public service as a Richland Township supervisor in Cambria County,
Pennsylvania.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:42 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Gary Paul, throughout his 30-year
tenure, has worked tirelessly as a
Geistown borough road foreman while
maintaining his family farm, where he
also raises beef cattle.
Recently, Gary was recognized for his
dedication by the Pennsylvania State
Association of Township Supervisors
and by the Richland Township Board of
Supervisors.
With pride for Gary, I join the citizens of Richland Township and of all of
Cambria County in thanking him for
his unwavering commitment and his
unwavering public service.
CONGRATULATING JACK FIELDS ON HIS
RETIREMENT

Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Speaker, I rise to honor Jack Fields for
more than 50 years of service to the
borough of McConnellsburg in Fulton
County, Pennsylvania.
Jack recently retired as secretary
and treasurer of the borough council,
acting as borough manager and head of
maintenance and permitting.
Just 2 years after graduating from
McConnellsburg High School, Jack was
drafted in 1953 and served our country
in the Korean war.
When Jack was asked about his military service, he shared that he learned
to depend on others and not to take
anything for granted. Jack continued
by encouraging others that ‘‘you must
go after it yourself.’’ What great advice.
I express best wishes to Jack for a deserved retirement, and I thank him for
his devotion to Pennsylvania’s 13th
Congressional District and especially
to beautiful Fulton County, Pennsylvania.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12 (a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess until 2
p.m. today.
Accordingly (at 12 o’clock and 10
minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1400
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. TAYLOR) at 2 p.m.
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret
Grun Kibben, offered the following
prayer:
God of love and compassion, what a
privilege it is to come before You on
this day. You see us, You receive us
just as we are. No matter how different
we may be from one another, You care
for us with the same depth of love with
no prejudicial regard for our differences.
Take us then just as we are, whether
we come from the East or West, North
or South, left or right; whether we

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

bring with us differing convictions or
have needs that may seem in conflict
with the desires of others. In You there
is no distinction for You, O God, are
the Lord over all.
Bestow on each of us the riches of
Your grace as we call upon You
throughout the day. Pour out on us the
overflowing fountain of Your kindness,
that each of us would know that all of
us stand equal in our need of Your redeeming grace.
Then may we, transformed by the
unity found in Your love, look upon all
those with whom we interact this day
with Your eyes, seeing in them what
You see; those whom You have deemed
worthy of dignity and respect.
In the name of the one who is Lord of
all, we pray.
Amen.
f

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair has examined the Journal of the
last day’s proceedings and announces
to the House the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Will the
gentleman from South Carolina (Mr.
WILSON) come forward and lead the
House in the Pledge of Allegiance.
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina led
the Pledge of Allegiance as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

HIGHLIGHTING
STUDENT-RUN
CAFE AT CLEARFIELD COUNTY
CAREER AND TECHNOLOGY CENTER
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to highlight
the student-run cafe at Clearfield
County Career & Technology Center.
The cafe opened last week and gives
students the opportunity to serve food
to their peers.
The program allows 18 students to
participate in morning class and an additional 15 students to participate in
the afternoon. High school students
from Clearfield, Curwensville, West
Branch,
Philipsburg-Osceola,
and
Moshannon Valley are eligible to enroll in the program.
The cafe operates as a training lab,
giving students the opportunity to
apply skills they have learned in the
classroom to real-life scenarios.
Students help prepare ingredients,
set up workstations, and create menus.
Those who work the afternoon shift are
responsible for making and serving
food.
The students develop leadership
skills and professionalism, assets that

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.003

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

are needed for a successful career in
the hospitality and culinary industries.
Mr. Speaker, as co-chair of the Congressional Career and Technical Education Caucus, programs like this one
at Clearfield County Technical School
are vital for helping students be prepared for the workforce.
f

ACA SUBSIDIES
(Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, over 130,000 eastern North
Carolinians depend on ACA subsidies to
afford basic health coverage.
Losing coverage would put families
at real risk.
These subsidies are not a handout.
They are a lifeline that keeps working
people insured, healthy, and able to see
a doctor before a small problem becomes a huge crisis.
Without Congress, premiums are skyrocketing, forcing too many residents
to choose between healthcare, rent,
and groceries.
The consequences ripple throughout
our communities, raising uninsured
rates and driving up costs for everyone.
ACA subsidies are about stability,
dignity, and the simple belief that access to healthcare should not depend
on luck.
Congress must act to ensure accountability and to prevent millions of
Americans from being left behind.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

PRESIDENT TRUMP IS KEEPING
FAMILIES SAFE
(Mr. WILSON of South Carolina
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, across the country, arrests of
criminal illegal aliens are successful as
President Donald Trump is making
good on his promise to rid communities
of murderous threats to families; making sure killers, gang members, and
other violent criminals are deported.
The President is ramping up pressure
to cooperate with law enforcement by
sending in U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers. This is undermined by extremist paid rioters.
The January 14 Washington Times
editorial stated: ‘‘Leftists justify their
. . . behavior by reciting a version of
events existing only in their imaginations.’’ Vice President J.D. VANCE is
correct. Officials are promoting rioting
in the streets rather than follow the
law.
Knowing the President has their
back, Federal officials aren’t intimidated fighting insurrection. An insurrection is a real attack on democracy.
In conclusion, God bless our troops as
the global war on terrorism continues.
President Trump is reinstituting peace
through strength, revealing war criminal Putin lies, insulting Trump, mock-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:42 Jan 21, 2026

H929

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ing Trump with Putin mercilessly
launching rockets on civilian targets,
murdering innocent Ukrainians.
f

RECOGNIZING THOMAS PELISSERO
(Mr. BERGMAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. BERGMAN. Mr. Speaker, it is
my honor to recognize Mr. Thomas
Pelissero for his heartfelt tribute to his
hometown of Bessemer, Michigan, in
his book: ‘‘Bring One Home: A Memoir
of Boyhood, Basketball, and Hometown
Spirit.’’
This book is not only a salute to Bessemer, but the tough, resilient communities across Michigan’s Upper Peninsula and middle America.
Mr. Speaker, 60 years ago this week,
the Bessemer Speedboys basketball
team ended a 42-game losing streak, at
the time, the longest in Upper Peninsula high school basketball history.
The people of Bessemer always
showed up, cheered, and stood by their
team. That loyalty and perseverance
reflect the hardy spirit that defines
this town and so many communities
across our Upper Peninsula.
That spirit remains alive today.
Mr. Pelissero’s book launch filled
Bessemer City Hall to standing room
only and raised more than $5,000 for the
Bessemer Public Library. Since its release in November of 2025, ‘‘Bring One
Home’’ has earned national recognition
to include inclusion in the Library of
Congress.
Mr. Speaker, it is my honor to recognize Mr. Pelissero for capturing the
character, resilience, and enduring fellowship of Bessemer and the Upper Peninsula we are all proud to call home.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess subject to
the call of the Chair.
Accordingly (at 2 o’clock and 8 minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1530
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mrs. MILLER of Illinois) at 3
o’clock and 30 minutes p.m.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the Chair
will postpone further proceedings
today on motions to suspend the rules
on which a recorded vote or the yeas
and nays are ordered, or votes objected
to under clause 6 of rule XX.
The House will resume proceedings
on postponed questions at a later time.

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS
SMALL BUSINESS ACCESS ACT
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I move to suspend the rules
and pass the bill (H.R. 3496) to amend
the Small Business Act for microloan
eligibility for the Commonwealth of
the Northern Mariana Islands, and for
other purposes, as amended.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The text of the bill is as follows:
H.R. 3496
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Northern Mariana Islands Small Business Access Act’’.
SEC. 2. INCLUSION OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF
THE NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS
IN THE MICROLOAN PROGRAM.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 7(m)(7)(B) of the

Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 636(m)(7)(B)) is
amended—
(1) by inserting ‘‘, the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands’’ after ‘‘Guam’’ each
place it appears; and
(2) in clause (i)(I)(bb), by striking ‘‘1⁄55’’ and
inserting ‘‘1⁄56’’.
AMENDMENT.—Section
(b)
TECHNICAL
7(m)(11)(C)(ii) of the Small Business Act (15
U.S.C. 636(m)(11)(C)(ii)) is amended by striking
‘‘rural’’ and all that follows through the end of
the clause and inserting ‘‘rural; and’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from
Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) and the gentlewoman
from
New
York
(Ms.
VELÁZQUEZ) each will control 20 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Texas.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that
all Members may have 5 legislative
days in which to revise and extend
their remarks and include extraneous
material on the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Texas?
There was no objection.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise today in
strong support of H.R. 3496, the Northern Mariana Islands Small Business
Access Act. This bill was introduced by
Delegate KING-HINDS and Representative CONAWAY.
The SBA microloan program provides
entrepreneurs with access to small-dollar loans through qualified lenders.
Sometimes, entrepreneurs do not need
to access large sums of capital for their
operations. That is where the SBA
microloan program can help entrepreneurs get just enough capital to
meet their exact needs.
Under current law, the SBA apportions microloan program funding to
intermediaries in 55 States and territories. Unfortunately, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
is excluded. This creates unnecessary
barriers for small businesses in the
Northern Mariana Islands by limiting

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.005

H20JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H930

opportunities for local entrepreneurship and economic growth.
H.R. 3496 fixes this oversight and ensures that the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands is included
within the geographic scope of the SBA
microloan program, increasing the
number of States and territories eligible to receive microloan program funding from 55 to 56.
Expanding
eligibility
for
the
microloan program will help spur entrepreneurship, strengthen local economies, and ensure that small businesses
in all States and territories have a fair
opportunity to grow.
Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 3496, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise in support of
H.R. 3496, the Northern Mariana Islands Small Business Access Act.
This is a straightforward but important bill that expands access to SBA’s
microloan program to small businesses
in the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands.
These small businesses face unique
challenges, as geographic isolation
leads to higher costs for goods and
services. Their economy is heavily reliant on tourism, which can ebb and flow
with the economy and natural disasters.
Having access to affordable credit
gives small businesses the ability to
weather the storms and economic uncertainty and fully prepare for the next
opportunity.
The extension of the microloan program to CNMI will be critical to support business growth, create jobs, and
stimulate the local economy.
I have long supported efforts to ensure the territories have full access to
SBA products and services. In previous
Congresses, I worked with then-Representative Sablan to establish an
SBDC center in CNMI, and I also
worked to ensure that CNMI had access
to the microloan program as part of a
more comprehensive bill.
Unfortunately, the bill to improve
the microloan program was not enacted into law. I am glad to be working
across the aisle again to make sure territories receive full access to SBA services.
Madam Speaker, I urge Members to
support this important bill, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I yield such time as she may
consume to the gentlewoman from the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (Ms. KING-HINDS), my good
friend.
Ms. KING-HINDS. Madam Speaker, I
rise today in strong support of my bill,
H.R. 3496, as amended, the Northern
Mariana Islands Small Business Access
Act.
This bill would include my district,
the Northern Mariana Islands, in the
Small
Business
Administration’s

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

01:42 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

microloan program. The microloan
program issues loans of $50,000 or less
at low interest rates to help small businesses that may be unable to access
capital elsewhere, grow their businesses, or create jobs.
Since the program became operational in 1992, it has issued over 69,000
loans, totaling over $900 million, and
supported over 250,000 American jobs.
Despite the program’s impressive impact for Americans across the country,
the Northern Mariana Islands is the
only State or territory not explicitly
included under the law. This bill would
simply add the CNMI to be eligible for
the program alongside every other territory.
The CNMI is currently facing an economic crisis following the collapse of
our primary industry, which is tourism. Local small businesses are struggling to get approved for affordable
loans, in part because of this economic
uncertainty. Gaining access to this
program could help local entrepreneurs
make the investments they need to
help put our economy on a more solid
footing.
Madam Speaker, I thank my co-lead
on the bill, Representative CONAWAY,
for his steadfast support, as well as
Representatives
CISNEROS
and
GOODLANDER for also cosponsoring this
legislation. I also thank Chairman WILLIAMS and Ranking Member VELÁZQUEZ
for their support and help in bringing
this bill to the floor.
Again, my bill simply adds my district to the microloan program that is
already available to all other Americans. I urge all of my colleagues to support this bipartisan, commonsense, nocost bill.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
urge my colleagues to support this legislation, and I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I have no further speakers,
and I urge my colleagues to support
H.R. 3496 to bring access to capital for
small businesses in the Northern Mariana Islands. I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) that the House suspend the
rules and pass the bill, H.R. 3496, as
amended.
The question was taken; and (twothirds being in the affirmative) the
rules were suspended and the bill, as
amended, was passed.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

MAIN STREET PARITY ACT
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I move to suspend the rules
and pass the bill (H.R. 5763) to amend
the Small Business Investment Act of
1958 to modify the criteria for loans for
plant acquisition, construction, conversion or expansion, and for other purposes.

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The text of the bill is as follows:
H.R. 5763
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Main Street
Parity Act’’.
SEC. 2. MODIFICATION TO CRITERIA FOR LOANS
FOR PLANT ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION, CONVERSION OR EXPANSION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 502(3)(C) of the

Small Business Investment Act of 1958 (15
U.S.C. 696(3)(C)) is amended—
(1) by striking clauses (ii) and (iii);
(2) in clause (i), by inserting ‘‘or’’ at the
end; and
(3) by redesignating clause (iv) as clause
(ii).
AMENDMENT.—Section
(b)
CONFORMING
502(3)(B)(ii) of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 (15 U.S.C. 696(3)(B)(ii)) is
amended by striking ‘‘clauses (i), (ii), or (iii)
of subparagraph (C)’’ and inserting ‘‘clause
(i) of subparagraph (C)’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from
Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) and the gentlewoman
from
New
York
(Ms.
VELÁZQUEZ) each will control 20 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Texas.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that
all Members may have 5 legislative
days in which to revise and extend
their remarks and include extraneous
material on the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Texas?
There was no objection.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise today in
strong support of my bill, H.R. 5763, the
Main Street Parity Act.
I also thank the gentlewoman from
California (Ms. SIMON), my friend, for
joining me in co-leading this bipartisan
effort.
The SBA’s 504 loan program is an important tool that helps small businesses obtain affordable financing for
the acquisition of fixed assets, such as
land, buildings, and heavy machinery.
To obtain a 504 loan, a small business
owner must contribute 10 percent of
the total project cost as a form of
downpayment. However, if a small
business is seeking financing to build
something like a surgery center or a
nursing home, the SBA imposes additional equity requirements because
these properties are deemed limited
purpose.
b 1540
This initial equity injection was required because limited purpose properties were believed to be at a higher
risk of default. Years of data show that
this assumption is incorrect. In fact,
many businesses facing these increased
costs were at lower risk of default than

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.008

H20JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 20, 2026

the broader 504 portfolio. It is time to
bring parity to Main Street and remove
the unnecessary lender barriers based
on outdated assumptions.
Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’ on H.R. 5763, and
I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise in support of
H.R. 5763, the Main Street Parity Act.
One of the key functions of the SBA
is to ensure that small businesses in
communities across the country have
access to the capital they need to grow
and scale their operations.
The SBA has long served this need
through its loan guarantee program,
including the 504/CDC program. The
504/CDC program supports small businesses in accessing capital for the development of major fixed assets like
land, buildings, equipment, and machinery. As part of the program, loans
are guaranteed for so-called special use
properties like amusement parks, car
washes, bowling alleys, and gas stations.
When the special use designation was
created in 1996, Congress required businesses developing these properties to
pay a special purpose penalty. The penalty requires these businesses to provide at least 15 to 20 percent equity instead of the minimum 10 percent for
standard 504/CDC loans.
While the additional equity requirement served an important safeguard
for the program when first enacted, we
have seen over time that the extra risk
is not as great as anticipated.
In the past 30 years, technological developments and time have shown that
many of these properties can be successfully repurposed for alternative
uses, increasing the market pool of potential buyers.
Further, the charge-off rates for special purpose and standard loans are
similar, demonstrating that these
loans pose no greater risk than regular
504 loans. Because of its limited risk,
the special use penalty is no longer
necessary.
H.R. 5763 reduces the minimum equity requirement for special purpose
properties to at least 10 percent, in line
with the requirement for standard 504/
CDC loans. Most importantly, it maintains discretionary authority to require higher equity if deemed necessary. This bill is supported by the
National Association of Development
Companies.
Madam Speaker, I applaud Chairman
WILLIAMS’ and Representative SIMON’s
bipartisan work on this issue, and I ask
all my colleagues to support it.
Madam Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I reserve the balance of my
time.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
yield 3 minutes to the gentlewoman
from California (Ms. SIMON).
Ms. SIMON. Madam Speaker, I thank
Representative VELÁZQUEZ for her sup-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:10 Jan 21, 2026

H931

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

port, particularly for freshman members from the Democratic side on the
Small Business Committee and to Representative WILLIAMS for his collaboration on this bill.
Madam Speaker, I am extremely
proud to lead the Main Street Parity
Act with Chair WILLIAMS. As members
of the Small Business Committee, one
of the most bipartisan committees in
the 119th Congress, we hear the same
messages repeated every single day:
Small businesses don’t need special
treatment. In fact, they are just asking
for a fair shot in this economy.
The SBA’s 504 loan program is designed to provide that fair shot
through basic good policy and affordable, long-term financing. The financing helps small businesses buy buildings, buy property, expand operations,
and employ Main Street neighbors
throughout our community.
Under the current law, not all small
businesses are treated the same. Owners of so-called small purpose properties are required to put up significantly more cash up front, often 5 to 10
percent more than standard property
owners. These include places like bowling alleys, car washes, marinas, funeral
homes, and recreation centers. These
are the kinds of small businesses that
serve local families, create jobs, and
keep our communities vibrant.
For many entrepreneurs, the higher
equity requirement is the difference
between jumping in headfirst and creating new economic opportunities for
their communities and families or
walking away entirely.
This way of doing business just
doesn’t reflect our current economic or
technological realities. This bill offers
a new opportunity for Americans
across the country to step forward.
The Main Street Parity Act is common sense. It is a clear fix that brings
these loans in line with the 504 standardization programs by setting an equity requirement at 10 percent.
Madam Speaker, I encourage Members from both sides of the aisle to put
small business owners and their employees first by supporting this bill.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I am prepared to close, and I
reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
yield myself the balance of my time.
Madam Speaker, I, again, thank
Chairman WILLIAMS and Representative SIMON for their bipartisan work on
this bill. I encourage all my colleagues
to vote ‘‘yes,’’ and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, H.R. 5763 allows small businesses on Main Street to have equal access to SBA 504 loans. I urge my colleagues to support this legislation, and
I yield back the balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) that the House suspend the
rules and pass the bill, H.R. 5763.
The question was taken.

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The SPEAKER pro tempore. In the
opinion of the Chair, two-thirds being
in the affirmative, the ayes have it.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, on that I demand the yeas
and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this motion will be postponed.
f

AI FOR MAIN STREET ACT
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I move to suspend the rules
and pass the bill (H.R. 5764) to amend
the Small Business Act to require
small business development centers to
assist small business concerns with the
use of artificial intelligence, and for
other purposes, as amended.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The text of the bill is as follows:
H.R. 5764
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘AI for Main
Street Act’’.
SEC. 2. GUIDANCE ON THE USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SMALL BUSINESS
CONCERNS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 21(c)(3) of the Small

Business Act (15 U.S.C. 648(c)(3)) is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (T), by striking ‘‘and’’ at
the end;
(2) in the first subparagraph (U) (relating to
encouraging and assisting the provision of succession planning), by striking the period at the
end and inserting a semicolon;
(3) by redesignating the second subparagraph
(U) (relating to providing training in conjunction with the United States Patent and Trademark Office) as subparagraph (V);
(4) in subparagraph (V), as so redesignated,
by striking the period at the end and inserting
‘‘; and’’; and
(5) by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
‘‘(W) assisting small business concerns in
evaluating artificial intelligence concerning operations, including by—
‘‘(i) providing information, guidance, and
training to small business concerns on the use of
artificial intelligence, including—
‘‘(I) best practices for using artificial intelligence;
‘‘(II) using artificial intelligence to plan for
unexpected circumstances, protect data and intellectual property, improve cybersecurity, facilitate regulatory compliance, and improve customer trust; and
‘‘(III) incorporating artificial intelligence into
business operations; and
‘‘(ii) conducting outreach to the extent practical to small business concerns regarding the
use of artificial intelligence.’’.
(b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.—Section 3 of
the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
‘‘(gg) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.—In this Act,
the term ‘artificial intelligence’ has the meaning
given such term in section 5002 of the National
Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 (15
U.S.C. 9401).’’.
SEC. 3. COMPLIANCE WITH CUTGO.

No additional amounts are authorized to
carry out this Act or the amendments made by
this Act.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.011

H20JAPT1

H932

Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) and the gentlewoman
from
New
York
(Ms.
VELÁZQUEZ) each will control 20 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Texas.
GENERAL LEAVE

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that
all Members may have 5 legislative
days in which to revise and extend
their remarks and include extraneous
material on the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Texas?
There was no objection.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise today in
strong support of H.R. 5764, the AI for
Main Street Act, introduced by Representatives ALFORD and SCHOLTEN.
Artificial intelligence is increasingly
being used to streamline operations,
reduce costs, and boost productivity
for small businesses. For many small
businesses across the country, adopting
these tools remains out of reach because they lack the staff, the expertise,
or the capital to do so.
b 1550
Madam Speaker, the AI for Main
Street Act helps address this challenge
by directing the SBA’s Small Business
Development Centers, or SBDCs, to assist small businesses in developing AI
technologies into their operations.
These centers operate in partnership
with universities and community colleges across the country and are trusted advisers to local entrepreneurs.
This approach builds on work already
underway. In September 2024, America’s SBDCs, in partnership with
Google, launched America’s SBDC AI
U, which provides hands-on AI training, clinics, and technical assistance to
small businesses.
This bill builds on that effort by requiring the SBDC network to have a
core duty to assist entrepreneurs nationwide in fighting AI in their businesses.
As artificial intelligence becomes a
core driver of productivity and competitiveness, Main Street cannot be
left behind. I urge my colleagues to
support H.R. 5764, the AI for Main
Street Act.
Madam Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I am pleased to support the AI for Main Street Act, which
would allow SBDCs to assist small
business owners on how to evaluate artificial intelligence. I commend Mr.
ALFORD and Ms. SCHOLTEN for working
together on this bipartisan legislation.
AI has the potential to boost productivity, enhance customer service, and
save costs. While it is becoming increasingly common for small busi-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

02:10 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

nesses to use AI to streamline their operations, many still do not know how
to access it responsibly. If used incorrectly, AI could have disastrous consequences.
That is why it is incredibly important for SBA and its entrepreneurial
ecosystem to help small businesses understand the potential pitfalls and
learn how to avoid them.
Madam Speaker, I am pleased to support this bipartisan bill, and I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I yield such time as he may
consume to the gentleman from Missouri (Mr. ALFORD).
Mr. ALFORD. Madam Speaker, I rise
today in strong support of our AI for
Main Street Act.
I thank Chairman WILLIAMS for his
leadership. I also thank my colleagues
on the other side of the aisle. Foremost, I recognize both Ranking Member VELÁZQUEZ for her leadership and
Congresswoman HILLARY SCHOLTEN for
working with me to bring this important bill forward.
A lot of people are talking about AI
these days. Will it overtake America?
Will it put businessowners and workers
out of business? This bill is designed to
get ahead of that and to make sure
that does not happen. In fact, it will increase businesses in America.
This committee exists for one simple
reason, and that is to champion Main
Street and the small businesses that
line our town squares, that power our
farms, support our hospitals, and employ nearly half of the American workforce. Right now, Main Street stands at
the doorstep of a major transformation
because the AI revolution is not just
coming. It is already here.
Whether it is managing inventory,
scheduling workers, marketing products, improving cybersecurity, or
streamlining paperwork, artificial intelligence is rapidly becoming how
business gets done in America.
If small businesses do not have the
tools and guidance to adapt to that, if
they are fearful of it, they risk getting
left behind. They will get left behind
by larger competitors with bigger
budgets and in-house tech teams. By
the way, they are also using AI. That is
exactly what this bill addresses.
The AI for Main Street Act directs
Small Business Development Centers,
SBDCs, to provide counseling, training,
and outreach to help small businesses
safely evaluate and adopt artificial intelligence tools.
These centers already serve as trusted boots-on-the-ground advisers in
communities across the country, such
as the University of Missouri-Columbia
and Sedalia and other places where
these SBDCs are providing real help,
real boots on the ground.
Madam Speaker, entrepreneurs rely
on them for practical guidance and
real-world help that works for their
businesses. This bill builds on existing
efforts like America’s SBDC AI U program and ensures that AI support is

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

consistent, accessible, and nationwide.
It is not just in major metro areas but
in rural towns, manufacturing hubs,
and agricultural communities like
those I represent in Missouri’s Fourth
Congressional District.
Just as importantly, this bill emphasizes responsible adoption. We want
small business owners to understand
not only what AI can do but how to use
it securely, safely, ethically, and effectively.
This is not about replacing people. It
is about empowering people. It is about
giving a family-owned business the
same opportunity to compete and grow
and innovate as a Fortune 500 company.
I am proud of this legislation and
how it advanced out of committee with
strong bipartisan support. I appreciate
the strong backing from our colleagues
on both sides of the aisle who recognize
that innovation and small business
growth should never be partisan issues.
At the end of the day, when Main
Street succeeds, America succeeds. The
AI for Main Street Act helps ensure
that our entrepreneurs are not spectators in the next wave of innovation
but our small business owners are leaders in this revolution.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
commend the sponsors for working together on this important legislation to
provide small businesses with the
training they need.
Madam Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, H.R. 5764 will directly give
small businesses the AI resources and
tools for SBDCs across this country. I
urge my colleagues to support this
commonsense legislation.
Madam Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) that the House suspend the
rules and pass the bill, H.R. 5764, as
amended.
The question was taken.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. In the
opinion of the Chair, two-thirds being
in the affirmative, the ayes have it.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, on that I demand the yeas
and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this motion will be postponed.
f

504 PROGRAM RISK OVERSIGHT
ACT
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I move to suspend the rules
and pass the bill (H.R. 5788) to amend
title V of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 to require an annual
portfolio risk analysis of loans guaranteed under such title, and for other
purposes.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.013

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026
The text of the bill is as follows:

H.R. 5788
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘504 Program
Risk Oversight Act’’.
SEC. 2. PORTFOLIO RISK ANALYSIS OF LOANS
GUARANTEED UNDER THE 504 PROGRAM.

Title V of the Small Business Investment
Act of 1958 (15 U.S.C. 695 et seq.) is amended
by adding at the end the following:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

‘‘SEC. 511. PORTFOLIO RISK ANALYSIS.
‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall

annually conduct a risk analysis of the portfolio of the Administration with respect to
all loans guaranteed under this title.
‘‘(b) REPORT TO CONGRESS.—Not later than
December 1, 2025, and annually thereafter,
the Administrator shall submit to Congress
a report containing the results of each portfolio risk analysis conducted under subsection (a) during the fiscal year preceding
the submission of the report, which shall include—
‘‘(1) an analysis of the overall program risk
of loans guaranteed under this title;
‘‘(2) an analysis of the program risk, set
forth separately by industry concentration;
‘‘(3) without identifying individual development companies by name, a consolidated
analysis of the risk created by development
companies making loans under this title
that are responsible for not less than 1 percent of gross loan approvals under this title,
set forth separately by—
‘‘(A) the dollar value of the loans made by
such development companies;
‘‘(B) the number of loans made by such development companies; and
‘‘(C) an analysis of the program risk for
such loans with a dollar value—
‘‘(i) less than or equal to $500,000;
‘‘(ii) greater than $500,000 and less than or
equal to $1,000,000;
‘‘(iii) greater than $1,000,000 and less than
or equal to $2,000,000; and
‘‘(iv) greater than $2,000,000 and less than
or equal to $5,500,000;
‘‘(4) an analysis of the program risk for
loan guarantees made under this title for
loans that were originated—
‘‘(A) less than one year before the date of
submission of the report;
‘‘(B) at least one year, but not more than
two years before such date; and
‘‘(C) more than two years before such date;
‘‘(5) an analysis of the program risk for
loan guarantees made under this title for
loans that were originated—
‘‘(A) to a borrower that uses such loan to
open a business;
‘‘(B) to a borrower not described in subparagraph (A) that is a business concern that
has been in operation for less than or equal
to two years before the date of origination;
and
‘‘(C) to a borrower that is a business concern that has been in operation for more
than two years on the date of origination;
‘‘(6) an analysis of the program risk for
loan guarantees made under this title for
loans that were originated for limited or special purpose properties;
‘‘(7) steps taken by the Administrator to
mitigate the risks identified in paragraphs
(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6);
‘‘(8) the number of development companies,
the number of loans made, and the gross dollar amount of the loans made under this
title;
‘‘(9) the number and total dollar amount of
purchases by the Administrator of the principal and interest of loans guaranteed under
this title that are in default, the total dollar

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:49 Jan 21, 2026

H933

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

amount of collections recovered on such purchases, and the number and total dollar
amount of charge-offs for such purchases;
‘‘(10) the number and type of enforcement
actions with respect to a loan made by a development company under this title recommended by the Administrator; and
‘‘(11) the number and dollar amount of any
civil monetary penalty assessed pursuant to
an enforcement action described in paragraph (10).
‘‘(c) AVAILABILITY OF REPORT.—The Administrator shall make available to the public
on a website of the Administration the report required under subsection (b) not later
than 7 days after the Administrator submits
such report to Congress.
‘‘(d) LIMITED OR SPECIAL PURPOSE PROPERTY DEFINED.—In this section, the term
‘limited or special purpose property’ has the
meaning given by the Administrator in the
guidance titled ‘Lender and Development
Company Loan Programs’ (SOP 50 10 8; as in
effect on June 1, 2025).’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from
Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) and the gentlewoman
from
New
York
(Ms.
VELÁZQUEZ) each will control 20 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Texas.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that
all Members may have 5 legislative
days in which to revise and extend
their remarks and include extraneous
material on the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Texas?
There was no objection.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise today in
strong support of H.R. 5788, the 504 Program Risk Oversight Act introduced by
Representatives Tran and Patronis.
This bipartisan piece of legislation
would give Congress greater accountability and oversight of the SBA’s 504
Loan Program by requiring the SBA to
provide Congress and the public with
annual, data-driven risk assessments of
the 504 loan portfolio.
The 504 program is an incredibly important tool that helps small businesses obtain long-term, fixed-rate financing like the acquisition of fixed
assets such as land, buildings, and
heavy machinery.
In fiscal year 2025, the program supported $7.8 billion in loans to small
businesses nationwide. Specifically,
H.R. 5788 would require the SBA to provide Congress with annual reports on
the health of the 504 loan portfolio.
This would include an analysis of any
risk to the program broken down by
multiple data points, including industry concentration, loan age, and gross
dollar amount.
b 1600
These reports would be made available to the public within 7 days of
being provided to Congress. The transparency measures in this bill are par-

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ticularly important in light of the
House passage of my bill, H.R. 3174, the
Made in America Manufacturing Finance Act, which raised the loan limit
for American manufacturers under the
SBA’s 7(a) and 504 loan programs to $10
million. I hope it will quickly move
through the Senate and to President
Trump’s desk.
Madam Speaker, H.R. 5788 marks a
critical step toward identifying and
mitigating risks early, strengthening
the long-term viability and affordability of the 504 loan program and ensuring continued support for American
entrepreneurs.
Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’ on H.R. 5788, and
I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise in support of
the bill before us today, H.R. 5788, the
504 Program Risk Oversight Act.
Madam Speaker, transparency is key
to ensuring the proper operation and
functioning of the SBA lending programs, including the 504/CDC program.
This bill will give the Committee on
Small Business the necessary information to carry out our oversight authority.
Federal law requires the SBA Office
of Credit Risk Management to conduct
an annual portfolio risk analysis of the
SBA flagship 7(a) loan program and
provide Congress with a detailed report
of their results. This report has been
crucial in Committee on Small Business Democrats’ investigation into the
rising default levels in the 7(a) program and has helped us to respond accordingly.
Unfortunately, no statutory reporting requirement exists for the 504/CDC
loan program. H.R. 5788 will fix that by
adding a requirement that the SBA
conduct an annual risk analysis of the
504/CDC program and provide Congress
with their results. Tailored to the 504/
CDC program’s unique features, the report will provide Congress with many
of the same data points it currently
provides on the 7(a) program, but the
bill also requires several new data
points to improve our stewardship of
the program.
While loan defaults aren’t currently
a concern for the 504 program, this bill
will provide Congress with valuable information needed to monitor the program’s operation, guard against future
risk, and ensure that the program’s
zero-subsidy requirement is maintained.
Madam Speaker, I applaud Representatives TRAN and PATRONIS for
their work on this bill, which is supported by the National Association of
Development Companies. I ask my colleagues to support it, and I reserve the
balance of my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I yield such time as he may
consume to the gentleman from Florida (Mr. PATRONIS).

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.015

H20JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H934

Mr. PATRONIS. Madam Speaker, I
thank the lead of this bill, the gentleman from California (Mr. TRAN), for
his work on this bill.
I appreciate the opportunity to serve
as co-lead on this legislation. The
SBA’s 504 program helps small businesses to grow, create jobs, and invest
in their communities. Since this program uses taxpayer-backed loans, it is
important that we properly review and
manage risk.
Madam Speaker, H.R. 5788 makes a
simple fix. It requires risk assessments
for the 504 loan program, just like we
already do with other major SBA loan
programs. This helps to close the gap
and improves oversight.
Transparency matters. When we
clearly understand how a program is
working, we can protect taxpayer dollars and make sure the program stays
strong.
This bill helps us to ensure that we
are responsible with taxpayer money
while continuing to support small businesses.
Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 5788.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from
California (Mr. TRAN), the lead sponsor
of the bill.
Mr. TRAN. Madam Speaker, I rise
today in strong support of H.R. 5788,
the 504 Program Risk Oversight Act,
bipartisan legislation that strengthens
one of SBA’s most successful financing
programs.
For decades, the SBA’s 504 loan program has been a cornerstone of economic development in communities
across America. Through public and
private partnership with certified development companies, the 504 program
helps small businesses to grow, create
jobs, and invest in their communities.
Since its inception in 1986, the program has provided approximately $400
billion in total project financing and
created over 3.3 million jobs. In California alone, that translates to $95 billion in total capital and the creation of
over 715,000 good-paying jobs.
For entrepreneurs in California’s 45th
District and across the Nation, the 504
loan program’s unique model provides
them with access to long-term, fixedrate financing to help them to expand
operations, purchase property, and
make lasting investments in their
local economy.
In Orange County and Los Angeles
County alone, the 504 program has injected more than $27 billion into local
businesses and helped to create over
175,000 jobs over the last 25 years.
My bipartisan bill, the 504 Program
Risk Oversight Act, builds on that success by ensuring that all partners—the
SBA, Congress, and industry—have access to clear, consistent, and transparent data about the health of the
program.
Currently, SBA is not required to
conduct an annual risk analysis of the
504 loan program and provide Congress
with any performance data. My bill ad-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

02:10 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

dresses this problem and requires the
SBA to conduct an annual risk assessment of the 504 program and provide
Congress with detailed insights into
overall health of the program and information needed to strengthen program performance.
Madam Speaker, transparent data is
the cornerstone of a productive partnership between the SBA, Congress,
and industry and the work that we do
collectively to keep the 504 program
healthy for future generations of entrepreneurs. Now more than ever, small
businesses need what the 504 loan program provides: certainty and affordable
patient capital.
Madam Speaker, I am proud to lead
this bill, and I thank my colleague,
Representative JIMMY PATRONIS, for his
partnership in co-leading this important piece of legislation with me. Of
course, this bill would not be possible
without the leadership of Ranking
Member VELÁZQUEZ and Chair WILLIAMS.
Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I have no further speakers,
and I am prepared to close. I reserve
the balance of my time.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
again applaud Representatives TRAN
and PATRONIS for their bipartisan work
on this bill. I encourage all of my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes,’’ and I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, H.R. 5788 provides transparency to the SBA’s 504 loan program,
a key program that promotes job creation and small business growth.
Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues to support this legislation, and
I yield back the balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) that the House suspend the
rules and pass the bill, H.R. 5788.
The question was taken; and (twothirds being in the affirmative) the
rules were suspended and the bill was
passed.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WISDOM FOR INNOVATIVE SMALL
ENTERPRISES ACT
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I move to suspend the rules
and pass the bill (H.R. 5784) to amend
the Small Business Act to help small
business concerns critically evaluate
artificial intelligence tools, and for
other purposes.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The text of the bill is as follows:
H.R. 5784
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Artificial Intelligence Wisdom for Innovative Small Enterprises Act’’ or the ‘‘AI–WISE Act’’.

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC.

2.

ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES AND MODULES FOR SMALL BUSINESS CONCERNS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—The Small Business Act

(15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.) is amended—
(1) by redesignating section 49 as section
50; and
(2) by inserting after section 48 the following new section:
‘‘SEC.

49.

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES AND MODULES FOR SMALL BUSINESS CONCERNS.
IN GENERAL.—The Administrator

‘‘(a)
shall—
‘‘(1) establish and maintain educational resources and modules for small business concerns with information on artificial intelligence tools; and
‘‘(2) make such educational resources and
modules publicly available on an existing online learning platform of the Administration.
‘‘(b) CONTENTS.—The educational resources
and modules established under subsection (a)
shall include, to the extent practicable, information on—
‘‘(1) how artificial intelligence models
work, including the limits of the capabilities
of such models, and how such limits affect
the outputs of such tools;
‘‘(2) how to determine if software outputs
are generated with the use of artificial intelligence;
‘‘(3) how to remain updated on the emergence, development, and technological maturation of artificial intelligence;
‘‘(4) how to understand and remain updated
on the policies, terms, and conditions applicable to users of artificial intelligence;
‘‘(5) best practices in coordinating with
third-party providers of artificial intelligence tools;
‘‘(6) how to effectively identify, evaluate,
and manage the risks of artificial intelligence;
‘‘(7) how to ensure the privacy of user inputs to artificial intelligence tools;
‘‘(8) how to retain human involvement in
important decisions informed by recommendations made by artificial intelligence;
‘‘(9) how to identify tasks and functions
that artificial intelligence can reliably and
effectively perform, including whether artificial intelligence can improve operations,
productivity, or customer service; and
‘‘(10) how to determine whether an artificial intelligence tool adequately fills a need
and is worth adopting.
‘‘(c) ACCURACY AND MAINTENANCE.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—To the extent practicable, the Administrator shall ensure that
the information contained in the educational
resources and modules established under subsection (a) is factually accurate and current,
including by consulting with—
‘‘(A) the Director of the National Institute
of Standards and Technology; and
‘‘(B) the Advisory Working Group established under paragraph (2).
‘‘(2) ADVISORY WORKING GROUP.—
‘‘(A) ESTABLISHMENT.—The Administrator
shall establish a working group (in this paragraph referred to as the ‘Advisory Working
Group’) with which the Administrator shall
consult on an ongoing basis regarding the information contained in the educational resources and modules established under subsection (a).
‘‘(B) DUTIES.—The duties of the Advisory
Working Group shall include the identification and recommendation of relevant information to the Administrator for inclusion in
the educational resources and modules established under subsection (a).
‘‘(C) MEMBERS.—The Advisory Working
Group shall be comprised of the following

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.017

H20JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 20, 2026

members, who shall be selected by the Administrator:
‘‘(i) Individuals with demonstrated expertise in artificial intelligence, including—
‘‘(I) not less than one individual from the
private sector;
‘‘(II) not less than one individual from academia;
‘‘(III) not less than one individual from an
organization with demonstrated expertise in
ensuring artificial intelligence outputs—
‘‘(aa) are reliable, secure, transparent, and
not used for illegal purposes; and
‘‘(bb) which protect user privacy; and
‘‘(IV) not less than one individual with
demonstrated expertise in the creation of
educational or professional development materials regarding artificial intelligence.
‘‘(ii) Individuals with demonstrated expertise in outreach to small business concerns,
including—
‘‘(I) not less than one individual from each
resource partner;
‘‘(II) not less than one individual from a
district office of the Administration; and
‘‘(III) not less than one individual from an
association representing small business concerns.
‘‘(D) VACANCIES.—Any vacancy in the Advisory Working Group shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment.
‘‘(E) INAPPLICABILITY OF FACA.—The requirements of chapter 10 of title 5, United
States Code, shall not apply to the Advisory
Working Group established under this paragraph.
‘‘(3) INCORPORATION OF INFORMATION IN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES AND MODULES.—In establishing and maintaining the educational resources and modules under subsection (a),
the Administrator—
‘‘(A) shall consider relevant, existing information developed by resource partners;
‘‘(B) may consider relevant, existing information developed by private entities; and
‘‘(C) may incorporate information described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) into
such educational resources and modules.
‘‘(d) RESOURCE PARTNER INVOLVEMENT.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall
coordinate with resource partners to disseminate information to raise the awareness
of small business concerns about availability
of the educational resources and modules established under subsection (a).
‘‘(2) SPECIALIZED AND LOCALIZED EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT.—Resource
partners may develop specialized and localized training resources to more effectively
disseminate the information in the educational resources and modules established
under subsection (a), including by incorporating information on uses of artificial intelligence tools common to the community
served by such resource partner.
‘‘(e) MANNER.—The Administrator shall ensure that the information in the educational
resources and modules established under subsection (a)—
‘‘(1) is actionable and presented in a manner that is easily comprehensible by small
business concerns;
‘‘(2) does not give preference to a particular artificial intelligence model or tool
over similar such models or tools; and
‘‘(3) does not give preference to an artificial intelligence model or tool developed by
a specific entity or group of entities over an
artificial intelligence model or tool developed by another entity or group of entities.
‘‘(f) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE DEFINED.—In
this section, the term ‘artificial intelligence’
has the meaning given such term in section
5002 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2021 (15 U.S.C. 9401).’’.
(b) DEADLINE.—The Administrator of the
Small Business Administration shall estab-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:10 Jan 21, 2026

H935

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

lish the educational resources and modules
required by section 49 of the Small Business
Act (15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.), as added by this
Act, not later than 180 days after the date of
the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 3. COMPLIANCE WITH CUTGO.

No additional amounts are authorized to
carry out this Act or the amendments made
by this Act.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from
Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) and the gentlewoman
from
New
York
(Ms.
VELÁZQUEZ) each will control 20 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Texas.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that
all Members may have 5 legislative
days in which to revise and extend
their remarks and include extraneous
material on the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Texas?
There was no objection.
b 1610
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise in support of
H.R. 5784, the Artificial Intelligence
Wisdom for Innovative Small Enterprises Act, the AI-WISE Act. This bipartisan bill is led by Representatives
SCHOLTEN and DOWNING.
Artificial intelligence is changing
how businesses operate in real time.
While large corporations can afford expensive consultants and trial-and-error
experimentation, many small businesses do not have the luxury to do
that. For a small business owner like
myself, every dollar matters. The AIWISE Act helps bridge that gap.
This bill directs the SBA to provide
clear, accessible, and practical guidance that helps small business owners
understand artificial intelligence in
straightforward terms. It focuses on
helping entrepreneurs evaluate whether an artificial intelligence tool is useful for their specific business, where it
may fall short, and whether it is truly
worth the cost before they spend their
money to get that.
Importantly, this bill does all of this
without authorizing any new spending.
It builds on existing programs, avoids
picking winners and losers, and keeps
the Federal Government focused on
providing information, not mandates.
I urge my colleagues to support this
commonsense, bipartisan legislation
and to vote ‘‘yes’’ on H.R. 5784.
Madam Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I am proud to support H.R. 5784, the AI-WISE Act.
Four years ago, AI burst into mainstream focus with the launch of
OpenAI’s ChatGPT. When I first tried

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

this tool, I was shocked. I knew then
and there that AI had the potential to
revolutionize the way American firms
operate and do business.
AI, like all emerging technology,
comes with risks. AI outputs are prone
to bias, discrimination, misinformation, and omissions. Safety and cybersecurity vulnerabilities can render AI
deployers open to adversarial attacks.
We don’t even fully know this risk because we cannot predict AI’s trajectory, so new risk could come up as it
evolves and adds capabilities.
We have all seen reports of GenAI
gone wrong, with episodes ranging
from customer service chatbots at car
dealerships offering to sell pickup
trucks for $1 to general purpose
chatbots advising small businesses to
break the law.
In other words, a small business
using a flawed AI model risks steep
reputational and legal harm. Many of
these incidents are attributable simply
to AI’s current technological immaturity and the growing pains that come
with its ongoing evolution. This is why
AI literacy is crucial for small businesses to keep up with their larger
competitors considering and adopting
AI.
The AI-WISE Act will direct SBA to
create online AI literacy resources for
entrepreneurs, so they have the tools
to make sound choices on AI adoption
and use. It will also direct the SBA to
keep their resources updated on innovations in AI technology through an
expert working group. Finally, the bill
will allow the SBA resource partners to
develop specialized and localized assistance to best educate their communities.
I thank my colleagues, Ms. SCHOLTEN
and Mr. DOWNING, for collaborating
over the last 2 years to bring this bill
to the floor. Furthermore, let me convey my gratitude to Chairman WILLIAMS;
his staff director, Lauren
Holmes; and all the floor staff for seeing this bill through today. It is greatly appreciated.
Madam Speaker, I urge Members to
support this bill, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, I yield such time as he may
consume to the gentleman from Montana (Mr. DOWNING).
Mr. DOWNING. Madam Speaker, I
rise in strong support of H.R. 5784, the
AI-WISE Act. This legislation will provide essential resources for small businesses to support their efforts to adopt
AI.
Small businesses are optimistic
about the potential of AI. Capabilities
like machine learning and language
processing are becoming critical tools
for businesses seeking streamlined operations, like workforce recruitment,
marketing, and strategy development.
However, businesses with substantial
and stable access to capital tend to be
better positioned for technology adoption and dealing with its ramifications.
Small businesses, on the other hand,

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.005

H20JAPT1

H936

including businesses in rural communities like my home district in central
and eastern Montana, often lack the
resources and information needed to facilitate technology adoption.
For example, according to a 2025 report from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 59 percent of small businesses in
Montana have adopted AI into their operations. While this figure may seem
significant, it pales in comparison to
the near-universal adoption of AI that
is seen with Fortune 500 companies.
That is why I am proud to co-lead H.R.
5784, the AI-WISE Act, with my colleague, Representative SCHOLTEN.
The AI-WISE Act directs the Small
Business Administration, the SBA, to
establish educational resources on AI
for small businesses through its online
learning platform. In doing so, this legislation seeks to provide small businesses with the technical and practical
knowledge needed to best navigate AI
adoption.
The scope of this educational material will include resources for small
businesses on how AI models work, how
businesses can identify tasks that AI
can effectively perform, and the best
practices for coordinating with thirdparty providers and protecting data
privacy.
Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague, Representative SCHOLTEN, for
co-leading this legislation with me.
The AI-WISE Act will ensure small
businesses have the information that
they need to most effectively utilize AI
to bolster their entrepreneurship.
Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues to vote in support of this legislation.
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ. Madam Speaker, I
commend Ms. SCHOLTEN and Mr. DOWNING for their dedication to our Nation’s
innovative small enterprises, and I
urge my colleagues to support H.R.
5784.
Madam Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas. Madam
Speaker, we cannot leave Main Street
behind in the adoption of AI. I urge my
colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’ on this legislation, and I yield back the balance of
my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) that the House suspend the
rules and pass the bill, H.R. 5784.
The question was taken; and (twothirds being in the affirmative) the
rules were suspended and the bill was
passed.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

VETERANS LAW JUDGE
EXPERIENCE ACT OF 2025
Mr. BOST. Madam Speaker, I move
to suspend the rules and pass the bill
(H.R. 659) to amend title 38, United
States Code, to direct the Chairman of
the Board of Veterans’ Appeals to give
priority to individuals with certain

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

02:44 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

professional experience in recommending such individuals to serve as
members of the Board of Veterans’ Appeals, and for other purposes.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The text of the bill is as follows:
H.R. 659
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Veterans
Law Judge Experience Act of 2025’’.
SEC. 2. PRIORITY FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH CERTAIN PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
IN APPOINTMENTS TO BOARD OF
VETERANS’ APPEALS.

Subsection (a) of section 7101A of title 38,
United States Code, is amended by adding at
the end the following new paragraph:
‘‘(3) In recommending individuals to the
Secretary to serve as members of the Board,
the Chairman shall give priority to individuals with three or more years of legal professional experience in areas that pertain to the
laws administered by the Secretary.’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from Illinois (Mr. BOST) and the gentleman
from California (Mr. TAKANO) each will
control 20 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Illinois.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. BOST. Madam Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days in which to
revise and extend their remarks on
H.R. 659.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Illinois?
There was no objection.
Mr. BOST. Madam Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise today in support of H.R. 659.
This bill would require the chairman
of the Board of Veterans’ Appeals to
prioritize people with at least 3 years
of relevant experience working in veterans law when recommending new veteran law judges to the VA Secretary
for positions at the VA.
b 1620
This legislation does not alter the
criteria the board currently uses to
evaluate judges, and it does not restrict the board chairman from recommending other qualified candidates.
Madam Speaker, this bill would ensure that the best judges with vitally
important firsthand experience are
serving our veterans at the VA.
Veterans expect that those who are
hearing their appeal or reviewing evidence in support of their appeal, have
the skills, knowledge, and experience
in veterans law to make sound decisions.
I support this commonsense legislation, and I urge all of my colleagues to
support H.R. 659. Madam Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. TAKANO. Madam Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise to express my
support for H.R. 659, the Veterans Law
Judge Experience Act of 2025.

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Madam Speaker, contrary to what
the American public often thinks,
sometimes in this body we actually do
things that make sense.
That is very much the case with H.R.
659, the Veterans Law Judge Experience Act introduced by my friend and
colleague,
Representative
JULIA
BROWNLEY.
This bill is simple and straightforward.
It states that when recommending
individuals to serve on the Board of
Veterans’ Appeals, priority should be
given to those who have 3 or more
years of experience in practicing veterans law.
The Veterans’ Affairs Committee
hears often about the complex nature
of the disability compensation system
at the Department of Veterans Affairs.
That complexity, unfortunately, leads
to mistakes and errors that cause our
veterans’ disability claims to be denied
prematurely. Especially now at a time
when we have seen that Secretary Collins has shifted the Department’s focus
from getting claims right to simply
getting them fast, we are seeing higher
rates of processing errors, higher denial rates, and consequently higher
rates of appeals to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals, the BVA.
In that context, it is imperative that
the BVA has the staffing levels and experience levels to get things right for
our veterans. I, along with everyone
else, support efforts to ensure that veterans and beneficiaries are being
served at every point of contact in VA
by the best talent we can muster.
One way we can do that is by ensuring we have the right folks in the right
roles. This legislation seeks to help
that at BVA by focusing on hiring
those with sufficient experience to best
serve our veterans.
We can and should look to staff the
Board of Veterans’ Appeals with attorneys that have demonstrated expertise
in this area, attorneys who are experienced and who can see beyond quotas
and metrics to apply the law to the
maximum benefit of veterans at the
heart of the process.
So, Madam Speaker, I strongly support H.R. 659 and urge my colleagues to
do the same.
I also want to mention another bill
that the House should take up which
would further improve the BVA. H.R.
2303, introduced by Representative
MORGAN MCGARVEY, increases the promotion potential for attorneys at the
Board of Veterans’ Appeals.
I know that my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle balk at anything
that might result in civil servants receiving more compensation, but if we
agree that we need to hire board attorneys with greater experience, and we
are asking them to do more work and
more complex work at that, we ought
to see fit to pay them what they are
worth. I hope that my colleagues see
fit to advance that bill very soon, as
well.
Madam Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.021

H20JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 20, 2026

Mr. BOST. Madam Speaker, I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. TAKANO. Madam Speaker, before I actually yield to the gentlewoman
from
California
(Ms.
BROWNLEY), I want to—in recognition
of her announced retirement, though
she is going to be with us for the rest
of the year, but I don’t know if I will
ever have this chance of a moment on
the floor with her again—point out
that she was the leader of the very first
Women Veterans Task Force that resulted in the Deborah Sampson Act,
which unfortunately, is really substantively the bill that she put forward
and is really the real author of, but it
carries somebody else’s name. It is the
same with the Elizabeth Dole 21st Century Veterans Healthcare and Benefits
Improvement Act. It is an amazing
piece of legislation and amazingly substantive. The Elizabeth Dole 21st Century Veterans Healthcare and Benefits
Improvement Act has laid the groundwork for our senior veterans who want
to age in place at home. Congresswoman BROWNLEY has worked on that
and many other pieces of legislation as
the chair and then ranking member of
the Subcommittee on Health.
It is with a heavy heart that I yield
such time as she may consume to the
gentlewoman from California (Ms.
BROWNLEY), my good friend and colleague, the ranking member of the
Subcommittee on Health, and the author of this legislation.
Ms. BROWNLEY. Madam Speaker, I
thank the ranking member for yielding, and I thank him for the very kind
words. I appreciate it very much. I
thank the chairman and the ranking
member for their support of this bill,
the Veterans Law Judge Experience
Act, and for their work to bring it to
the floor today.
Every day, far too many veterans
across this country are waiting for a
VA benefit decision, but not only for
the benefits they are due, but for the
stability, the security, and the relief
that comes with these benefits.
Too often, that wait stretches from
months and sometimes into years. During that time, veterans are left in
limbo, unable to work, struggling to
support their families, and forced to
navigate a system that moves far too
slowly for the urgency of their lives.
Across our district offices, our caseworkers hear directly from veterans
who are desperate for answers about
their claims and appeals. In many
cases, a timely VA decision could
change a veteran’s life. Yet, even after
waiting for an initial decision, they
may need to appeal their case to the
Board of Veterans’ Appeals where they
face more months and often years of
additional delay.
Veterans deserve a system that
works with the same urgency and seriousness with which they served our Nation. In recent years, despite hiring
new veteran law judges, the board has
often lacked the experienced personnel
needed to move cases efficiently and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:44 Jan 21, 2026

H937

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

accurately. This is in part due to the
fact that in February 2020 the longstanding experience requirement for
the veteran law judges was eliminated,
opening the door to hiring judges without a background in veterans law.
While we respect the commitment of
those entering this workforce, the reality is that lengthy training periods
slow decisions, increase errors, and
leave veterans waiting even longer for
answers.
The Veterans Law Judge Experience
Act takes a practical, commonsense,
and targeted step to address this challenge to encourage the Board of Veterans’ Appeals to prioritize hiring
judges with at least 3 years of veterans’
law experience. That means more cases
decided, fewer delays, and stronger retention of professionals who already
understand this complex and deeply
consequential area of the law.
Hiring
experienced
veteran
law
judges will help speed the appeals process, improve the accuracy of decisions,
and reduce unnecessary appeals to the
U.S. Court of Appeals for Veteran
Claims.
According to the Department of Veterans Affairs, there are approximately
200,000 pending appeals before the board
today—200,000 pending appeals before
the board today.
Further, a GAO audit spanning 2019
to 2022, showed the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veteran Claims either partially or fully remanded more than 80
percent of veteran cases back to the
board,
resting
the
clock
and
compounding delays.
b 1630
Madam Speaker, our obligation to
veterans does not end when they no
longer serve in uniform. It continues in
how we care for them, how we honor
their service, and how seriously we
take the responsibility to deliver the
benefits they have earned. That is what
guides my work on the House Veterans’
Affairs Committee and why I am proud
to see this bipartisan bill move forward.
By strengthening the expertise of the
Board of Veterans’ Appeals, we can reduce the backlog, restore trust in the
system, and ensure veterans receive
the timely and fair decisions they deserve.
Madam Speaker, I respectfully urge
my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’ on this
bill which passed the House Veterans’
Affairs Committee with overwhelming
bipartisan support.
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, in closing, I encourage my colleagues to vote
‘‘yes’’ on H.R. 659, the Veterans Law
Judge Experience Act of 2025. It is clear
to me from the words on the floor from
the ranking member of the House subcommittee, JULIA BROWNLEY, that this
bill is wise, it is warranted, and it is
well-thought-out.
The arguments for it are about helping our veterans receive their claims
and get their claims approved in a
timely manner. Again, I repeat my sen-

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

timent that we appreciate her service
to this body. She has left an indelible
mark on veterans’ policy, on veterans’
affairs, and I look forward to serving
the balance of this year with my colleague and congratulate her on a brilliant career in the House of Representatives.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. BOST. Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the gentlewoman from California
for her time in service here. I wish her
the best. Hopefully, we will continue
working together, as we still have a lot
of things to get done. This bill is a very
good bill.
Mr. Speaker, I, once again, encourage
all Members to support this legislation,
and I yield back the balance of my
time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
NEWHOUSE). The question is on the motion offered by the gentleman from Illinois (Mr. BOST) that the House suspend
the rules and pass the bill, H.R. 659.
The question was taken; and (twothirds being in the affirmative) the
rules were suspended and the bill was
passed.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

VETERANS SCAM AND FRAUD
EVASION ACT OF 2025
Mr. BOST. Mr. Speaker, I move to
suspend the rules and pass the bill
(H.R. 1663) to amend title 38, United
States Code, to establish in the Department of Veterans Affairs a Veterans
Scam and Fraud Evasion Officer, and
for other purposes, as amended.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The text of the bill is as follows:
H.R. 1663
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Veterans
Scam And Fraud Evasion Act of 2025’’ or the
‘‘VSAFE Act of 2025’’.
SEC. 2. VETERANS SCAM AND FRAUD EVASION
OFFICER.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Chapter 3 of title 38,

United States Code, is amended by adding at
the end the following new section:
‘‘§ 326. Veterans Scam and Fraud Evasion Officer
‘‘(a) ESTABLISHMENT.—There is in the Department a Veterans Scam and Fraud Evasion Officer, who shall—
‘‘(1) be responsible for fraud and scam prevention, reporting, and incident response
plans at the Department; and
‘‘(2) serve as a central point of contact to
direct veterans to resources to prevent and
mitigate fraud and scams.
Veterans
‘‘(b)
RESPONSIBILITIES.—The
Scam and Fraud Evasion Officer shall carry
out the following responsibilities:
‘‘(1) Providing comprehensive communication from the Secretary to employees of the
Department and veterans, their families,
caregivers, and survivors during strategic
and time-sensitive fraud and scam incidents.
‘‘(2) Establishing consistent guidance
across the enterprise for employees as well
as veterans, their families, caregivers, and

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.024

H20JAPT1

H938

survivors on how to identify, report, and
avoid fraud and scam attempts.
‘‘(3) Promoting the VSAFE Fraud Hotline
and VSAFE.gov website of the Department
(and any successor resources) and identifying
other identity theft resources available to
veterans, their families, caregivers, and survivors, including with respect to actions
made by the Secretary to protect the identities of veterans and their beneficiaries.
‘‘(4) Developing methods to monitor fraud
and scam metrics within the Department
to—
‘‘(A) provide internal and external reporting;
‘‘(B) enable advanced data analytics; and
‘‘(C) facilitate proactive and robust fraud
and scam trend identification.
‘‘(5) Developing comprehensive training
plans for Department employees fielding
fraud and scam inquiries and reports.
‘‘(6) Coordinating with the Inspector General of the Department and other Federal departments and agencies, including the Executive Office of the President, the Office of
Management and Budget, the Internal Revenue Service, the Department of Justice, the
Department of State, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Department of
Defense, the Department of Education, the
Social Security Administration, and other
relevant agencies to—
‘‘(A) develop a whole-of-Government view
within the Department to improve fraud prevention efforts within the Department;
‘‘(B) identify the proper avenues for veterans to report fraud attempts and receive
assistance; and
‘‘(C) identify opportunities for coordination with such departments and agencies.
‘‘(7) Consulting with veterans service organizations and State, local, and tribal governments, as necessary, to improve understanding of potential fraud and scam risks to
veterans.
‘‘(c) FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES.—Nothing in
this section authorizes an increase in the
number of full-time employees otherwise authorized for the Department.
‘‘(d) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the Office of Inspector General
of the Department as otherwise provided in
this title or in chapter 4 of title 5 (commonly
referred to as the Inspector General Act of
1978).
‘‘(e) SUNSET.—The requirements and authorities of this section shall terminate on
September 30, 2030.’’.
(b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT.—The table of
sections at the beginning of such chapter is
amended by adding at the end the following
new item:
‘‘326. Veterans Scam and Fraud Evasion Officer.’’.
SEC. 3. EXTENSION OF CERTAIN LIMITS ON PAYMENTS OF PENSION.

Section 5503(d)(7) of title 38, United States
Code, is amended by striking ‘‘January 31,
2033’’ and inserting ‘‘March 31, 2033’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from Illinois (Mr. BOST) and the gentleman
from California (Mr. TAKANO) each will
control 20 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Illinois.
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. BOST. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members have 5
legislative days in which to revise and
extend their remarks on H.R. 1663, as
amended.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Illinois?

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

02:44 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

There was no objection.
Mr. BOST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support
of H.R. 1663, as amended, offered by
Representative CALVERT from California.
This bill would protect veterans from
scams and fraud that may target the
benefits they earned through service.
Too many veterans, along with their
families, caregivers, and survivors, are
being hit with savvy fraud schemes designed to steal personal information,
drain bank accounts, and even redirect
VA benefits to bad actors. When these
scams happen, veterans often don’t
know where to turn inside the Federal
system.
The VSAFE Act would take direct
action to fix this issue. This bill would
add dedicated veterans scam and fraud
evasion officer positions at the Department of Veterans Affairs. This would
rightfully build up VA’s fraud prevention and response efforts across VA, so
this problem is treated like a real
threat, not just an afterthought.
Representative CALVERT’s bill would
also require VA to improve communications during urgent fraud incidents, so veterans and their families
are not left in the dark while scammers
continue to strike. By building up VA’s
existing antifraud tools, adding new
ones where necessary, we can combat
fraud head-on.
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day,
veterans should never lose their hardearned benefits because the system
failed to protect them from criminals.
The VSAFE Act should strengthen the
accountability, improve prevention,
and give veterans the support and protection they deserve.
This bill takes an important step toward
safeguarding
veterans
and
strengthening trust in the VA system,
and I am proud to support it.
Mr. Speaker, I urge all of my colleagues to support H.R. 1663, as amended, and I reserve the balance of my
time.
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak in hesitant support of H.R. 1663, the Veterans
Scam And Fraud Evasion, or VSAFE,
Act, as amended.
I fully support the intention of this
bill and strongly encourage the Department to fully resource the VSAFE program established under President
Biden. However, the actions taken by
the Trump administration over the last
year will significantly hinder the great
work that has been accomplished by
the VSAFE Task Force, the Federal
Trade Commission, and the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, which is,
unfortunately, more pressing than
ever.
According to the Federal Trade Commission, veterans reported some of the
highest numbers of fraud complaints
and greatest total losses in 2024,
amounting to nearly $600 million. Veterans also continually face higher

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

losses than their civilian counterparts,
with median losses reported around
$700, which is over $200 higher than the
general population.
Both the FTC and CFPB have done
important work in identifying the
most pressing scams and fraudulent activities that target veterans and their
families. These include scams like
credit card fraud, investment schemes,
and imposter scams, which seek to impersonate government officials, technology support, or even love interests
to collect money or gain access to veterans’ personal systems.
They have also identified the threat
of multilevel marketing schemes and
other ‘‘business opportunities,’’ like
Amway, Mary Kay, and Herbalife, who
regularly target veterans, servicemembers, and their families under the guise
of patriotism, flexible hours, and financial independence.
I applaud my colleague, Representative DELIA RAMIREZ, for offering an
amendment
to
require
specific
trainings on these tactics to provide
veterans and their families with clear,
actionable guidance to protect their
hard-earned benefits. It is unfortunate
that this commonsense amendment
was voted down by the Republican
members of our committee.
Lastly, I find it ironic that these
same Republican colleagues want to
advance this legislation while our
President actively dismantles the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,
one of the only agencies set up to protect military and veteran consumers.
This is ironic.
Since its inception in 2008, the CFPB
has returned more than $21 billion—
that is billion with a b—back to consumers, which includes hundreds of
millions of dollars to servicemembers
and veterans impacted by violations of
the Military Lending Act. Unfortunately, President Trump has determined that those who served our Nation no longer deserve protections
against bad actors who seek to profit
off their benefits.
As fraudsters’ ability to create more
complex scams and become more convincing in their deceit thanks to
emerging technologies like artificial
intelligence, the time to create informed and resourced tools is now.
H.R. 1663 marks a step in the right direction, but I urge my congressional
colleagues to do more to help protect
our Nation’s veterans against these
scams.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. BOST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Someday, I would like to carry on
this floor from our committee a bill
that is actually sponsored by a Republican that my colleague can actually
find totally good. We come out here
every time, and he finds all the excuses
of why this is bad, this is bad, and this
is bad. This is a really good bill.
Mr. Speaker, I yield such time as he
may consume to the gentleman from

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.008

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

California (Mr. CALVERT), the person
who has worked very hard on this bill
to make sure it deals with the fraud
that is out there.
b 1640
Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Speaker, through
their service and sacrifice, our veterans
willingly put themselves in harm’s way
to ensure the security of our country.
It is our turn to ensure that they are
protected from scams and fraud. That
is why I introduced H.R. 1663, the Veterans Scam And Fraud Evasion Act, or
VSAFE Act.
The sophistication and frequency of
scams and fraud targeting our veterans
are constantly increasing. According to
a report from the Federal Trade Commission, U.S. veterans and military retirees reported $350 million in total
fraud losses in 2023.
While a number of departments and
staff work in an uncoordinated manner
to combat fraud within the VA and
other agencies, the VSAFE Act will establish a comprehensive effort that
will assist our veterans by establishing
a veterans scam and fraud evasion officer in the Department of Veterans Affairs who is responsible for all fraud
prevention efforts.
By providing veterans with more consistent guidance on how to identify, report, and avoid fraud and scam attempts, we can reduce the occurrences
that are occurring.
I thank Chairman MIKE BOST and all
the cosponsors of this bill for their support. I encourage all of my colleagues
to protect our veterans by supporting
the VSAFE Act.
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time to close.
In response to the chairman, let me
just say that I did say that this bill
was a step in the right direction, a step
that could be a big leap if we all got behind bigger initiatives and called upon
this administration to stop diminishing and diluting the power of the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
The results of protecting military
servicemembers and veterans by that
particular agency are undisputed, and
it became particularly impactful when
it was in full force. The philosophy of
this administration has been to diminish the authority and reach of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau as
well as the Federal Trade Commission,
and our veterans are suffering.
In spite of this very small step we are
taking with this bill, it is insufficient
to take on the enormous challenge of
fighting fraudsters in this country who
will take advantage of those who have
laid their lives on the line for all of us.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this legislation, and I intend to
vote ‘‘yes.’’ I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. BOST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time to close. I
encourage all Members to support this
piece of legislation. I think it is a wonderful piece of legislation. It is way
overdue.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:44 Jan 21, 2026

H939

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Illinois (Mr. BOST)
that the House suspend the rules and
pass the bill, H.R. 1663, as amended.
The question was taken; and (twothirds being in the affirmative) the
rules were suspended and the bill, as
amended, was passed.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess until approximately 6:30 p.m. today.
Accordingly (at 4 o’clock and 43 minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1630
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mrs. KIM) at 6 o’clock and 30
minutes p.m.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Proceedings will resume on motions to
suspend the rules previously postponed.
Votes will be taken in the following
order:
H.R. 5763; and
H.R. 5764.
The first electronic vote will be conducted as a 15-minute vote. Pursuant
to clause 9 of rule XX, the remaining
electronic vote will be conducted as a
5-minute vote.
f

MAIN STREET PARITY ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on the motion to suspend the rules and pass the
bill (H.R. 5763) to amend the Small
Business Investment Act of 1958 to
modify the criteria for loans for plant
acquisition, construction, conversion
or expansion, and for other purposes,
on which the yeas and nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) that the House suspend the
rules and pass the bill.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 383, nays 8,
not voting 40, as follows:
[Roll No. 32]
YEAS—383
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Allen

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Arrington
Auchincloss

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Balint
Barr

Barragán
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Beyer
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Burchett
Burlison
Bynum
Calvert
Cammack
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Cloud
Clyburn
Clyde
Cohen
Cole
Collins
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crow
Cuellar
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Escobar
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.029

H20JAPT1

Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Fry
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gill (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gosar
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grijalva
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (IL)
Jackson (TX)
Jacobs
James
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Kennedy (UT)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu

Lofgren
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luttrell
Lynch
Mace
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Massie
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain
McClellan
McClintock
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGarvey
McGovern
McGuire
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Norcross
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Olszewski
Omar
Onder
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Perez
Perry
Peters
Pettersen
Pfluger
Pingree
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross
Rouzer
Roy
Ruiz
Rulli
Rutherford
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schmidt

H940
Schneider
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Steil
Steube
Stevens
Strickland
Strong

Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

bill (H.R. 5764) to amend the Small
Business Act to require small business
development centers to assist small
business concerns with the use of artificial intelligence, and for other purposes, as amended, on which the yeas
and nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Texas (Mr. WILLIAMS) that the House suspend the
rules and pass the bill, as amended.
This is a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 395, nays 14,
not voting 22, as follows:

Self
Spartz

Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Allen
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Arrington
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Balint
Barr
Barragán
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Beyer
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Burchett
Burlison
Bynum
Calvert
Cammack
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Cloud
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crane
Crank

[Roll No. 33]
YEAS—395

NAYS—8
Brecheen
Davids (KS)
Davidson

Fletcher
Harrigan
Knott

NOT VOTING—40

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Baird
Casar
CherfilusMcCormick
Ciscomani
Crenshaw
Crockett
Fong
Gimenez
Harris (MD)
Hill (AR)
Houlahan
Huffman
Huizenga

Hunt
Ivey
Jayapal
Lawler
Luna
Mackenzie
Mast
McCaul
McClain Delaney
Murphy
Nehls
Ocasio-Cortez
Pelosi
Pocan

Ramirez
Rogers (AL)
Scholten
Shreve
Smucker
Stauber
Stefanik
Swalwell
Tiffany
Wagner
Wasserman
Schultz
Wilson (FL)
Womack

b 1854
Messrs. HARRIGAN and KNOTT
changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to
‘‘nay.’’
Ms. WILLIAMS of Georgia and Mr.
NORCROSS changed their vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So (two-thirds being in the affirmative) the rules were suspended and the
bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
Stated for:
Mr. LAWLER. Madam Speaker, had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call
No. 32.
Mr. MACKENZIE. Madam Speaker, had I
been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll
Call No. 32.
Mr. SHREVE. Madam Speaker, had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call
No. 32.
Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ. Madam
Speaker, I attended an official meeting that did
not end on time and was not able to reach the
House Chamber before the first vote of the series closed. Had I been present, I would have
voted YEA Roll Call No. 32.
Mr. HUIZENGA. Madam Speaker, I
was delayed on the way to the floor
and missed the vote. Had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on
Roll Call No. 32.
f

AI FOR MAIN STREET ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on the motion to suspend the rules and pass the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Stutzman
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Timmons
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Van Drew

02:48 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Crawford
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Escobar
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gill (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gosar
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grijalva

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 9920

Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huffman
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jackson (IL)
Jackson (TX)
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Kennedy (UT)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Loudermilk

Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Lynch
Mace
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McCaul
McClain
McClellan
McClintock
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Norcross
Norman
Nunn (IA)

Obernolte
Ogles
Olszewski
Omar
Onder
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pfluger
Pingree
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross
Rouzer
Ruiz
Rulli
Rutherford
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simon
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Smucker
Sorensen

Clyde
Collins
Davidson
Fletcher
Fry

Harrigan
Knott
Massie
McGuire
Ocasio-Cortez

Soto
Spartz
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Timmons
Titus
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—14
Perry
Roy
Self
Tlaib

NOT VOTING—22
Baird
Casar
CherfilusMcCormick
Ciscomani
Crenshaw
Crockett
Fong

Houlahan
Hunt
McClain Delaney
Murphy
Nehls
Pelosi
Pocan
Ramirez

Scholten
Stefanik
Swalwell
Tiffany
Wagner
Wilson (FL)
Womack

b 1905
So (two-thirds being in the affirmative) the rules were suspended and the
bill, as amended, was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Ms. SCHOLTEN. Madam Speaker, I was
unable to vote today. Had I been present, I
would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 32
and YEA on Roll Call No. 33.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Mr. WOMACK. Madam Speaker, I was unavoidably absent and unable to vote. Had I
been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll
Call No. 32 and YEA on Roll Call No. 33.

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.010

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

REMOVAL OF NAME OF MEMBER
AS COSPONSOR OF H.R. 5116
Mrs. MILLER of Illinois. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to remove
the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr.
EVANS) as cosponsor of H.R. 5116.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
BAUMGARTNER). Is there objection to
the request of the gentlewoman from
Illinois?
There was no objection.
f

HONORING GLENN RITCHEY
(Mr. FINE asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. FINE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize and honor Mr. Glenn
Ritchey, a distinguished Floridian
whose lifelong dedication to civic leadership, business excellence, and community service has left an indelible
mark on Daytona Beach, the State of
Florida, and the Nation.
Mr. Ritchey is the former mayor of
Daytona Beach, serving from 2006 to
2012. He contributed his time to a wide
range of civic, educational, and charitable organizations. His service demonstrates a steadfast commitment to
progress and public good.
His accomplishments have been recognized with dozens of prestigious
awards, including the United Way’s
Herbert M. Davidson Award for Outstanding Community Service and the
NAACP Humanitarian of the Year
Award. In 2019, he was honored for the
18th consecutive year as a GM Dealer
of the Year, one of only three dealers
in the Nation to hold that distinction.
Glenn Ritchey is also a proud family
man, with four children, nine grandchildren, and four great-grandchildren.
Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege to
honor Glenn Ritchey for a life dedicated to service, leadership, and community. He embodies the very best of
American citizenship, and I ask my
colleagues to join me in recognizing his
remarkable contributions.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1910
SOUTH CAROLINA STATE UNIVERSITY FOOTBALL TEAM 2025 HBCU
NATIONAL CHAMPIONS
(Mr. CLYBURN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Speaker, I rise a
proud South Carolina State University
alumnus to congratulate its football
team on their new title, the 2025 HBCU
national champions. The Bulldogs
erased a 21-point half-time deficit,
scoring three touchdowns in the third
quarter to win the Cricket Celebration
Bowl in a four-overtime thriller over
Prairie View A&M University. I offer
my not-so-sincere apologies to my good
friend
and
colleague,
EMANUEL
CLEAVER.
The Bulldogs finished the season 10–3
and claimed their second Celebration

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:48 Jan 21, 2026

H941

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Bowl title and third appearance in the
classic over the past 5 years.
It was also a great honor for the city
and county of Orangeburg. The State of
South Carolina showed its appreciation
by flying the school’s flag over the
Capitol dome yesterday as the Nation
honored HBCU graduate, Martin Luther King, Jr.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you and our
colleagues join me in congratulating
the South Carolina State University
Bulldogs for their exceptional season.
This championship will be remembered
not only for the trophies earned and individual achievements but for the
sportsmanship of the Prairie View
A&M Panthers.
f

PASSING LEGISLATION TO REDUCE
UNNECESSARY
ANIMAL
TESTING
(Mr. CARTER of Georgia asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to urge the House to
immediately consider and pass the
FDA Modernization Act 3.0, which reduces unnecessary animal testing.
Many of our families would feel incomplete without the pets and animals
that bring unconditional love to our
lives. However, there are millions of
animals in our country that are forced
into inhumane testing for pharmaceutical development.
When I think about healthcare policy
in Congress, I recognize the need to
protect the lives of those who cannot
defend themselves. In 2022, I helped
pass the FDA Modernization Act 2.0,
allowing drug developers to use modern, animal-free testing methods for
the first time.
This act was intended to cut the requirements from the FDA that put so
many animals in harm’s way. Unfortunately, under the Biden administration, the FDA did not fully implement
this law, limiting its effectiveness and
leaving animals at risk.
That is why I introduced a bill called
the FDA Modernization Act 3.0 to compel the FDA’s career bureaucrats to finally implement the will of the Congress and the American people.
This bill not only helps to reduce and
replace the use of animals in nonclinical research, but it works to improve
these methods and reduce the time of
drug development.
Mr. Speaker, by passing this bill,
Congress can save animal lives and accelerate the delivery of safer, more affordable, and effective medications.
f

SALUTING A NEIGHBOR AND
FRIEND, M. CHRISTINA SELIN
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize and salute the ex-

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ceptional life of M. Christina Selin,
known as Chris to all of her friends, a
resident of New Rochelle, and a tremendous community leader.
Chris is, by profession, a lawyer with
a practice in business and commercial
law. She is an active member of the
New Rochelle Bar Association as part
of that commitment to the law, but
Chris’ work goes well beyond that.
She served for over a decade as a
councilwoman on the New Rochelle
City Council, representing the city’s
South End, service as president of the
New Rochelle Public Library Foundation, active in her neighborhood Sutton Manor Residents Association, and
an ever-present participant at major
community events, like the summer
concerts and all of the other programs
that always happened with Chris
present and participating.
In testimony to her community impact, she was named grand marshal for
the 2025 New Rochelle Thanksgiving
Day Parade, the largest such parade in
the county, and she has received numerous awards and recognitions.
This week, Chris celebrates her 80th
birthday at a soiree at Alvin & Friends,
the popular downtown New Rochelle
establishment, where she will be surrounded by friends and well-wishers.
Mr. Speaker, from the floor of the
House of Representatives, we salute
this neighbor and friend who is making
a tremendous contribution every day
to her profession and to her home community.
f

RECOGNIZING HELEN HAYES HOSPITAL CELEBRATING 125 YEARS
OF SERVICE
(Mr. LAWLER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize an extraordinary
milestone for one of our community’s
most cherished institutions, Helen
Hayes Hospital, celebrating over 125
years of service as of last year.
Founded in 1900 as one of our Nation’s earliest hospitals dedicated to
caring for children with physical disabilities, Helen Hayes Hospital has
grown from a small cottage in
Tarrytown to a nationally recognized
leader in rehabilitation right in the
heart of West Haverstraw.
For generations, families across the
Hudson Valley and far beyond have
turned to Helen Hayes during some of
their most challenging moments, including my grandmother who was recovering from a heart attack. Time
after time, the doctors, nurses, therapists, and staff have delivered worldclass care rooted in compassion, expertise, and a deep commitment to every
patient’s recovery.
From treating children affected by
tuberculosis and polio to helping today’s patients rebuild their lives after
strokes, spinal cord injuries, brain injuries, and complex surgeries, Helen

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.035

H20JAPT1

H942

Hayes Hospital has never wavered in
its mission.
Mr. Speaker, I thank every member
of their team, past and present, for the
life-changing work they have done for
our community for the last 125 years.
f

IMPRESSION OF A
CONGRESSIONAL MEMBER OWL
(Ms. BYNUM asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. BYNUM. Mr. Speaker, I will offer
my impression of a congressional Member owl who will not stand up to the
unconstitutional acts of this administration.
Who? Who me? Everything is okay. I
see the beatings on TV. I see ICE showing up at people’s doors. I see what is
happening, but I am not getting in the
way. I am going to keep my head down.
f

INDIANA—COLLEGE NATIONAL
FOOTBALL CHAMPIONS
(Mr. SHREVE asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. SHREVE. Mr. Speaker, last night
the country watched something nobody
predicted: Indiana, national football
champions. Our Hoosiers beat Miami
27–21, and finished a perfect season and
brought the title home to Indiana.
I say that as a proud IU alum, former
chairman of our IU Alumni Association, over 800,000 living alumni strong.
My wife, Mary, and I have been cheering on our Hoosiers since our college
days.
We will be talking about this play for
a long time: Fourth and five, Fernando
Mendoza puts his head down, bounces
off defenders, spins, stretches, and powers in for the touchdown.
Coach Curt Cignetti took over just
two seasons ago. There were no shortcuts and no gimmicks. It was just work
and belief.
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate IU’s
president Pam Whitten, our AD Scott
Dolson, every player and coach, and
our Hoosier fans who never gave up.
Coach Cignetti said of the season: ‘‘It
would be a helluva movie,’’ and he is
right.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

DEFUND ICE
(Ms. STANSBURY asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
her remarks.)
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, it is
beyond time to defund ICE. It is beyond time to stop the violence. It is beyond time to stop the unfettered use of
force against our communities and to
stop the lawless violation of human
and civil rights. It is beyond time, Mr.
Speaker, to stop the rot from the top,
which has turned this agency into a
rogue and lawless force that is terrorizing our communities.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

02:48 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

This week, the House will consider
funding for DHS and give even more
funding to ICE.
Let me be clear, Mr. Speaker: I am
not only a no, I am a hell no.
From unleashing violence in Minneapolis to dog whistles from the
White House, I have received countless
calls from New Mexicans calling for an
end to this violence because we cannot
and we will not allow ICE to tear our
country apart. We refuse to allow this
administration to terrorize this country, and that is why I will be damned if
we give one more dollar to that rogue
organization, Mr. Speaker. That is why
I will vote ‘‘no,’’ and that is why we
must defund ICE.
f

b 1920
CELEBRATING WINNERS OF 2025
NEW JERSEY 10TH BLACK HISTORY MONTH ESSAY CONTEST
(Mrs. MCIVER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Mrs. MCIVER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
congratulate the 2025 New Jersey 10th
Black History Month Essay Contest
winners.
I love this contest because it showcases the amazing talent found in the
halls of our New Jersey–10 schools. Uplifting our prolific young writers is
vital to empowering the next generation of New Jersey leaders.
Last year, Emma Andre from
Cranford High School, Mia Jones from
University High School, Bruno Mendes
from Science Park High School, Chris
Tacuri from Science Park High School,
and Demetrius Williams from East Orange STEM Academy High School were
each recognized for their tributes to
Black history trailblazers. This year,
the contest continues in celebration of
the 100th anniversary of Black History
Month.
Mr. Speaker, 100 years later, where
do we go from here? I am challenging
New Jersey–10 students to ponder this
question and examine the current state
of Black history, envisioning its future
for generations to come. Submissions
are due by February 23.
f

CELEBRATING DR. MARTIN
LUTHER KING
(Ms. KAPTUR asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, yesterday, alongside hundreds of Ohioans,
our community of Toledo celebrated
the sacrificial life and works of Reverend Martin Luther King.
Macedonia Baptist Church in Toledo,
and its rousing choir, welcomed guest
speaker and NAACP’s national executive board member, Reverend Dr. Wendell Anthony, who spoke eloquently of
the living legacy of Reverend Dr. King.
One quote of Dr. King remains alive—
and there are so many that do—but is

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

particularly poignant and courageous.
He said:
‘‘I’m not one to lose hope. I keep on
hoping. I still have faith in the future.
But I have had to analyze many things
over the last few years. And I would
say over the last few months, I’ve gone
through a lot of soul-searching and agonizing moments. And I have come to
see that we have many more difficulties ahead. Some of the old optimism
was a little superficial, and now it
must be tempered with solid realism.
And I think the realistic fact is that we
still have a long, long way to go.’’
Mr. Speaker, until his life was taken
from him, he worked for hope, optimism, and to build a better world every
day. I share that with every citizen of
our country.
f

CONGRATULATING ABIGAIL ROSS
HOPPER
(Mr. TONKO asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. TONKO. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
recognize and congratulate Abigail
Ross Hopper, who is retiring from her
role as president and CEO of the Solar
Energy Industries Association.
For nearly a decade, Abby has led efforts to develop, to enact, and defend
policies to support solar energy and energy storage.
During this time, the solar industry
has been massively successful. Costs
have come down dramatically. Some
250 gigawatts of installed solar capacity nationwide now exist. That is
enough to power 45 million homes,
making solar an important and rapidly
growing part of our electricity mix.
As of 2024, the industry employed
280,000 Americans across thousands of
companies including a recent boom in
domestic manufacturing jobs. One of
the greatest developments over the
past few years has been the huge
growth in American-made solar panels
and components.
Thanks to policies championed by
Abby and SEIA, the United States has
become the third largest solar module
manufacturer in the world. While I am
saddened by Abby’s departure, I am
confident that because of her leadership, the solar industry is well-positioned to continue playing a leading
role in delivering the affordable, reliable, and pollution-free electricity that
Americans are indeed counting on.
f

BUILDING A BELOVED COMMUNITY
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Ms. MCCLELLAN
of Virginia was recognized for 60 minutes as the designee of the minority
leader.)
GENERAL LEAVE

Ms. MCCLELLAN. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days to revise
and extend their remarks and include

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.037

H20JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 20, 2026

extraneous material on the subject of
my Special Order.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Virginia?
There was no objection.
Ms. MCCLELLAN. Mr. Speaker, it is
with great honor that I rise today to
anchor this Congressional Black Caucus Special Order hour, as we celebrate
the life and legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., whose national holiday
was yesterday and who would have
been 97 years old on January 15.
Mr. Speaker, 1 year ago today was
Martin Luther King Day. It was also
Inauguration Day. As I sat in the rotunda watching the President take the
oath of office, I couldn’t help but ponder the final question that Dr. King
pondered in the last year of his life:
Where do we go from here? Chaos or
community.
Dr. King asked this question after
the victory of the Civil Rights Act and
after the victory of the Voting Rights
Act. He pondered what the Black community should do with this extraordinary power, the power of the vote,
when for the first time in American
history, a government by, of, and for
the people finally included Black
Americans.
He focused on addressing poverty. He
focused on addressing discrimination.
He focused on addressing war. I
thought about another speech that he
gave shortly before he died called: ‘‘Remaining Awake Through a Great Revolution.’’
Before Inauguration Day, one of the
architects of Project 2025, which has
been the blueprint for the second
Trump administration, said this is the
second American Revolution, which
will be peaceful if the left allows it. I
thought about what Dr. King would say
today. His words remain relevant.
Within hours of the President taking
his oath of office, chaos was unleashed.
Through an attack on diversity, equity, and inclusion, we saw over the
past year efforts to roll back the hardwon victories of the civil rights movement.
We see at the Supreme Court right
now a case that could gut what remains of the Voting Rights Act after
the court gutted section 5 and section
4 effectively in the Shelby County v.
Holder case.
We have seen Black and Brown communities, including American citizens,
living in terror as ICE agents show up
on streets, door to door, in our courthouses, and on the way to school, grabbing people and violating their due
process rights.
We have seen trade wars that make
the cost of everything go up. We have
seen a Federal workforce—which was
the doorway to the middle class for
many Black Americans—we have seen
a Federal workforce, in the words of
Russell Vought, ‘‘traumatized.’’ We
have seen the largest cuts to food assistance and healthcare coverage in
American history. That is just the tip

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:48 Jan 21, 2026

H943

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

of the iceberg. Chaos has been unleashed.
Dr. King in his time, while he fought
chaos, he stayed focused on community. He stayed focused on building
what he called the beloved community.
I think the beloved community is best
described as a community in which we
care for one another. It is where we
feed the hungry, where we care for the
sick, and where we house the homeless.
He focused on making sure that the
promises upon which this country was
founded ring true for every American.
b 1930
Before he died, he wondered if the
dream that he talked about on the
March on Washington had become a
nightmare and was too far out of reach.
Yet, on the night before he died, he
told us that he had seen the Promised
Land, that he wouldn’t get there with
us, but he still believed in the power of
community and the power of the beloved community.
Today, the Congressional Black Caucus is carrying forward his work. We
are his legacy. We ensure that what he
fought for—what John Lewis fought
for, and what millions of Americans
have fought for—since the first day in
1619, when Africans were brought to
these shores involuntarily—endures.
From day one, through acts of rebellion, resistance, and self-liberation,
fought for an America that included
them, and we the people.
We carry out that legacy, and we will
fight the chaos every single day to ensure that his work continues. Whether
it is expanding the right to vote,
whether it is fighting unjust wars,
whether it is working to eradicate poverty, whether it is standing up for the
constitutional rights of every American, as the conscience of the Congress,
we will continue that legacy.
Mr. Speaker, it is now my pleasure to
yield to our chairwoman, the Congresswoman from New York (Ms. CLARKE).
Ms. CLARKE of New York. Mr.
Speaker, I am Representative YVETTE
D. CLARKE, chair of the Congressional
Black Caucus, proudly representing
New York’s Ninth Congressional District in central and south Brooklyn.
I thank Congresswoman JENNIFER
MCCLELLAN for anchoring this Congressional Black Caucus Special Order
hour.
Mr. Speaker, I rise tonight with my
colleagues of the Congressional Black
Caucus to commemorate the life and
legacy of the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Dr. King held an unyielding belief
that women and men everywhere, regardless of color or creed, are equal. He
used the power of words and the example of nonviolent resistance to bring us
closer to racial and economic justice.
Dr. King was a man of courage, principles, and faith. We are forever in his
debt. Today, his example inspires us all
toward our highest ideals as Americans. As we gather to honor the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., an

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

American hero and patriot, we are
keenly aware of the pivotal moment in
history in which we stand and of the
forces actively working to undermine
his life’s work.
At a time when the most vulnerable
communities in our Nation are under
relentless attack, the Congressional
Black Caucus continues to uphold Dr.
King’s legacy, rooted in justice, fairness, and equity for all.
Today, ironically, also marks the 1year anniversary of the Trump administration. As we reflect on the damage
that this administration has inflicted
on communities across this Nation, we
call on our colleagues across the aisle
to honor the teachings and philosophy
of the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr., and to work with us to reject
the hateful agenda that has taken hold.
Dr. King devoted his life to reminding us that silence in the face of injustice is not an option. As he so powerfully said: ‘‘Our lives begin to end the
day we become silent about the things
that matter.’’
The Congressional Black Caucus refuses to remain silent in the face of the
pain this administration inflicts on the
American people, from the assaults on
voting rights with the looming Louisiana v. Callais decision before the Supreme Court, to deepening economic
inequality, to the threats against our
Nation’s healthcare.
Today, we are recommitting ourselves to the fight of keeping Dr.
King’s dream and his mission alive.
Ms. MCCLELLAN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the chair for her words.
Mr. Speaker, I now yield to our immediate past chair of the Congressional
Black Caucus, the Congressman from
Nevada’s Fourth, STEVEN HORSFORD.
Mr. HORSFORD. Mr. Speaker, I
thank my colleague from the Commonwealth of Virginia for yielding and to
the chair of the Congressional Black
Caucus, Congresswoman CLARKE, and
all of our colleagues for the work that
we do every single day to live out the
legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor
the legacy of my dear fraternity brother and trailblazing leader, Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Today, I speak with
urgency about the American Dream;
specifically, that dream being under
attack.
More than 60 years ago, Dr. King
warned this Nation that America had
given Black Americans ‘‘a bad check, a
check which has come back marked
‘insufficient funds,’ ’’ a promise made
but not kept, opportunity delayed and
justice deferred.
Mr. Speaker, that warning still rings
true today. Dr. King reminded us that
public policy is a moral act. What we
choose to fund and what we choose to
cut reveals who we value and who we
leave behind. Right now, working families in my home State of Nevada and
all across this country are feeling the
consequences of those choices: Prices
are rising. Wages are stretched thin.
Too many people are working full-time
but still falling behind.

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.040

H20JAPT1

H944

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

While families are struggling to
make ends meet, this administration is
attempting to rewrite history. Just recently, the current occupant of the
White House claimed that civil rightsera protections left White Americans
‘‘very badly treated.’’
These false and dangerous claims tarnish Dr. King’s legacy and the history
in which he lived, which is at risk of
repeating itself today.
Dr. King called for a revolution of
values, and I rise today with my colleagues to reinforce that cause. Today,
that revolution means choosing people
over profits, workers over Wall Street,
and families over special interests.
The American Dream is not dead, but
it is under attack. If we lead with courage, invest with purpose, and govern
with our values, we can revive it for
Nevada and for our entire Nation. That
is how we honor Dr. King’s legacy: by
building an America of equal opportunity, shared prosperity, and dignity
for all.
I encourage all of my colleagues, regardless of party lines, to do their part
in honoring Dr. King through their actions. That is how we carry on his legacy, and that is how we revive the
dream.
Ms. MCCLELLAN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman for his comments.
Mr. Speaker, I now yield to the Congresswoman from North Carolina’s
Fourth District, Congresswoman VALERIE FOUSHEE.
Mrs. FOUSHEE. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman for organizing this
Special Order hour and for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to join my
colleagues in reflecting on the life, legacy, and enduring moral leadership of
the great Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.,
whose vision of justice and equality
continues to shape our Nation’s conscience.
Dr. King’s work reminds us that
progress in this country has never been
inevitable and that the rights and freedoms that we cherish have always required vigilance, courage, and sustained commitment. Today, that lesson
is as urgent as ever. Across our country, communities are feeling the
weight of an administration that governs through extremism, division, punishment, and exclusion.
b 1940
We see it in attacks on our voting
rights, in efforts to criminalize protests, in targeting immigrants and asylum seekers, in the rollback of civil
rights protections, and in policies that
deepen economic inequality while
shielding the powerful from accountability.
Dr. King did not believe justice was
self-executed. He understood that
progress is never handed down. It is demanded. He warned us, as you heard
from our chairwoman, that our lives
begin to end the day we become silent
about things that matter.
Silence, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what
this moment does not allow.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Progress is never achieved without
persistence, and justice is never advanced without those willing to confront complacency and demand accountability.
The Congressional Black Caucus will
not be silent while families are pushed
deeper into poverty, while communities of color are targeted by discriminatory policies, and while the promise
of our democracy is narrowed to serve
the few instead of the many.
We refuse to accept the vision of
America where cruelty is policy and inequality is the goal. Instead, we stand
in the tradition of Dr. King, committed
to dignity, equity, and justice for all.
We will continue to speak out, to act,
and to fight until the promise of this
Nation is fully realized.
Ms. MCCLELLAN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Congresswoman FOUSHEE.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from Maryland (Mr. IVEY).
Mr. IVEY. Mr. Speaker, I thank my
colleague from Virginia for hosting
this event, and I also thank the Congressional Black Caucus for the focus
on this issue tonight.
I was a child in Rocky Mount, North
Carolina, in the late 1960s. I lived
across the street from the Booker T.
Washington High School, so you know
what side of town I lived on.
Rocky Mount was a city that was
still segregated. In fact, it was literally
divided by the railroad tracks that ran
through the middle of the town. The
Whites lived on one side; the Blacks
lived on the other.
My parents were both graduates of
that high school, and I had gone to
work at that point. My mother worked
in the school system. In the late 1960s,
the schools were still segregated. I was
able to see how that changed as my
mother was working and then had the
chance to work at other schools as the
schools integrated.
I knew that the connection was the
civil rights movement that was led by
Dr. Martin Luther King, and Dr. Martin Luther King had preached at that
gymnasium at the Booker T. Washington High School a few years earlier.
I was probably too young to remember
him even showing up, but we recognized the power of that movement and
his leadership.
His leadership was a courage rooted
in faith and total commitment to public service. He knew he was going to be
killed, as you know from the ‘‘I’ve
Been to the Mountaintop’’ speech he
delivered the night before he was assassinated, but he still went on.
In 1956, after he had just graduated—
or he was still working on his dissertation, actually working on graduating
with his Ph.D.—he was called to Montgomery to preach at a church there and
lead the church. When he got there, he
was drafted to become the leader of the
SCLC, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. He was put in that position because they had conflicting
groups. They couldn’t decide who the
leader should be, but they knew it was

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

a critical time, and they knew that
this young man, whose father had been
a preacher, had talent. They put him in
the middle of that position.
This is a young man—I think he was
around 26—who moves to a new town,
doesn’t know anybody there, with his
wife and child. He becomes the pastor
of a church. He is still writing his dissertation at night, and then he becomes the leader of the Montgomery
bus boycott. Talk about gifted leadership.
Not too far into that—they were a
few days in, actually—the White segregationists realized that this bus boycott was serious. They knew that it
was real. They started with the
threats. They tried to threaten people
and threaten to take their jobs away,
but they weren’t able to get away with
that. They weren’t able to undermine
the bus boycott with threats, so they
actually started calling Dr. King’s
house. They threatened his wife, and
they threatened him.
Eventually, the threats became real.
In 1956, somebody put a bomb at his
house and blew up the front part of it.
His wife was there. His young baby was
there. Thank God, neither of them was
hurt. When Dr. King heard about it, he
prayed and then ran to his house as
quickly as he could.
When he got there, a crowd had gathered, hundreds of people, African Americans who lived in that community and
knew about Dr. King and attended his
church. They were angry. If they had
guns, they brought those. If they had
weapons, they brought those. If they
didn’t have that, they grabbed a shovel
or whatever they could get their hands
on and went to the house because they
were ready to seek revenge, but Dr.
King said: That is not our way.
The Christian leadership that he provided was deeply rooted in faith, deeply
rooted in nonviolence, and was ultimately tested that night. He met the
test that night and continued forward.
Part of that movement ended up resulting in the civil rights legislation
that became the crown jewel of the
American democracy, because America
wasn’t really a democracy in 1776 or
when the Constitution was written in
the 1787–1789 era. It certainly wasn’t a
democracy after the Civil War because
right after that, when Reconstruction
ended, the Ku Klux Klan rose up. They
reasserted their right to white supremacy.
African Americans who had been
freed from slavery were pushed back
into an ugly version, an ugly, violent
version that we called segregation. The
Jim Crow laws were put in place. Many
of them had achieved positions, including being elected to this body, and all
of that was stripped away.
For the next 100 years or so, African
Americans lived under the threat of violence. If you looked at a White woman
the wrong way, you could end up dead.
If she just thought you looked at her
the wrong way, you could end up dead.
That is what happened to Emmett Till.

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.042

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Not only that, you had African Americans who came back from service after
World War II, including my father-inlaw, and what they found was an America that was still deeply violent, deeply
racial.
In fact, one of the veterans who came
back who had served in the military
and fought in World War II had his eyes
gouged out when he came back, an act
of violence that shocked the country,
but didn’t shock it enough. We had
other lynchings, and the like, that
went through that era and continued
until the 1960s. That is when Dr. King
and the civil rights movement had
their rendezvous with destiny.
I am here tonight to thank him for
the work that he did. The Voting
Rights Act, which is one of the key
pieces of legislation that came out of
that era, is now under attack. It is
under threat. It is pending in front of
the Supreme Court across the street.
We won’t know how it is going to turn
out until the opinion is released, but I
tell you what: We are not in the same
place we were even then. When the
Voting Rights Act was passed in 1965,
yes, there was division. There were
people who opposed it. There were segregationists—they called themselves
Dixiecrats then—who opposed it, as
well.
When it was reauthorized in 2006, the
vote in the House was 390–33, and it
passed the Senate unanimously. President Reagan had signed a previous reauthorization. President Bush signed
this one, and that was just 20 years
ago. What has happened to the country
since then?
I will say this: We all know that the
vote is the most powerful tool in a democracy. We all know that there are
challenges to votes, voting ability, and
voting rights across the country. We
have disagreements, I suppose, with
our Republican colleagues about some
of that, but we need to make sure we
remain vigilant and keep working hard
to protect those rights.
I had a chance over the weekend to
do a couple of things. Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday, I had a
chance to visit churches and groups
that were celebrating Dr. King, remembering Dr. King. I went to First Baptist
Church of Highland Park, Faith Temple No. 2, and the AKAs had a day of
service that I was happy to attend and
have a chance to speak to them, worship with them, and work with them.
b 1950
They are all concerned about where
the country is going and the challenges
to American democracy and the civil
rights movement that gave us the
rights that we have today.
I think it is critical for us to remember a couple of things. One is the work
continues, no doubt. I have strong disagreements, to say the least, with the
current administration, and I commit
myself to fighting against the excesses
and the wrongs that are going on there.
On Friday, I went with a group of
Democrats to Minnesota to deal with

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

H945

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

the protests there, to see them firsthand. They reminded me in some ways
of the civil rights protests from back in
that era, the protests in Selma that led
to the Voting Rights Act passage, the
protests in Birmingham. The violence
is shocking. People are dying. The
shooting of Renee Good is just one example of those that has reached the
media attention, but there are more of
these going on all across the country. I
saw clips of people and heard their testimony, people who were dragged out
of cars, people who were citizens but
were still arrested anyway and taken
to the ICE detention center and not released for hours, people who were denied the right to call for an attorney,
people who were denied the basic constitutional rights that my colleague
from Virginia was talking about.
We have got to make sure we turn
that around. We have got to make sure
that we protect the rights that the
civil rights movement was about defending and even beyond that the
Fourth Amendment, the Fifth Amendment, all of those things were put in
place 250 years ago, which is the anniversary we are about to celebrate later
this year, and rightly so.
We are not a perfect country. We are
not a perfect nation, but we have been
called to a perfect mission. We need to
fulfill that mission.
I think it is important to wrap up
with this. Dr. King’s dream, kids learn
about it in school now, and they see
the replays, but in some ways the
dream has become a memory for many.
I think it is important for us to recall
that the dream is not a memory, it is
a mandate. It is a mission. It is a
movement that we need to continue to
make sure we get that work done that
Dr. King died for and so many others
died for, as well.
I thank my colleague again for putting on this event tonight, giving us a
chance to remember Dr. King and
think about the civil rights movement
and where we are going as a nation. I
want to continue to fight alongside her
and all my colleagues with the Congressional Black Caucus and my colleagues here in the House of Representatives on both sides of the aisle as we
work to get this done.
Ms. MCCLELLAN. I thank Congressman IVEY for his remarks.
Mr. Speaker, you see behind me a
quote from Dr. King that he gave in an
interview in 1967 where he talks about
how in many ways the dream that he
articulated in the march on Washington had become a nightmare. Most
people are surprised by that.
Why did it become a nightmare?
It became a nightmare because after
the victories of the Civil Rights Act,
after the victory of the Voting Rights
Act, when he really began to address
the systemic issues facing this country
of poverty, of hatred, of war, he began
to see how deeply ingrained in American culture racism really was.
He began to see that the systemic
racism couldn’t just be overcome with

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

laws. I think for many African Americans today that is the heartbreak that
we face. When Dr. King spoke at the
march on Washington, he said that in
many ways the marchers had come to
collect on a promissory note in our
Declaration of Independence written
250 years ago, which promised that all
men were endowed by their creator
with the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
Thomas Jefferson didn’t mean all men.
He didn’t include the men, women, and
children that he owned, including his
children and the mother of those children.
When James Madison, the architect
of the Constitution wrote the Virginia
Plan that led to the Constitution in
the beginning, ‘‘We the people . . . in
order to form a more perfect Union’’
and laid out a vision of government by,
of, and for the people, it didn’t include
all the people.
My ancestors, our ancestors here in
the
Congressional
Black
Caucus,
weren’t even deemed people. They were
deemed three-fifths of a person for purposes of apportionment. They were
treated as property and in some cases
animals.
We have a country that was literally
built on the backs of a whole race of
people with an ideal that was revolutionary: it said the power of government derives from the people.
My ancestors believed in that ideal
just as much as yours, Mr. Speaker,
but it took us a long time to participate in that government, in that promise. That is what the civil rights movement was about.
It was also about recognizing the
basic decency and dignity of every
human being, regardless of where they
are born, regardless of how they worship, regardless of the color of their
skin.
We still have a long way to go, because what diversity, equity, and inclusion recognizes is that when the Civil
Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act
and all of the laws that were passed because of the work of Dr. King, they
weren’t a magic wand that erased over
300 years of the impact of slavery and
Jim Crow. That requires intention, intentional unwinding to recognize that
you have people like my mother’s family, who her parents, her brothers, and
her sisters didn’t go to school beyond
the eighth grade because the State of
Mississippi didn’t find it important to
educate Black children, and while the
Catholic church did, they only educated Black children until the eighth
grade. Their opportunities were limited.
You had neighborhoods like Jackson
Ward that I represent that was once
the Harlem of the South, decisions
were made to cut that neighborhood in
half by a highway and segregate part of
that neighborhood away from everything that they needed. Those were intentional decisions that were made
rooted in this community doesn’t matter.

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.044

H20JAPT1

H946

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

So, part of the nightmare has been
the very things used to try to erase the
legacy of Jim Crow and slavery have
now been weaponized against that
progress. When you see the President
of the United States deride the very
things used to try to eradicate the legacy of Jim Crow and slavery to divide
again, to wedge, to sow division, it is
as old as time.
The history of this country has been
every time we make progress towards
the ideal, there is backlash, and it involves three things: violence, propaganda, and voter suppression.
My great-grandfather lived through
the first backlash. He was a man born
on a plantation. His parents were
enslaved. He exercised his right to vote
after he was given a literacy test. He
got all the questions right, and he
heard the registrar say—and this is the
only time you will hear me use this
word is in a direct quote—‘‘I need more
questions because this nigger got them
all right.’’ He was on a list, do not register this man to vote.
b 2000
My parents saw the second backlash
to the civil rights movement. We are in
the third backlash now.
What the backlash involves is propaganda that breaks up coalitions,
whether it was a coalition of previously enslaved Black men and poor
nonlandowning Whites who came together during Reconstruction to rebuild this Nation, the backlash to that
involved racial terror lynching, or the
lie of white supremacy and a rash of
voter suppression laws that completely
ignored the 14th and 15th Amendments.
The backlash in the civil rights
movement of Dr. King was a Southern
strategy that intentionally carved a
wedge between Black and White communities—it was intentional in order
to suppress the vote—and the murder
of our leaders who fought to change
those laws and to change the system.
We are in that backlash right now.
We have a choice, and Dr. King spelled
it out. We decide where we go from
here.
We decide: Is it more chaos, division,
hatred, propaganda, violence, voter
suppression, and tyranny where we pit
one group against another to stay in
power?
That is one choice.
Dr. King gave his life for community
where we come together, where we
work together, and where we uplift
each other. We care for one another, we
love one another, and we live up to the
ideal upon which this country was
founded.
He died for that because it meant
some people found that idea dangerous.
We, the Congressional Black Caucus,
stand here today recommitted to making his dream a reality. We won’t give
in to the nightmare. We will not give
in to the chaos. Not only will we fight
the chaos, we will fight for community.
We can’t do it alone.
Just like the civil rights movement
during Reconstruction and just like

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

the civil rights movement in the 1950s
and 1960s, it required people coming together from all walks of life putting
aside hatred and division and loving
their neighbor and their enemy. We can
do that. We need a little love today. We
need a little light in the darkness. We
need community in the midst of the
chaos.
We have to do it because while we are
fighting the same fights that our parents, our grandparents, and our greatgrandparents fought, we cannot leave
those fights to our children, our grandchildren, or our great-grandchildren if
we expect this country to survive.
That is because what Dr. King also
recognized was that now human beings
hold the power to destroy each other
and to destroy this planet. If we don’t
get ahold of our hatred, then a lot of
lives will be destroyed.
That is not what Dr. King wanted.
That is not what people elect us to do.
They elect us to help people and solve
problems. They elect us to focus on
community. Let’s not give into the
chaos.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

ENROLLED BILL SIGNED
Kevin F. McCumber, Clerk of the
House, reported and found truly enrolled a bill of the House of the following title, which was thereupon
signed by the Speaker:
H.R. 6938. An act making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
f

ADJOURNMENT
Ms. MCCLELLAN. Mr. Speaker, I
move that the House do now adjourn.
The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 8 o’clock and 3 minutes p.m.),
under its previous order, the House adjourned until tomorrow, Wednesday,
January 21, 2026, at 10 a.m. for morning-hour debate.
f

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS,
ETC.
Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive
communications were taken from the
Speaker’s table and referred as follows:
EC–2704. A letter from the Secretary, Department of Defense, transmitting authorization of Lieutenant General Thomas M.
Carden, Jr., Army National Guard of the
United States, to wear the insignia of the
grade of general, pursuant to 10 U.S.C.
777a(b)(4); Public Law 111-383, Sec. 505(a)(1);
(124 Stat. 4209); ; to the Committee on Armed
Services.
EC–2705. A letter from the President and
Chair, Board of Directors, Export-Import
Bank of the United States, transmitting a
statement with respect to transactions involving exports to Ethiopia, pursuant to 12
U.S.C. 635(b)(3); July 31, 1945, ch. 341, Sec. 2
(as added by Public Law 102-266, Sec. 102);
(106 Stat. 95); to the Committee on Financial
Services.
EC–2706. A letter from the Chief of Staff,
Media Bureau, Federal Communications

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Commission, transmitting the Commission’s
final rule — Amendment of the Commission’s
Rules to Advance the Low Power Television,
TV Translator and Class A Television Service [MB Docket No.: 24-148] received January
15, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2707. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Report Number: 007067, ‘‘U.S. Compliance
with the Authorization for Use of Military
Force in Iraq’’, pursuant to 50 U.S.C. 1541
note; Public Law 107-243, Sec. 4(a); (116 Stat.
1501); to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2708. A letter from the Secretary, Department of the Treasury, transmitting a
six-month periodic report on the national
emergency with respect to the International
Criminal Court that was declared in Executive Order 14203 of February 6, 2025, pursuant
to 50 U.S.C. 1641(c); Public Law 94-412, Sec.
401(c); (90 Stat. 1257) and 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
Public Law 95-223, Sec 204(c); (91 Stat. 1627);
to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2709. A letter from the Secretary, Department of the Treasury, transmitting a
six-month periodic report on the national
emergency with respect to the widespread
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and the
potential for a deepening economic collapse
in Afghanistan that was declared in Executive Order 14064 of February 11, 2022, pursuant to 50 U.S.C. 1641(c); Public Law 94-412,
Sec. 401(c); (90 Stat. 1257) and 50 U.S.C.
1703(c); Public Law 95-223, Sec 204(c); (91 Stat.
1627); to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2710. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: RSAT case 25-11179,
pursuant to section 3(d) of the Arms Export
Control Act; to the Committee on Foreign
Affairs.
EC–2711. A letter from the Office Manager,
Office of the District of Columbia Auditor,
transmitting a report titled: ‘‘ANC 8C Funds
Used for Political Activity’’, pursuant to
Public Law 93-198, Sec. 455(d); (87 Stat. 803);
to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2712. A letter from the Associate Director, Court Services and Offender Supervision
Agency, transmitting a notification of a vacancy and change in previously submitted
reported information, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
3349(a); Public Law 105-277, Sec. 151(b); (112
Stat. 2681-614); to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2713. A letter from the Senior Advisor,
Office of the Inspector General, Department
of Health and Human Services, transmitting
notification of an action on nomination and
discontinuation of service in acting role,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3349(a); Public Law 105277, Sec. 151(b); (112 Stat. 2681-614); to the
Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform.
EC–2714. A letter from the Deputy Assistant General Counsel, General Law and Regulation, Department of the Treasury, transmitting fourteen (14) notifications of a vacancy, designation of acting officer, nomination, action on nomination, and discontinuation of service in acting role, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 3349(a); Public Law 105-277, Sec. 151(b);
(112 Stat. 2681-614); to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2715. A letter from the Commissioner,
Federal Maritime Commission, transmitting
the Commission’s FY 2025 Commercial and
Inherently Governmental Activities Inventory report, pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 501 note;
Public Law 105-270, Sec. 2(c)(1)(A); (112 Stat.
2382); to the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform.
EC–2716. A letter from the Chairman, Federal Trade Commission, transmitting the

E:\CR\FM\K20JA7.046

H20JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 20, 2026

Commission’s semiannual report for the period April 1, 2025 through September 30, 2025,
pursuant to section 5(b) of the Inspector
General Act; to the Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform.
EC–2717. A letter from the Chair of the
Board, Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, Secretary of Labor, transmitting the
Corporation’s Semiannual Report to Congress by the Office of the Inspector General
for the period April 1, 2025 through September 30, 2025, pursuant to the Inspector
General Act of 1978; to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
EC–2718. A letter from the Solicitor General, Department of Justice, transmitting
the Department’s determination that certain
aspects
of
the
Ronald
E.
McNair
Postbaccalaureate Achievement Program
violate the Constitution, pursuant to 28
U.S.C. 530D(a)(1); Public Law 107-273, Sec.
202(a); (116 Stat. 1771); to the Committee on
the Judiciary.
EC–2719. A letter from the Acting Director,
Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs,
Department of Labor, transmitting the Secretary’s response to the Office of the Ombudsman’s 2024 Annual Report, pursuant to
42 U.S.C. 7385s-15(e)(1); Public Law 106-398,
Sec. 1 (as amended by Public Law 108-375,
Sec. 3161); (118 Stat. 2185); to the Committee
on the Judiciary.
EC–2720. A letter from the Assistant for
Legislative Affairs, Department of the Army,
Corps of Engineers, Department of Defense,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Reissuance and Modification of Nationwide
Permits [Docket Number: COE-2025-0002]
(RIN: 0710-AB56) received January 14, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2721. A letter from the Paralegal, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, Department of Transportation,
transmitting the Department’s Major final
rule — Pipeline Safety: Class Location
Change Requirements [Docket No.: PHMSA2017-0151; Amdt. No.: 192-155] (RIN: 2137-AF29)
received January 14, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.
EC–2722. A letter from the Director, Office
of Regulatory Oversight and Management,
Veterans Benefits Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs, transmitting the
Department’s final rule — Servicemembers’
Group Life Insurance Traumatic Injury Protection Program Amendments [Docket No.:
VA-2024-VBA-0014] (RIN: 2900-AS12) received
January 15, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
EC–2723. A letter from the Director, Office
of Regulatory Oversight and Management,
Veterans Benefits Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs, transmitting the
Department’s final rule — Apportionments
[Docket No.: VA-2021-VBA-0025] (RIN: 2900AP67) received January 15, 2026, pursuant to
5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
EC–2724. A letter from the Director, Office
of Regulatory Oversight and Management,
Veterans Health Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs, transmitting the
Department’s final rule — Reproductive
Health Services [Docket No: VA-2025-VHA0073] (RIN: 2900-AS31) received January 15,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
EC–2725. A letter from the Section Chief,
Internal Revenue Service, transmitting the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

H947

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Service’s IRB only rule — Exempt Organizations Rulings and Determination Letters
Procedures (Rev. Proc. 2026-5) received January 15, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Ways and Means.
EC–2726. A letter from the Section Chief,
Internal Revenue Service, transmitting the
Service’s IRB only rule — Extension of Transition Period to Calendar Year 2026 for Certain Requirements in Revenue Ruling 2025-4
(Notice 2026-6) received January 15, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee
on Ways and Means.
EC–2727. A letter from the Section Chief,
Internal Revenue Service, transmitting the
Service’s IRB only rule — Safe Harbor for
the Credit for Carbon Oxide Sequestration
under Section 45Q for Qualified Carbon Oxide
Disposed of in Secure Geological Storage in
Calendar Year 2025 (Notice 2026-1) (NOT118817-25) received January 15, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Ways and Means.
EC–2728. A letter from the Federal Register
Liaison, Internal Revenue Service, transmitting the Service’s IRB only rule — Section
1295 Retroactive QEF election PLR Revenue
Procedure (Rev. Proc. 2026-10) received January 15, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Ways and Means.
EC–2729. A letter from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health
and Human Services, transmitting the Providing Accountable Care Organizations the
Ability to Expand the Use of Telehealth Report to Congress, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1395jjj
note; Public Law 115-123, Sec. 50324(b)(2); (132
Stat. 203); jointly to the Committees on Energy and Commerce and Ways and Means.
EC–2730. A letter from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health
and Human Services, transmitting the Department’s Report on Unobligated Balances
for Appropriations Relating to Quality Measurement, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1395aaa(f)(1);
Public Law 116-94, div. N, title I, Sec. 102(a)
(as amended by Public Law 116-260, Sec.
102(b)(2)); (134 Stat. 2941); jointly to the Committees on Energy and Commerce and Ways
and Means.
f

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES ON
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XIII, reports of
committees were delivered to the Clerk
for printing and reference to the proper
calendar, as follows:
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia: Committee on Rules. H. Res. 1009. A resolution
providing for consideration of the bill (H.R.
6945) to amend part A of title IV of the Social Security Act to clarify the authority of
States to use funds for pregnancy centers,
and for other purposes; providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 6359) to require institutions of higher education to disseminate
information on the rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for other purposes; and providing
for consideration of the joint resolution (H.J.
Res. 140) providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5, United
States Code, of the rule submitted by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public
Land Order No. 7917 for Withdrawal of Federal Lands; Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis
Counties, MN (Rept. 119–459). Referred to the
House Calendar.
f

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:
By Mr. COLE:
H.R. 7147. A bill making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Appropriations,
and in addition to the Committee on the
Budget, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. COLE:
H.R. 7148. A bill making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Appropriations,
and in addition to the Committees on the
Budget, and Ways and Means, for a period to
be subsequently determined by the Speaker,
in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. RILEY of New York:
H.R. 7149. A bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to eliminate the maximum authorizations of appropriations for certain
benefits for homeless veterans administered
by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and to
make permanent the authority of the Secretary to carry out certain programs for
homeless veterans; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. WHITESIDES:
H.R. 7150. A bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to submit to Congress a quarterly report on housing loans insured, guaranteed, or under laws administered by the
Secretary, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Ms. BARRAGÁN (for herself and
Mr. OBERNOLTE):
H.R. 7151. A bill to require the Secretary of
Commerce to conduct a public awareness and
education campaign to provide information
regarding the benefits of, risks relating to,
and the prevalence of artificial intelligence
in the daily lives of individuals in the United
States, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Ms. BARRAGÁN (for herself, Ms.
BROWN, Mrs. MCIVER, Mr. TORRES of
New York, Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Ms.
NORTON, Mr. ESPAILLAT, and Ms.
ANSARI):
H.R. 7152. A bill to provide technical assistance and grants for faith-based organizations, institutions of higher education, and
local governments to increase the supply of
affordable rental housing, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mrs. BICE (for herself, Mr. KHANNA,
Mr. SCHMIDT, Mr. EDWARDS, Mr. NUNN
of Iowa, Mr. SMITH of New Jersey,
and Mr. SHREVE):
H.R. 7153. A bill to improve connections between the Department of Agriculture and national and homeland security agencies, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture.
By Mr. CISNEROS (for himself and Ms.
VELÁZQUEZ):
H.R. 7154. A bill to amend the Small Business Act to modify the dollar threshold for
certain sole source contracts, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Small Business.
By Ms. CRAIG:
H.R. 7155. A bill to amend the title 18,
United States Code, to increase the penalties
for theft or bribery concerning programs receiving Federal funds and to amend the
Richard B. Russell National School Lunch
Act to require audits under the summer food

E:\CR\FM\L20JA7.000

H20JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H948

service program; to the Committee on the
Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee
on Education and Workforce, for a period to
be subsequently determined by the Speaker,
in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. EMMER (for himself, Mr.
Mrs.
FISCHBACH,
Mr.
STAUBER,
FINSTAD, Mr. GOODEN, Mr. NEHLS, Mr.
OY
,
Mr.
A
LFORD
,
Ms.
M
ACE
,
Mr.
R
BAIRD, Mr. MCGUIRE, Mr. WEBER of
Texas, Mr. DONALDS, Mr. ROGERS of
Alabama, Mr. GILL of Texas, Mr.
PALMER, Ms. VAN DUYNE, Mr. CARTER
of Georgia, Mr. GOSAR, Mr. KENNEDY
of Utah, Mr. GUEST, Mr. MOORE of
Alabama, Mr. BEAN of Florida, Mr.
HUNT, Mr. PATRONIS, Mr. JACK, Mr.
MOORE of North Carolina, Mr. ROSE,
Mr. SELF, Mr. CRANE, Mr. BOST, Mr.
NORMAN, Mr. SHREVE, Mrs. LUNA, Mr.
TIMMONS, Mr. MCDOWELL, Mr. JACKSON of Texas, Mr. COLLINS, Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas, Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas,
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina, Mr.
AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia, and Mr.
BURCHETT):
H.R. 7156. A bill to expand and clarify the
grounds for civil denaturalization proceedings for individuals who have defrauded
a governmental program, joined a terrorist
organization, or committed certain criminal
offenses; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. FIELDS:
H.R. 7157. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to exclude from gross income up to the first $50,000 wages from employment as a K-12 public school teacher; to
the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mrs. FOUSHEE (for herself and Mr.
NUNN of Iowa):
H.R. 7158. A bill to support a broad and diverse interdisciplinary research community
for the advancement of artificial intelligence
(AI) and AI-powered innovation through
partnerships and capacity building at certain
institutions of higher education and other
institutions to expand AI capacity in populations historically underrepresented in
STEM, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology.
By Mr. GOSAR:
H.R. 7159. A bill to amend the Lacey Act
Amendments of 1981 to adjust provisions relating to captive wildlife offenses; to the
Committee on Natural Resources.
By Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI:
H.R. 7160. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to establish the first-time
homebuyer refundable tax credit; to the
Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI:
H.R. 7161. A bill to limit the use of Federal
contractors to perform certain enforcement
activities under the immigration laws, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on the
Judiciary.
By Ms. NORTON:
H.R. 7162. A bill to amend title 40, United
States
Code,
to
permit
commercial
filmmaking and photography on the United
States Capitol grounds, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Transportation
and Infrastructure.
By Mr. PAPPAS (for himself, Mr.
STANTON, and Ms. LEE of Nevada):
H.R. 7163. A bill to allocate funds for the
local law enforcement grant programs, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Appropriations, and in addition to the Committee on the Judiciary, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Ms. SCHRIER (for herself and Ms.
BUDZINSKI):

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

H.R. 7164. A bill to expand cost-sharing reductions with respect to qualified health
plans offered through an Exchange, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on Ways and Means, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. STEUBE (for himself and Ms.
LEE of Nevada):
H.R. 7165. A bill to amend section 495 of the
Public Health Service Act to require inspections of foreign laboratories conducting biomedical and behavioral research to ensure
compliance with applicable animal welfare
requirements, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN (for herself, Mrs. RAMIREZ, Mr. BEYER, Ms.
DELBENE, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania,
Ms. DEGETTE, Mr. LYNCH, Mr.
MOULTON, Mr. GOLDMAN of New York,
Ms. NORTON, Ms. LOFGREN, Mr.
QUIGLEY, Ms. CASTOR of Florida, Ms.
KELLY of Illinois, Ms. CHU, Mr. GARCIA of California, Ms. ANSARI, Mr.
CARBAJAL, and Ms. TITUS):
H.R. 7166. A bill to require face-to-face purchases of ammunition, to require licensing of
ammunition dealers, and to require reporting regarding bulk purchases of ammunition;
to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Ms. UNDERWOOD:
H. Res. 1010. A resolution recognizing 2026
as ‘‘The Year of The Power of Nurses’’ in
Celebration of the 130th Anniversary of the
American Nurses Association; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. BAUMGARTNER:
H. Res. 1011. A resolution expressing the
sense of the House of Representatives that
the structure and governance of the Football
Bowl
Subdivision
postseason
should
prioritize broad-based athletic opportunity,
financial sustainability for college athletics,
and competitive balance, and that innovative proposals to expand broad based
postseason participation-such as proposals
advanced by Coach Mike Leach-warrant serious consideration to mitigate anticompetitive effects in top-division college football;
to the Committee on Education and Workforce.
f

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers
granted to Congress in the Constitution to enact the accompanying bill or
joint resolution.
By Mr. COLE:
H.R. 7147.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
The principal constitutional authority for
this legislation is clause 7 of section 9 of article I of the Constitution of the United
States (the appropriation power), which
states: ‘‘No Money shall be drawn from the
Treasury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law . . . . ’’ In addition,
clause 1 of section 8 of article I of the Constitution (the spending power) provides:
‘‘The Congress shall have the Power . . . to
pay the Debts and provide for the common
Defence and general Welfare of the United
States . . . . ’’ Together, these specific constitutional provisions establish the congressional power of the purse, granting Congress
the authority to appropriate funds, to deter-

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

mine their purpose, amount, and period of
availability, and to set forth terms and conditions governing their use.
By Mr. COLE:
H.R. 7148.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
The principal constitutional authority for
this legislation is clause 7 of section 9 of article I of the Constitution of the United
States (the appropriation power), which
states: ‘‘No Money shall be drawn from the
Treasury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law . . . . ’’ In addition,
clause 1 of section 8 of article I of the Constitution (the spending power) provides:
‘‘The Congress shall have the Power . . . to
pay the Debts and provide for the common
Defence and general Welfare of the United
States . . . . ’’ Together, these specific constitutional provisions establish the congressional power of the purse, granting Congress
the authority to appropriate funds, to determine their purpose, amount, and period of
availability, and to set forth terms and conditions governing their use.
By Mr. RILEY of New York:
H.R. 7149.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
article 1 section 8
By Mr. WHITESIDES:
H.R. 7150.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, clause 18
By Ms. BARRAGÁN:
H.R. 7151.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Section 8 of Article 1 of the Constitution
By Ms. BARRAGÁN:
H.R. 7152.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Section 8 of Article 1 of the Constitution.
By Mrs. BICE:
H.R. 7153.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution
By Mr. CISNEROS:
H.R. 7154.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Ms. CRAIG:
H.R. 7155.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. EMMER:
H.R. 7156.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I
By Mr. FIELDS:
H.R. 7157.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1
By Mrs. FOUSHEE:
H.R. 7158.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1
By Mr. GOSAR:
H.R. 7159.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 3
By Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI:
H.R. 7160.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
By Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI:
H.R. 7161.

E:\CR\FM\L20JA7.100

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 [Page H4586]
By Ms. NORTON:
H.R. 7162.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Clause 18 of Section 8 of Article I of the
Constitution
By Mr. PAPPAS:
H.R. 7163.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 18 of the United
States Constitution states that ‘‘Congress
shall have the authority to make all Laws
which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers,
and all other Powers vested by the Constitution in the Government of the United States,
or in any Department or Officer thereof’’
By Ms. SCHRIER:
H.R. 7164.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
This bill is enacted pursuant to the power
granted to Congress under Article I, Section
8 of the United States Constitution.
By Mr. STEUBE:
H.R. 7165.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8
By Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN:
H.R. 7166.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18: [The Congress shall have Power . . . ] To make all
Laws which shall be necessary and proper for
carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United
States, or in any Department or Officer
thereof.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H.R. 45: Ms. FEDORCHAK.
H.R. 116: Mr. STEUBE.
H.R. 309: Mr. MACKENZIE.
H.R. 485: Mr. DELUZIO.
and
Mr.
H.R.
516:
Mr.
BURCHETT
LANGWORTHY.
H.R. 569: Mr. PFLUGER.
H.R. 588: Ms. ANSARI.
H.R. 929: Mr. AMO.
H.R. 950: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 1061: Mr. KHANNA, Mr. COSTA, and Mr.
GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 1076: Mr. GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 1094: Mr. MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 1162: Mr. AUCHINCLOSS.
H.R. 1171: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 1189: Mr. SWALWELL.
H.R. 1207: Ms. HAGEMAN.
H.R. 1329: Mr. FULCHER.
H.R. 1330: Mrs. GRIJALVA, Mr. STANTON, and
Mr. CROW.
H.R. 1517: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 1529: Ms. TOKUDA.
H.R. 1936: Mr. THOMPSON of California.
H.R. 1993: Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia and Mr.
PETERS.
H.R. 2045: Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ of Texas.
H.R. 2049: Mr. GOLDMAN of New York.
H.R. 2086: Ms. BROWN and Mr. VASQUEZ.
H.R. 2368: Mr. MORELLE, Ms. LOIS FRANKEL
of Florida, Mr. QUIGLEY, Mr. LYNCH, and Ms.
CRAIG.
H.R. 2398: Mr. LIEU.
H.R. 2487: Mrs. BEATTY.
H.R. 2570: Mr. LALOTA.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

H949

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

H.R. 2641: Mr. MOORE of West Virginia.
H.R. 2705: Mr. PFLUGER.
H.R. 2711: Mr. LALOTA.
H.R. 2837: Mr. CASE.
H.R. 2853: Mr. HERNÁNDEZ and Mr. RUTHERFORD.
H.R. 2854: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 2891: Mr. BACON and Mrs. FISCHBACH.
H.R. 3028: Mr. SHREVE.
H.R. 3139: Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.R. 3164: Mr. HIMES.
H.R. 3209: Ms. JAYAPAL.
H.R. 3227: Ms. SCHRIER.
H.R. 3307: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 3333: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 3459: Ms. FRIEDMAN.
H.R. 3497: Mr. BARR.
H.R. 3562: Mrs. LUNA, Ms. ANSARI, Mr.
KEAN, Ms. TLAIB, Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania, and Ms. MCBRIDE.
H.R. 3609: Ms. RANDALL.
H.R. 3649: Mr. GARCIA of California.
H.R. 3699: Mr. MOORE of Alabama.
H.R. 3946: Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 3978: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 4032: Mr. FINSTAD.
H.R. 4076: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 4109: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 4176: Ms. STRICKLAND.
H.R. 4206: Mr. MOSKOWITZ, Ms. TITUS, Mr.
STANTON, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN, Ms.
ESCOBAR, and Mr. MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 4317: Mr. OLSZEWSKI.
H.R. 4368: Mr. SHERMAN and Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 4525: Ms. ESCOBAR and Mr. KENNEDY of
New York.
H.R. 4532: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 4606: Mr. VINDMAN and Mr. JOHNSON of
Georgia.
H.R. 4642: Mr. BARR and Mr. DAVIS of North
Carolina.
H.R. 4664: Mr. TORRES of New York.
H.R. 4667: Mr. COSTA and Mr. KHANNA.
H.R. 4796: Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois.
H.R. 4831: Mr. LAWLER and Mr. HARRIGAN.
H.R. 4967: Ms. BONAMICI and Mr. EVANS of
Pennsylvania.
H.R. 5085: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 5168: Ms. TOKUDA.
H.R. 5265: Mr. MULLIN.
H.R. 5269: Mr. HERNÁNDEZ.
H.R. 5271: Mr. AMO, Mrs. MCBATH, Mr.
BISHOP, and Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 5334: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 5356: Mr. BELL and Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 5387: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 5408: Mr. LANGWORTHY and Ms. HOYLE
of Oregon.
H.R. 5434: Mrs. BEATTY and Mr. CASAR.
H.R. 5438: Mr. JACK, Mrs. LUNA, Mr.
TIMMONS, Ms. MACE, and Mr. MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 5494: Ms. DE LA CRUZ.
H.R. 5509: Mr. HUDSON and Mr. SCHNEIDER.
H.R. 5543: Ms. BALINT.
H.R. 5545: Mrs. DINGELL, Ms. NORTON, and
Ms. FRIEDMAN.
H.R. 5672: Mr. SCHMIDT.
H.R. 5907: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 5935: Mr. RUIZ.
H.R. 5973: Mr. LEVIN, Ms. FRIEDMAN, Mrs.
TORRES of California, Mr. CASTEN, Ms. MORRISON, and Ms. CRAIG.
H.R. 6032: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6047: Mr. VAN DREW.
H.R. 6099: Ms. CLARKE of New York.
H.R. 6130: Ms. BALINT and Mr. GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 6137: Ms. BONAMICI.
H.R. 6182: Mr. SOTO.
H.R. 6212: Mr. NADLER.
H.R. 6275: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6277: Ms. BYNUM and Mr. EZELL.
H.R. 6318: Mr. DESAULNIER.
H.R. 6392: Mr. MCGUIRE.
H.R. 6521: Ms. SCANLON and Ms. JOHNSON of
Texas.
H.R. 6567: Mr. PANETTA.
H.R. 6617: Mr. POCAN.
H.R. 6618: Ms. KAPTUR.

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

H.R. 6633: Mr. SHREVE.
H.R. 6694: Mr. ESPAILLAT, Mr. TORRES of
New York, and Mr. TONKO.
H.R. 6706: Ms. CHU.
H.R. 6731: Mr. LIEU.
H.R. 6756: Ms. DEXTER.
H.R. 6782: Ms. MATSUI.
H.R. 6806: Ms. BROWNLEY and Ms. GARCIA of
Texas.
H.R. 6809: Mr. GIMENEZ and Mr. JOHNSON of
Georgia.
H.R. 6839: Ms. FRIEDMAN.
H.R. 6840: Mr. AUCHINCLOSS and Mr. MAGAZINER.
H.R. 6873: Mr. AUCHINCLOSS.
H.R. 6875: Mr. MORAN, Mr. LAWLER, and Mr.
MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 6915: Mr. MAGAZINER.
H.R. 6925: Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 6926: Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 6945: Mr. MCGUIRE, Mr. GUEST, Mr.
MOORE of Alabama, Mr. BARRETT, Mr.
SHREVE, and Mr. FULCHER.
H.R. 6972: Mr. SHREVE and Mr. HARRIGAN.
H.R. 6976: Ms. STRICKLAND and Mr. KHANNA.
H.R. 6980: Ms. JAYAPAL.
H.R. 6985: Ms. MALLIOTAKIS.
H.R. 6989: Mr. GARCIA of California.
H.R. 6997: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 7008: Mr. FONG and Mr. CRANK.
H.R. 7016: Ms. FRIEDMAN, Mr. CISNEROS, Ms.
SÁNCHEZ, Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas, and Mr.
MEEKS.
H.R. 7024: Mr. VALADAO, Mr. POCAN, and
Mrs. MCBATH.
H.R. 7028: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 7033: Ms. MENG, Mr. STAUBER, and Mr.
LYNCH.
H.R. 7034: Mr. HARIDOPOLOS.
H.R. 7035: Mr. TIFFANY and Mr. VAN DREW.
H.R. 7036: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 7052: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 7056: Mr. GOTTHEIMER and Mr.
MEUSER.
H.R. 7058: Mr. SHREVE and Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 7071: Mr. PANETTA and Mr. TORRES of
New York.
H.R. 7074: Mr. BILIRAKIS, Ms. MALOY, and
Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS.
H.R. 7082: Ms. TOKUDA.
H.R. 7084: Mr. MOORE of Alabama.
H.R. 7088: Mr. LYNCH, Mr. OLSZEWSKI, Ms.
BALINT, Mr. MAGAZINER, Ms. JACOBS, and Mr.
MEEKS.
H.R. 7090: Mr. BURCHETT.
H.R. 7097: Mr. STEUBE.
H.R. 7100: Mr. GARAMENDI.
H. J. Res. 13: Ms. NORTON.
H. J. Res. 28: Mr. BARRETT.
H. J. Res. 54: Mr. LICCARDO.
H. J. Res. 122: Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois.
H. Con. Res. 68: Mr. RASKIN, Mr. JOHNSON of
Georgia, Mr. MORELLE, Ms. SCANLON, Mrs.
DINGELL, Ms. OCASIO-CORTEZ, Ms. BROWN, Mr.
LARSEN of Washington, and Mr. MAGAZINER.
H. Res. 67: Ms. TOKUDA and Mr.
FITZPATRICK.
H. Res. 94: Mr. FOSTER.
H. Res. 525: Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE.
H. Res. 547: Mr. HORSFORD.
H. Res. 638: Ms. PINGREE.
H. Res. 963: Ms. MCBRIDE.
H. Res. 987: Mr. JACKSON of Texas and Mr.
MOORE of North Carolina.
H. Res. 993: Ms. MACE, Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia, and Ms. MCBRIDE.
H. Res. 996: Mr. LYNCH, Mr. BOYLE of Pennsylvania, Mrs. BEATTY, Ms. SCANLON, and Ms.
STEVENS.
H. Res. 1001: Ms. MCBRIDE, Mr. CARSON, Mr.
PETERS, and Mr. CROW.
H. Res. 1002: Ms. WILSON of Florida.
f

CONGRESSIONAL EARMARKS, LIMITED TAX BENEFITS, OR LIMITED TARIFF BENEFITS
Under clause 9 of rule XXI, lists or
statements on congressional earmarks,

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.021

H20JAPT1

H950

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

limited tax benefits, or limited tariff
benefits were submitted as follows:
OFFERED BY MR. SMITH
The provisions that warranted a referral to
the Committee on Ways and Means in H.R.
6945, the Supporting Pregnant and Parenting

Women and Families Act, do not contain any
congressional earmarks, limited tax benefits, or limited tariff benefits as defined in
clause 9 of rule XXI.
OFFERED BY MR. COLE
The following table is submitted in compliance with clause 9 of rule XXI, and lists the

congressional earmarks (as defined in paragraph (e) of clause 9) contained in H.R. 7147.
The bill does not contain any limited tax
benefits or limited tariff benefits as defined
in paragraphs (f) and (g) of clause 9 of rule
XXI.

HOMELAND SECURITY
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)
Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Acushnet Office of Emergency Management

Acushnet Office of Emergency Management

MA

$2,140,000

Markey, Warren

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hazard Monitoring and Wildfire Detection System

Agribusiness Development Corporation

HI

1,125,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Historic Whitehall Shoreline

Anne Arundel County

MD

226,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Columbia Beach Resilience Project

Anne Arundel County

MD

1,175,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Gunners Brook Floodplain Restoration and Debris Catcher Reconfiguration

Barre City

VT

591,000

Sanders, Welch

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Beckley-Raleigh County EOC HVAC
Upgrades

Beckley-Raleigh County Convention
Center

WV

3,206,000

Capito, Justice

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Town of Berkley Emergency Operations Center

Berkley Police Department

MA

105,000

Markey, Warren

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Boone County Emergency Operations
Center

Boone County Illinois Emergency
Management Agency

IL

800,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Portable Generator for Critical Infrastructure

Borough of Hamburg

NJ

220,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Metuchen Borough Emergency Services Center Building Project

Borough of Metuchen

NJ

1,034,487

Pallone

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Mountainside Emergency Operations
Center

Borough of Mountainside

NJ

365,000

Kean

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Boynton Beach Harbor Marina Seawall Replacement

Boynton Beach Community Redevelopment Agency

FL

1,145,144

Frankel

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Callaway County Emergency Operations Center Relocation

Callaway County

MO

2,606,000

Onder

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

CORE3 ECC/Admin Building

Central Oregon Intergovernmental
Council

OR

1,034,487

Bynum

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Klukwan Landslide Protection Project

Chilkat Indian Village

AK

1,234,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Glacial Lake Outburst Flood Disaster
Mitigation—Flood Resilience on
the Mendenhall River

City and Borough of Juneau

AK

3,253,000

Begich

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Artesia Emergency Operations Center

City of Artesia

CA

925,000

Tran

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Atascadero Emergency Operations Center Technology Project

City of Atascadero

CA

1,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Atmore Storm Drainage Improvements

City of Atmore

AL

1,250,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Emergency Disaster Energy Hubs

City of Austin

TX

1,145,144

Doggett

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Beaumont Underpass Flooding Early Warning System Improvements

City of Beaumont

TX

827,000

Babin

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Cypress Ditch Improvement Project

City of Bellaire

TX

1,145,144

Fletcher

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Village Creek Stormwater Park Floodplain Restoration

City of Birmingham

AL

2,645,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Boyd Lining Project

City of Bloomfield

NM

750,000

Heinrich

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Brighton Emergency Operations Center Software

City of Brighton/Brighton Fire

CO

15,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Brisbane Glen Park Pump Station
Replacement

City of Brisbane

CA

1,145,144

Mullin

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Camarillo Hybrid Microgrid
Standby Power Resiliency Project

City of Camarillo

CA

1,145,144

Brownley

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

3rd Avenue SE Downtown Pump Station Backup Generator

City of Cedar Rapids

IA

1,407,000

Hinson

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Chino Hills Fire Risk Reduction
Project

City of Chino Hills

CA

1,628,000

Kim (CA)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Otay Valley Regional Park (OVRP)
Wildfire Hazardous Fuels Reduction

City of Chula Vista

CA

837,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Bradley County Emergency Operations Center

City of Cleveland

TN

1,328,000

Fleischmann

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Upgrades Project

City of Concord

CA

1,034,487

DeSaulnier

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Technology and Equipment

City of Concord

NC

326,000

McDowell

H

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.027

Foster

H
Kim

S

Booker, Kim

H

Murkowski

S

Murkowski

H/S

H

H
Britt

Padilla, Schiff

H20JAPT1

S

S

January 20, 2026

H951

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)

Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Davenport Water Pollution
Control Plant Flood Mitigation
Project

City of Davenport

IA

2,996,000

Miller-Meeks

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

San Francisquito Creek Floodway
Study

City of East Palo Alto

CA

600,000

Mullin

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hillside Natural Area Hazardous
Fuels Management

City of El Cerrito

CA

1,145,144

Garamendi

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Pump Station Upgrade Project

City of El Segundo

CA

1,145,144

Lieu

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Back-Up Generator Procurement

City of Englewood

KS

44,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Erie Emergency Operations
Command Center

City of Erie

PA

2,606,000

Kelly (PA)

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Locks Creek and Sessoms Drainage
Improvements

City of Fayetteville

NC

4,212,000

Rouzer

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Flagstaff—Fanning Wash
Flood Mitigations

City of Flagstaff

AZ

1,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Strategic Placement of City of Foley
Utilities Underground

City of Foley

AL

2,063,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Frankfort Riverbank Stabilization

City of Frankfort

KY

5,800,000

Comer

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

West Patrick Street at Maryvale
Ditch Flood Mitigation Project

City of Frederick, Maryland

MD

1,145,144

McClain Delaney

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Gladewater High Hazard Dam

City of Gladewater

TX

1,563,000

Moran

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Flood Control Levee Improvements

City of Glasgow

MT

2,487,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Greeley—Gold Hill Pipeline

City of Greeley

CO

8,685,000

Evans (CO)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Greenacres Emergency Operations Center

City of Greenacres

FL

1,034,487

Frankel

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hampton NH Coastal Resiliency
Storm Water Inflow/Infiltration Reduction Project

City of Hampton Department of
Emergency Management

NH

1,250,000

Shaheen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Harrisonburg Suter Street
Drainage Improvement Project

City of Harrisonburg

VA

1,750,000

Kaine, Warner

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Holladay City Hall Seismic Retrofit
Project

City of Holladay, Utah

UT

1,759,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H/S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Huntsville Hospital for Women and
Children Generator Project

City of Huntsville

AL

2,597,000

Strong

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Indianapolis Howland Ditch
Greenway Flood Control Improvement Project Design

City of Indianapolis

IN

1,145,144

Carson

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Irvine/COAST Wildfire Prevention SR–133 Restoration Project

City of Irvine

CA

1,125,000

Min

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Jackson Midtown Area
Stormwater Infrastructure Improvements

City of Jackson Public Works Department

MS

1,125,000

Wicker

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Jackson Queens Area
Stormwater Infrastructure Improvements

City of Jackson Public Works Department

MS

1,125,000

Wicker

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Jasper Flood Mitigation Infrastructure

City of Jasper

AL

893,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Kingman—Bull Mountain
Channel Improvements

City of Kingman

AZ

493,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Lake Worth Beach Emergency Operations Center

City of Lake Worth Beach

FL

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Las Vegas—Emergency Operations Upgrades

City of Las Vegas

NV

150,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Sumter County Storm Drainage Improvements

City of Livingston

AL

3,093,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Lompoc—EOC Emergency
Generator Project

City of Lompoc

CA

375,000

Schiff

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Long Beach Harbor Mitigation
Project

City of Long Beach

MS

2,558,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Los Alamitos Emergency Operations
Center

City of Los Alamitos

CA

382,880

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Louisville Emergency Operations Center

City of Louisville

CO

100,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Madelia Wastewater Lift Station Accredited Levee

City of Madelia

MN

1,980,000

Klobuchar,
Smith

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Meriden for Combined Emergency Operations Center/Emergency Communications Center
Public Safety Communications
Upgrades

City of Meriden

CT

1,003,003

Blumenthal,
Murphy

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Elm Street Housing Elevation

City of Montpelier

VT

1,458,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Charleston Slough Tide Gates Improvement Project

City of Mountain View

CA

1,145,144

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.028

H
Moran

S

Fetterman

H
H

H

H
Sheehy

Frankel

H

Tran

Hayes

H

Sanders, Welch
Liccardo

H20JAPT1

S

S
H

H952

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)
Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Mt. Juliet Emergency Operations Center

City of Mt. Juliet

TN

1,000,000

Rose

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Walter Mary Burke Park Shoreline
Restoration Project

City of New Baltimore

MI

1,000,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

New Rochelle City Park Drainage Improvements

City of New Rochelle

NY

1,145,144

Latimer

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of North Myrtle Beach Emergency Operations Center

City of North Myrtle Beach

SC

2,606,000

Fry

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Southern End Erosion Project

City of Ocean Shores

WA

1,145,144

Randall

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Palm Desert Emergency Resiliency Plan

City of Palm Desert

CA

296,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Peachtree City Emergency
Operations Center

City of Peachtree City

GA

1,172,000

Jack

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Pines Point Hurricane Mitigation

City of Pembroke Pines

FL

428,619

Wasserman
Schultz

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Gust Lane Flood Mitigation Improvements

City of Portsmouth

VA

1,145,144

Scott (VA)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

West River Flood Response Initiative

City of Providence

RI

825,000

Amo

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center (EOC)
Relocation

City of Rancho Cucamonga

CA

1,034,487

Aguilar

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Abalone Cove Landslide Stabilization
Project

City of Rancho Palos Verdes

CA

1,145,144

Lieu

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Klondike Canyon Landslide Emergency Mitigation Project

City of Rancho Palos Verdes

CA

1,145,144

Lieu

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Citywide Flood Mitigation

City of Ridgeland

MS

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Keith Creek Greenway Improvements

City of Rockford

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Sacramento Fire Department EMS
Division Integration EOC

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

FEMA

Peters, Slotkin

S

H
Padilla

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

H

Schiff

H

4,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

IL

2,000,000

Duckworth,
Durbin

S

City of Sacramento

CA

1,034,487

Planning & Design of Salt Lagoon &
Community Pond Flood Mitigation

City of Saint Paul

AK

375,000

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hazard Mitigation Infrastructure Resiliency Project

City of San Bernardino

CA

1,145,144

Aguilar

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Seattle Waterfront Elliott Bay Seawall Project, Phase 2

City of Seattle

WA

1,145,144

Jayapal

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Seattle Public Library Columbia
Branch Seismic Structural Upgrade

City of Seattle

WA

1,145,144

Smith (WA)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

MLK Street South Flooding Alleviation

City of St. Petersburg

FL

1,145,144

Castor

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

88th Avenue North Storm Drainage
Improvements

City of St. Petersburg

FL

1,145,144

Castor

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Taunton Emergency Operations Center

City of Taunton

MA

1,034,487

Auchincloss

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Thousand Oaks Community
Resilience Center Project

City of Thousand Oaks

CA

1,145,144

Brownley

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

N. Summit St. Restoration

City of Toledo

OH

1,145,144

Kaptur

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Toledo Public Safety Building Outfit

City of Toledo

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Savin Rock Beach Reinforcement

City of West Haven

CT

2,479,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

West Haven EOC

City of West Haven

CT

1,034,487

DeLauro

Blumenthal,
Murphy

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Westlake Village Emergency
Operations Center Resilience
Project

City of Westlake Village

CA

336,000

Brownley

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Lower Brandywine Flood Mitigation
Project

City of Wilmington, Delaware

DE

1,509,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

City of Wrightsville Emergency Operations Center Improvements

City of Wrightsville

GA

450,000

Warnock

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Yonkers Warburton Avenue Slope
Stabilization Project

City of Yonkers

NY

1,145,144

Latimer

Schumer

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Technology for South Site Emergency
Operations Center

Clark County

NV

1,034,487

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Flamingo Water Resources Center
Emergency Power Project

Clark County Water Reclamation District

NV

1,145,144

Titus

Cortez Masto

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Cleveland County Emergency Operations Center

Cleveland County

NC

1,954,000

Moore (NC)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Coffee County Emergency Operation
Center

Coffee County, Alabama

AL

977,000

Moore (AL)

H

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.028

Matsui

H
Murkowski

H20JAPT1

S
H

Cantwell

Schiff

H

H
H

H

January 20, 2026

H953

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)

Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

State Emergency Operations Center
Technology Update

Colorado Department of Public Safety—Division of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management

CO

585,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Coosa County Emergency Management Utilities Preservation

Coosa County Emergency Management Agency

AL

126,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Technology Refresh

County of Butte

CA

130,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Mercer County for Emergency Operations Center Improvements

County of Mercer

NJ

1,875,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Monroe County Goose Pond Dam Rehabilitation Project

County of Monroe

PA

2,432,000

Bresnahan

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

County of Orange Emergency Operations Center

County of Orange

CA

1,034,487

Correa

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Orange County Emergency Operations Center

County of Orange

NY

1,034,487

Ryan

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Pontotoc County Emergency Management Operations Center Construction Project

County of Pontotoc, Mississippi

MS

2,031,000

Kelly (MS)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Sacramento County Emergency Operations Center Project

County of Sacramento

CA

990,000

Bera

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Ulster County Emergency Operations
Center

County of Ulster

NY

1,034,487

Ryan

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Washington County Emergency Operations Center

County of Washington Emergency
Management Agency

IL

2,009,000

Bost

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Covington County Emergency Operations Center

Covington County Emergency Management Agency

MS

1,303,000

Guest

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Northwest Service Area Grid Resiliency

Cowlitz County Public Utility District
No. 1

WA

1,145,144

Perez

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Seismic Resiliency Reservoir and
Transmission Line Improvement
Project

Diablo Water District

CA

1,145,144

DeSaulnier

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Flood Reduction Project

DuPage County Stormwater Management

IL

225,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Alberta Avenue Storm and Domestic
Water Improvements

El Paso County Hospital District

TX

1,145,144

Escobar

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Frio County EOC

Frio County

TX

1,954,000

Gonzales

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Gibson County Emergency Generator

Gibson County, Tennessee

TN

117,000

Kustoff

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center

Habersham County

GA

2,500,000

Ossoff

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Harford County Department of Emergency Services Emergency Operations Center Equipment Upgrade

Harford County Department of Emergency Services

MD

525,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Tributary C116–00–00 Conveyance
and Drainage Improvements

Harris County Flood Control District

TX

1,145,144

Green (TX)

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center IT
Modernization

Hawaii Emergency Management
Agency

HI

1,034,487

Case

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Display
and Control Systems Equipment

Henry County

GA

1,149,000

Ossoff

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Mobile Generators for the Honolulu
Fire Department

Honolulu Fire Department

HI

315,000

Schatz

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Humboldt County—Emergency Operations Center

Humboldt County

NV

500,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Freeport Nuisance Flooding Mitigation

Incorporated Village of Freeport

NY

1,145,144

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Iron County Forestry Department—
Saxon Harbor Lake Superior
Shoreline Restoration Project

Iron County Forestry Department

WI

375,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Roadway Wildfire Hazard Mitigation
in Jefferson County

Jefferson County Parks & Conservation

CO

1,000,000

Pettersen

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Kentucky Emergency Management
Flood Monitoring System

Kentucky Emergency Management

KY

869,000

Rogers

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Lawrence County EOC

Lawrence County Office of Emergency Management

TN

2,606,000

DesJarlais

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Livingston Parish Emergency Operations Center

Livingston Parish

LA

2,606,000

Letlow

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Lower Makefield Township Flood
Mitigation and Stormwater Management

Lower Makefield Township

PA

5,211,000

Fitzpatrick

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Lyon County—Emergency Backup
Generators

Lyon County

NV

375,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Holly Beach Farm Resiliency

Maryland Department of Natural Resources

MD

1,145,144

Elfreth

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Jorstad Substation Grid Resilience
Project

Mason County PUD 1

WA

1,145,144

Randall

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.028

LaMalfa

H
Booker, Kim

S

Fetterman

H

Schumer

Cantwell

H
H

Durbin

S

H

Gillen

H
Baldwin

H20JAPT1

H

S

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

H
H

H954

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)
Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Mat-Su Revetment and Road Upgrades

Matanuska-Susitna Borough

AK

2,000,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Mesa County Douglas Wash Detention Basin Project

Mesa County Public Works Division

CO

869,000

Hurd

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Germantown, Englewood, Taylorsville
Upstream Dam Walls Rehabilitation

Miami Conservancy District

OH

8,685,000

Turner

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Middle Peninsula Emergency Operations Center Improvements

Middle Peninsula Planning District
Commission

VA

506,000

Kaine, Warner

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Montezuma County Emergency Operations Center

Montezuma County

CO

186,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Washington Ferry Road Restoration

Montgomery Area Chamber of Commerce

AL

4,000,000

Britt

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Wheaton Branch Flood Mitigation

Montgomery County Department of
Environmental Protection

MD

1,145,144

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

MATB Wastewater Treatment Plant
Flood Mitigation Project

Municipal Authority of the Town of
Bloomsburg

PA

1,205,000

Fetterman,
McCormick

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Little Mill Creek Upper Reach Flood
Control Project Major Maintenance

New Castle County, Delaware (Public
Works Department)

DE

758,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

New Hampshire State Emergency
Operations Center Modernization
Project

New Hampshire Division of Homeland Security and Emergency
Management

NH

250,000

Shaheen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

DHSEM Portable Backup Generators
and Water Support

NM Department of Homeland Security and Emergency Management

NM

1,500,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Wanchese Marine Industrial Park Authority Living Shoreline Resiliency
Project

North Carolina Department of Commerce

NC

2,605,000

Tillis

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Nye County—Gamebird Road Improvements Planning and Design
Project

Nye County

NV

323,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Nye County—Area Master Drainage
Plan (AMDP) Update

Nye County

NV

338,000

Rosen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Statewide Emergency Coordination
Center

Oregon Department of Emergency
Management

OR

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Ouachita Parish I-20 South Frontage
Road Drainage Improvements

Ouachita Parish Police Jury

LA

6,000,000

Cassidy,
Kennedy

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Lealman Community Hurricane Shelter Hardening

Pinellas County Board of County
Commissioners

FL

2,606,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Center Communications Enhancements

Prince George’s County Government

MD

469,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Pulaski County Emergency Operations Center Radio System Modernization

Pulaski County

GA

570,000

Warnock

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Southwestern WI Regional Planning
Commission—Resilient Southwest
Wisconsin

Resilient Southwest Wisconsin

WI

150,000

Baldwin

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Rio Vista—Emergency Operations
Center

Rio Vista Fire Department

CA

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Emergency Siren Warning System
Upgrades

Roosevelt County

NM

262,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Well 9 Seismic Resiliency Water
Transmission Main Design

Sammamish Plateau Water and
Sewer District

WA

1,125,000

Cantwell

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

San Miguel Community Services District Emergency Operations Center

San Miguel Community Services District

CA

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Westminster Emergency
Standby Generator and Control
Center for Drinking Water Plant

SC Emergency Management Division

SC

1,314,000

Graham

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Sedgwick County Emergency Operations Center

Sedgwick County

KS

2,000,000

Moran

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Shelby County Emergency Operations
Center

Shelby County Emergency Management and Homeland Security
Agency

TN

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Catfish Canal Stormwater Improvements Mitigation Project

South Carolina Office of Resilience

SC

1,359,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Emergency Operations Centers Complex

Southern University and A&M College

LA

1,034,487

Fields

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Suffolk County Emergency Operations
Center Project

Suffolk County Fire, Rescue and
Emergency Services

NY

1,954,000

Garbarino

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Taylor County Emergency Operations
and Public Safety Complex

Taylor County Board of County Commissioners

FL

2,606,000

Dunn

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Terrebonne Parish Emergency Operations Center

Terrebonne Parish Consolidated Government

LA

1,129,000

Higgins

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Wildwood Crest Flood Mitigation

The Borough of Wildwood Crest

NJ

3,572,000

Van Drew

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

City of Sunbury Flood Mitigation
Project

The Municipal Authority of the City
of Sunbury

PA

1,000,000

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.028

Murkowski

Raskin

Luna

H

Thompson (CA)

H

Panetta

H

Cohen

H

Graham

S

H
Fetterman

H20JAPT1

S

S

January 20, 2026

H955

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
HOMELAND SECURITY—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]
Requestor(s)

Agency

Account

Project

Recipient

State

Amount

Origination
House

Senate

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Longboat Key Storm Resiliency
Project

The Town of Longboat Key

FL

1,954,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Barrington Police Cove Park Seawall
Repair

Town of Barrington

RI

475,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Bristol Independence Park Seawall
Restoration

Town of Bristol

RI

900,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Bristol Seawall Repair

Town of Bristol

RI

660,000

Whitehouse

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Town of Burnsville Landslide Remediation Project

Town of Burnsville

WV

488,000

Capito, Justice

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Wallum Lake Dam Spillway Improvements

Town of Burrillville

RI

345,000

Reed

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

East Lyme EOC

Town of East Lyme CT Emergency
Management

CT

395,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Joint Emergency Operations Center

Town of Fairfield

CT

562,500

Himes

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Town of Hamden Emergency Operations Center

Town of Hamden

CT

1,034,487

DeLauro

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hardwick Flood Recovery & Resilience Plan

Town of Hardwick

VT

70,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Town of Hempstead—Bulkheads

Town of Hempstead

NY

1,780,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hull Harborview Road Coastal Resiliency and Shoreline Protection

Town of Hull

MA

1,145,144

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Town of Lake Arthur Pump Station

Town of Lake Arthur

LA

900,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Lynnfield Emergency Operations Center Project

Town of Lynnfield

MA

1,034,487

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

New Town Hall Emergency Operations Center

Town of Norton

MA

22,000

Markey, Warren

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Town of Ossining—Town-Wide
Drainage Study

Town of Ossining

NY

99,000

Gillibrand,
Schumer

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Scituate Cedar Point Seawall

Town of Scituate

MA

1,145,144

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Plantsville Center Flooding Study

Town of Southington

CT

300,000

Blumenthal,
Murphy

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Hendricks Head Infrastructure Improvements

Town of Southport

ME

1,165,000

Collins, King

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Newbury Neck Peninsula Storm
Evacuation

Town of Surry

ME

2,928,000

Collins, King

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Westhampton Public Safety Complex
Emergency Operations Center

Town of Westhampton

MA

885,757

McGovern

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Town of Woodbridge Emergency Operations Center

Town of Woodbridge

CT

1,034,487

DeLauro

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

UW-Whitewater Emergency Operations Center

UW-Whitewater Police Department

WI

225,000

Baldwin

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Village of La Farge Storm Sewer Improvements

Village of La Farge

WI

250,000

Baldwin

S

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Highbrook Avenue Drainage Improvement Project

Village of Pelham

NY

1,145,144

Latimer

Schumer

H

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Village of Wellington Emergency Operations Center

Village of Wellington

FL

1,034,487

Frankel

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

Winston County Road and Bridge
Restoration

Winston County Commission

AL

900,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–EOC

Yakima Valley Emergency Operation
Center

Yakima Valley Emergency Management

WA

1,953,000

FEMA

Federal Assistance–PDM

York County Flood Protection

York County Emergency Management
Agency

ME

1,762,000

OFFERED BY MR. ARRINGTON
The provisions that warranted a referral to
the Committee on the Budget in H.R. 7147,
the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026, do not contain any
congressional earmarks, limited tax bene-

fits, or limited tariff benefits as defined in
clause 9 of rule XXI.
OFFERED BY MR. COLE
The following table is submitted in compliance with clause 9 of rule XXI, and lists the

Buchanan

H

Welch

S

Gillibrand,
Schumer

S

Lynch

H
Kennedy

S

Moulton

H

Keating

Newhouse

H

H
Britt

S

Cantwell

H

Collins

S

congressional earmarks (as defined in paragraph (e) of clause 9) contained in H.R. 7148.
The bill does not contain any limited tax
benefits or limited tariff benefits as defined
in paragraphs (f) and (g) of clause 9 of rule
XXI.

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

2nd LT RICHARD W COLLINS III FOUNDATION, MD, for educational programming, including
coursework and internships

50,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Alaska Joint Electrical Apprenticeship and Training Trust, AK, to provide federally registered
apprenticeship training

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00029

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.028

H956

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Alaska Primary Care Association, AK, to establish the Alaska Graduate Medical Education
(GME) council and support GME expansion

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

AltaMed Health Services Corporation, CA, for healthcare workforce training, including tuition
and fees and purchasing equipment and training materials

995,000

Padilla

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Applied Behavioral Rehabilitation Institute, Inc., CT, for workforce development, including
supportive services for veterans

120,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Arizona Commission of African-American Affairs, AZ, to expand workforce training, including
stipends, supportive services, rentals, and equipment

300,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

AS220, RI, for workforce training, including stipends and tuition

1,120,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

ASI, Inc., IL, to expand workforce development, including purchasing equipment and providing supportive services

750,000

Durbin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Association for the Education of Young Children—Southeast Alaska, AK, to expand a child
care apprenticeship program

500,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Baltimore Alliance for Careers in Healthcare, MD, for an apprenticeship program, including
supportive services

579,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Bay Consortium Workforce Development Board, VA, for improving education and workforce
training, which may include the purchase of technology and equipment

354,000

Kaine, Warner

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Bean’s Cafe, AK, to fund a job training program

600,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Best Buddies International, Inc., NJ, for expanding workforce training, including rent, supplies, and supportive services

250,000

Kim

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Boys & Girls Club of the Northern Plains Inc., SD, to upgrade and expand early learning
centers

2,000,000

Rounds

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

BuildStrong Academy of Colorado, CO, for expanding workforce training, including the purchase of equipment, hiring instructors, and providing support services

750,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

CCARC, Inc., CT, for supporting a manufacturing internship program and workforce development

189,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Cecil College, MD, for improving commercial truck driver workforce training, including the
purchase of equipment

109,000

Alsobrooks

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Central Georgia Technical College Foundation, GA, for workforce training for veterans provided by VECTR Center, including providing supportive services and temporary housing

300,000

Ossoff

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Central Minnesota Jobs and Training Services, Inc., MN, for workforce development programs, which may include purchasing equipment

255,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Central Oregon Community College, OR, for expanding firefighter workforce training, including the purchase of equipment

800,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

City of New Haven, CT, for a career learning center, including the purchase of equipment
and lab materials

2,483,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Cloud County Community College, KS, to purchase advanced technology equipment and network infrastructure for technical education

708,000

Moran

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

College of Southern Maryland, MD, for education and training in water and wastewater
treatment programs, including the purchase of supplies

732,000

Alsobrooks

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Columbus Technical College, GA, for workforce development including the purchase of
equipment

897,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

CT Puerto Rican Forum dba Center for Latino Progress, CT, for workforce development programming, which may include stipends and purchase of equipment

1,184,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

DAY ONE Early Learning Community, Inc., NY, for establishing a teacher apprenticeship program, including rental costs and purchasing equipment

1,800,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Detroit Public Schools Community District, MI, to improve education and workforce training,
including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Peters

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Dorcas International Institute of Rhode Island, RI, for workforce training, including the purchase of supplies

680,000

Reed

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

DownCity Design, RI, for expanding career pathways programs, including providing stipends
and purchasing equipment

100,000

Reed

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Downriver Community College, MI, for workforce training, including providing supportive
services

750,000

Peters

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Drink at the Well, Inc., MD, for expanding workforce development programming, purchasing
equipment, and providing wrap around services, including child care

175,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Early Childhood Center of Excellence at Santa Fe Community College, NM, for expanding
apprenticeships and pre-apprenticeships, including providing stipends

273,000

Heinrich

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Educate Maine, ME, to purchase manufacturing and engineering equipment for Career and
Technical Education schools

2,000,000

Collins, King

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Elliot Health System, NH, for improving healthcare workforce training, including by providing scholarships

460,000

Shaheen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Fairbanks Pipeline Training Center Trust, AK, to fund training equipment for constructing
and maintaining pipelines

2,500,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Forge City Works, CT, for a culinary workforce training program, including supportive services, purchasing equipment and supplies

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Fund for the City of New York (Fiscal Sponsor of New York City Employment and Training
Coalition), NY, for workforce training

125,000

Schumer

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Goodwill Industries of the Valleys, VA, for education and workforce training, which may include the purchase of classroom supplies and equipment

1,800,000

Kaine, Warner

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00030

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

January 20, 2026

H957

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Goodwill of Greater Washington, MD, for expanding workforce training, including providing
stipends

1,000,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Goodwill of North Georgia, GA, for workforce training, including the purchase of equipment
and tuition

1,950,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Greater Lake City Alliance, SC, to expand a workforce training program

734,000

Graham

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Greater Roanoke Workforce Development Board, VA, for expanding apprenticeships and
youth apprenticeships, including rent and the purchase of equipment

737,000

Kaine, Warner

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Hanley Center for Health Leadership and Education DBA Maine Medical Education Trust,
ME, to support certified nursing assistant training for long-term care

1,000,000

Collins, King

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Hire Heroes USA, GA, for workforce training for veterans, transitioning service members and
military spouses

520,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Ilisagvik College, AK, to expand Ilisagvik College’s Workforce Development program

250,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

International Institute of New England, NH, for workforce training in early childhood education

470,000

Shaheen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Iron Workers Local Union No. 8 Joint Apprenticeship and Advanced Journeyman Training
Trust Fund, WI, for expanding apprenticeships, including the purchase of equipment

700,000

Baldwin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Jackson County Airport-Reynolds Field, MI, for improving aviation maintenance training, including the purchase of equipment

500,000

Peters

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

JEVS Human Services, PA, for healthcare workforce training, including purchasing supplies
and equipment

220,000

Fetterman

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Jobs & Hope West Virginia, WV, to support wage reimbursements

750,000

Justice

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

KNOX, Inc., CT, for an apprenticeship program, including stipends

231,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Lincoln University of Pennsylvania, PA, for expanding workforce training, including purchasing equipment and providing supportive services

1,000,000

Fetterman

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Literacy Pittsburgh, PA, for workforce training and career development programs, including
for purchasing equipment and supplies

250,000

Fetterman

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Lomakatsi Restoration Project, OR, for an inter-tribal forestry workforce training program,
including the purchase of equipment and tools

1,300,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Los Angeles Conservation Corps, CA, for workforce training, including transportation

969,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service DBA Global Refuge, MD, for expanding workforce
development programming, including supportive services

300,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Madison Area Technical College, WI, for improving workforce development for nursing,
health, and EMS programs, including the purchase of equipment

660,000

Baldwin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Massachusetts Down Syndrome Congress, MA, for workforce training, including equipment
and participant stipends

722,000

Markey,
Warren

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mesalands Community College, NM, for improving workforce training, including the purchase of equipment

4,000,000

Heinrich

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Michigan AFL–CIO Workforce Development Institute, MI, for expanding workforce training,
including the purchase of equipment

2,000,000

Slotkin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mid-Atlantic States Career and Education Center, NJ, for improving workforce training, including the purchase of equipment

137,000

Booker

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mississippi Coding Academies, MS, for a digital workforce training program

700,000

Hyde-Smith

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mississippi State University, MS, to expand a workforce training program for skilled manufacturing

5,320,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Mixed Magic Theatre & Cultural Events, RI, for a workforce training program, including providing stipends and purchasing supplies

100,000

Reed

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Moraine Park Technical College, WI, for improving education and workforce training, including the purchase of equipment

1,325,000

Baldwin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

MS Department of Archives and History, MS, to establish a workforce training field school

500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

National Forest Foundation, NM, for supporting workforce training and a conservation corps,
including the purchase of equipment and supplies

500,000

Luján

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

New Mexico Reentry Center, NM, for providing workforce training programs, including the
purchase of equipment

150,000

Heinrich

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Northwest Regional Workforce Investment Board, CT, for a reentry workforce training program, which includes providing supportive services

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

NPower Inc., MD, for expanding workforce training, including providing stipends and purchasing equipment

750,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Operation Stand Down Rhode Island, RI, for a workforce training program for veterans including purchasing equipment and providing supportive services

400,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Pacific Northwest Ironworkers and Employers Apprenticeship and Training Trust, AK, to fund
workforce opportunities in rural Alaska

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Plattsburgh-North Country Chamber of Commerce, NY, for workforce training, including supportive services

350,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Polytech Adult Education, DE, for expanding workforce training, including the purchase of
equipment

1,542,000

Coons

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Renewable Energy Alaska Project, AK, to fund a job training program

730,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Roxbury Community College, MA, for improving education and workforce training, including
purchasing equipment, providing financial aid and scholarships, and purchasing technology

2,000,000

Markey,
Warren

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00031

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H958

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Rural Alaska Community Action Program, AK, to provide childcare support and training in
rural Alaska

1,264,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

San Juan College, NM, for supporting workforce training for commercial drivers, including
the purchase of vehicles for a training program

1,000,000

Luján

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Sealaska Heritage Institute, AK, to fund a job training program

500,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

SMART Local Union No. 49 JATC, NM, for expanding apprenticeship programs, including the
purchase of equipment

1,200,000

Heinrich

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Southern Virginia Higher Education Center, VA, for technology workforce training, including
the purchase of equipment

751,000

Kaine, Warner

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Southwest Washington Workforce Development Council, dba Workforce Southwest Washington, WA, for education and workforce development programming, including supportive
services and tuition

1,000,000

Murray

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Survivor Ventures, DE, for workforce training, including supportive services and wage subsidies

257,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Survivor Ventures, VA, for providing workforce development, which may include providing
supportive services and financial aid

405,000

Kaine, Warner

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Tech Goes Home Incorporated, MA, for workforce development in digital skills and digital
literacy, including the purchase of equipment and technology

800,000

Markey,
Warren

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Arc Alliance, PA, for workforce training activities and improving services for individuals
with disabilities, including the purchase of equipment

200,000

Fetterman

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Arc Montgomery County, Inc., MD, for a workforce training program, including stipends

150,000

Alsobrooks

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Arizona Office of Economic Opportunity, AZ, for construction and trades apprenticeship
expansion, including purchasing equipment and providing tuition

2,000,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Chrysalis Center, CA, for workforce training, which may include scholarships and other
supportive services

405,000

Padilla

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Economic Development Corporation Serving Fresno County, CA, for workforce training,
including the purchase of equipment

2,304,000

Schiff

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Precision Institute, DE, for expanding workforce training, including purchasing equipment and providing stipends

1,100,000

Coons

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

The Training Source, Inc., MD, for workforce training and career counseling, including stipends

289,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Thread, AK, to provide TA and training for childcare centers

500,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Trying Together, PA, for expanding workforce training, including supportive services

500,000

Fetterman

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Uintah Basin Technical College, UT, to purchase two mobile trailer vehicles and provide
training

1,000,000

Curtis

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of Alaska Anchorage, AK, to expand a course of study for aviation maintenance
technology

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of Alaska Anchorage, AK, to fund workforce training opportunities for students

315,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of Alaska Southeast, AK, to fund a job training program

160,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of California, Merced, CA, for medical education, including the purchase of
equipment

3,500,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

University of Rhode Island Research Foundation dba Polaris MEP, RI, for advanced manufacturing workforce development, including the purchase of equipment

560,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Urban League of Greater Atlanta (ULGA), GA, for workforce development, including stipends,
supportive services, rent, and purchasing equipment

1,204,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Veterans Watchmaker Initiative, DE, for workforce training for veterans, including the purchase of equipment

444,000

Coons

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

VIPER Transitions, AK, to expand a veteran career services program

1,095,000

Murkowski

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Visiting Nurse Association Health Group, NJ, for improving health care workforce training,
including purchasing equipment, providing tuition support, and providing supportive
services

1,000,000

Booker, Kim

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Wide Angle Youth Media, MD, for a pre-apprenticeship program, including providing stipends and purchasing supplies and technology

712,000

Van Hollen

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Women’s Rights Information Center, NJ, for expanding workforce training, including purchasing equipment and providing supportive services

461,000

Booker, Kim

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Workforce Development Board of South Central Wisconsin, WI, for apprenticeship support,
including apprenticeship navigators

970,000

Baldwin

S

DOL

Employment and Training Administration

Workforce Development Council of Seattle King County, WA, for workforce development for
healthcare workers including providing supportive services

1,000,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College, GA, for facilities and equipment to improve rural
nurse education

424,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Addictions Recovery Center, Inc. (ARC), OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a residential treatment facility

1,400,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Adelante Healthcare, Inc., AZ, for facilities and equipment to expand a health center

2,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AdventHealth Redmond, GA, for equipment to provide ambulance services

934,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AdventHealth Shawnee Mission, KS, for facilities and equipment to expand high-risk maternal fetal clinic

1,000,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AIDS Resource Alliance, Inc., PA, for equipment to purchase a mobile clinic

375,000

Fetterman

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00032

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

January 20, 2026

H959

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Alaska—Division of Public Health State Medical Examiner’s Office, AK, for facilities and
equipment for acquisition and installation of x-ray imaging machine

550,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium, AK, for facilities and equipment to renovate and
upgrade operating room recovery space and perioperative bays

1,500,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Albany Area Primary Health Care, Inc., GA, for facilities and equipment to expand a medical
center

1,806,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Alternative Community Resource Program, PA, for facilities and equipment to renovate a
behavioral health clinic

1,000,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Amador Health Center, Inc., NM, for facilities and equipment to construct counseling space

516,000

Luján

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Amani Center, OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a child services center

1,023,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Amherst H. Wilder Foundation, MN, for facilities and equipment to expand access to substance use disorder treatment

1,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ammonoosuc Community Health Services, Inc., NH, for facilities and equipment to weatherize and improve accessibility for a health clinic

250,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Amoskeag Health, NH, for equipment to improve clinic safety and establish a new service
site

485,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Anchorage Community Mental Health Services Inc. dba Alaska Behavioral Health, AK, for facilities and equipment to renovate facilities in Anchorage and Fairbanks to allow expanded mental health residential treatment

1,950,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Anchorage Fire Department, AK, for facilities and equipment to construct a decontamination
unit

1,090,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Anderson Center for Autism, NY, for facilities and equipment to install a septic system

1,064,000

Gillibrand

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AnMed Health System, SC, for acquisition of imaging, lab, and pharmacy equipment

3,800,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Archways, NH, for facilities and equipment to improve access to substance use disorder
treatment

300,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Arkansas Department of Health, AR, for the acquisition of clinical practice technology, remote patient health tools, telehealth hardware and software, and electronic medical
records upgrades

13,300,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Arkansas State University Newport, AR, for facilities and equipment for Nursing and Health
Professions Facility and purchase of academic, telehealth, mental health, and student
health and wellness technology

7,700,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Arkansas State University, AR, for facilities and equipment for construction of Mental and
Maternal-Infant Healthcare Simulation Building

9,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Athens Model Neighborhood Health Center, Inc., GA, for equipment to purchase mobile units

1,001,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Atlantic Health System, NJ, for facilities and equipment to expand access to mammography
services

750,000

Booker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

AtlanticCare Health System, NJ, for facilities and equipment to provide an emergency power
supply

1,000,000

Booker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Augusta University, GA, for equipment to improve cancer treatment

800,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Augusta University, GA, for equipment to support training of medical students

630,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Avera Health, SD, for facilities and equipment to support the acquisition and installation of
fixed PET/CT scanner and linear accelerators

10,175,000

Rounds

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bailey’s Crossroads Health Access Partnership, Inc. (D/B/A Culmore Clinic), VA, for facilities
and equipment to construct a new medical clinic

550,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bath Community Hospital, VA, for equipment to purchase an ambulance

289,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bayfield County, WI, for establishing a rural first-responders program

300,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Beebe Medical Center, DE, for facilities and equipment to construct a primary care clinic

1,775,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Behavioral Health and Developmental Services of Strafford County, Inc., NH, for facilities
and equipment to improve access to behavioral health services

110,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bennett County Hospital & Nursing Home, SD, for facilities and equipment for new hospital
construction that will support emergency services, primary care, swing bed services, behavioral health programs, and other ancillary services

2,551,000

Rounds

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Blood Bank of Hawaii, HI, for equipment to purchase a blood donation center

1,000,000

Hirono

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Blue Mountain Heart to Heart, WA, for facilities and equipment to increase access to substance use disorder treatment

1,000,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, IL, for facilities and equipment to expand a
dental clinic

700,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bridgton Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate, expand, and provide diagnostic and patient room equipment for the Emergency Department

5,000,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Brightpoint Community College, Midlothian and Chester Virginia, VA, for facilities and
equipment to support health professions training

296,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bucksport Regional Health Center, ME, for facilities and equipment to support construction,
renovation, and purchase of dental equipment to expand dental services

1,980,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bucktail Medical Center, PA, for equipment to improve diagnostic services

949,000

Fetterman, McCormick

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Bullhead City Fire District, AZ, for equipment to provide ambulance services

294,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

C.A.R.E. Clinic, MN, for facilities and equipment to improve training for health professionals

1,100,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Calais Community Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to expand Rural Health Clinic

4,990,000

Collins, King

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00033

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H960

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Camai Community Health Center, AK, for facilities and equipment to expand and modernize
health center for mental health, emergency services, and diagnostic capabilities and
provide critical infrastructure upgrades

3,000,000

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Cameron County Ambulance Service, Inc., PA, for equipment to provide ambulance services

250,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Caring Hands Healthcare Centers Inc., OK, for facilities and equipment to support construction of new primary care clinic

950,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Centenary College, LA, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation for the
Centenary College School of Health Sciences

10,000,000

Cassidy,
Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Center Senior Living, WA, for facilities and equipment for an assisted living facility

1,000,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Central Arizona Fire and Medical Authority, AZ, for equipment to provide ambulance services

750,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Central Maine Highland Fire & EMS District 1, ME, for equipment to purchase new ambulances for regional EMS

1,875,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Charleston Area Medical Center, WV, for equipment for technical infrastructure upgrades
and cybersecurity technology

15,000,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

CHI Memorial Hospital—Georgia, GA, for equipment to improve patient monitoring and
emergency response

964,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Children’s Inn at NIH, Inc., MD, for facilities and equipment to construct residential spaces
for pediatric patients

620,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Children’s National Medical Center, MD, for equipment to expand access to pediatric care
through a mobile unit

600,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine, ME, for acquisition of equipment to train dental
hygienists

525,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Christiana Care Health Services, DE, for facilities and equipment to construct an urgent
care facility

4,008,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Circle the City, AZ, for facilities and equipment to expand a health center

840,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Bridgeton, NJ, for equipment to expand rural healthcare and purchase an ambulance

435,000

Kim

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Carlin Volunteer Fire Department, NV, for equipment to improve cardiac care

98,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Chicago, IL, for facilities and equipment to construct a senior center

2,000,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Clarksburg, WV, for renovations, functional fitness equipment, development of training, and conducting cancer screenings to support City of Clarksburg’s Cancer Screening
for Firefighters program

214,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of East Point, GA, for equipment to provide ambulance services

302,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Enterprise, AL, for facilities and acquisition to purchase and install surgical robot

3,000,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Fairbanks, AK, for equipment to purchase medical ambulance bus and emergency
medical equipment

728,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Lexington, VA, for facilities and equipment to construct a primary care clinic

2,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Maricopa, AZ, for equipment to provide ambulance services

867,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Meadville Fire Department, PA, for acquisition of vehicles, cardiac technology, and
telehealth equipment and to support personnel for a new Mobile Integrated Health unit

1,180,000

McCormick

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of O’Neill, NE, for facilities and equipment for construction to support replacement and
installation of boiler and water heating systems

3,500,000

Fischer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Valdosta, GA, for equipment to purchase a vehicle

328,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Wells, NV, for facilities and equipment to expand primary care services and purchase a vehicle

227,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

City of Winslow, AZ, for equipment to establish a rural emergency response program

68,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Clackamas County, OR, for facilities and equipment to improve access to substance use
disorder services

2,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Clinch County Hospital Authority, GA, for equipment to provide imaging and ambulance
services

450,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coastal Carolina University, SC, for acquisition of nurse simulation laboratory equipment
and nursing and health sciences education and training equipment

2,400,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

CODAC Behavioral Healthcare, RI, for facilities and equipment to improve accessibility

851,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY, for equipment to support neurodegenerative disease research

2,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Colorado State University, CO, for facilities and equipment to support a nurse training program

1,500,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Columbus Consolidated Government, GA, for equipment to provide healthcare to veterans
and software purchases

216,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Clinic of Maui, Inc. dba Malama I Ke Ola Health Center, HI, for facilities and
equipment for health information infrastructure and an electronic health records system

1,536,000

Hirono

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community College of Rhode Island, RI, for facilities and equipment to expand health care
training facilities

2,390,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Dental, ME, for facilities and equipment to expand dental services

2,334,000

King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Health Care Systems, Inc., GA, for equipment to purchase a mobile clinic

472,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Health Care, Inc., IL, for equipment to improve dental services

328,000

Durbin

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00034

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

Murkowski

S

January 20, 2026

H961

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Community Health Connections Inc., MA, for facilities and equipment to improve accessibility

1,500,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Concord University, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction of the Center for Rural
Healthcare Workforce Solutions

7,500,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Concordia University, Inc., WI, for facilities and equipment to renovate nurse training facilities

753,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Confederated Tribes of Coos, Lower Umpqua, and Siuslaw Indians, OR, for facilities and
equipment to renovate a behavioral health facility

1,030,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Conway Medical Center, SC, for acquisition of Emergency Department equipment

1,410,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coos County Administration, NH, for facilities and equipment to improve building safety

415,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coosa County Emergency Medical Service, AL, for equipment for purchase of new ambulance

300,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Copper Canyon Fire & Medical District, AZ, for equipment to purchase an ambulance, power
load system and gurney

320,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Copper River EMS Council, AK, to support Copper River EMS Council for providing emergency health services

291,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Cordova Community Medical Center, AK, for facilities and equipment for critical infrastructure and medical equipment upgrades

3,000,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coteau des Prairies Hospital, SD, for facilities and equipment for replacement and installation of boilers and pump systems

1,099,000

Rounds

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Coteau des Prairies Hospital, SD, for facilities and equipment for replacement and installation of chiller system

683,000

Rounds

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Cottage Hospital, NH, for facilities and equipment to remove and replace an oil tank

76,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

County of Cheshire Administration, NH, for facilities and equipment to install an emergency
communication system

936,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

County of Mono, CA, for facilities and equipment to renovate emergency facilities

1,340,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Crisp Regional Hospital, GA, for facilities and equipment to replace boilers and fire alarm
systems

1,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

CrossOver Healthcare Ministry, VA, for facilities and equipment to expand access to dental
services

400,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Cullman Regional Medical Center, AL, for facilities and equipment to purchase and install
surgical robot

2,500,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Daily Planet Health Services, VA, for facilities and equipment to replace HVAC systems

351,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Dar a Luz Birth Center, NM, for facilities and equipment to expand a birth center

2,677,000

Heinrich

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Dartmouth Health, NH, for facilities and equipment to construct a perinatal substance use
stabilization unit

900,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Day One, RI, for facilities and equipment for building infrastructure improvements

990,000

Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Delaware Health Empowerment Coalition, DE, for facilities and equipment to construct primary care clinics

2,600,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Delta Ambulance, ME, for equipment to purchase new ambulances and emergency medical
equipment

655,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Denver Health & Hospital Authority, CO, for facilities and equipment for building improvements

3,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Deschutes County, OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a child psychiatric facility

1,304,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Desert Hills Fire District, AZ, for equipment to improve cardiac care

210,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Dorchester County, SC, for facilities and equipment for site work to support a mobile MRI
unit and the acquisition of x-ray machinery

709,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

DotHouse Health Inc., MA, for facilities and equipment to replace HVAC systems and roofing

486,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Dr. Terry Sinclair Health Clinic, VA, for facilities and equipment to renovate an exam room

490,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Eagle View Community Health System, IL, for facilities and equipment, including a mobile
clinic

525,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Easter Seals New Jersey Inc., NJ, for equipment and supplies to improve accessibility

241,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Eastern Maine Community College, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction/renovation of nursing and allied health facility

6,510,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Eastern Maine Healthcare Systems DBA Northern Light Health, ME, for acquisition of labor
and delivery equipment

1,599,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Emory University, GA, for equipment for a neonatal intensive care unit

476,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Evergreen Treatment Services, WA, for facilities and equipment to increase access to substance use disorder treatment

3,040,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Fairfax County Government, VA, for facilities and equipment to construct a regional crisis
facility to address behavioral health needs

850,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Family & Children’s Aid, Inc., CT, for facilities and equipment to increase accessibility of a
clinic

350,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Family and Children’s Center of Wisconsin, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
mental health diagnostic center

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Faulkner University, AL, for equipment for mobile care clinics

1,305,000

Britt

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H20JAPT1

H962

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ferris State University, MI, for facilities and equipment to renovate clinical and teaching
space

1,950,000

Peters

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Florence-Darlington Technical College, SC, for acquisition of nursing equipment to support
Nursing and Allied Health Programs

1,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Floyd Healthcare Management, Inc. d/b/a Atrium Health Floyd, GA, for facilities and equipment to improve diagnostic services

1,500,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

For All Seasons, Inc., MD, for facilities and equipment to expand access to behavioral
health services

1,000,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Frontier Behavioral Health, WA, for facilities and equipment to construct a primary care
and behavioral health clinic

2,000,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Gallup Community Health, NM, for facilities and equipment to expand behavioral and specialty care services

750,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Gannon University, PA, for facilities and equipment for construction of two laboratories for
cancer treatment, education, and research

500,000

McCormick

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Georgia State University, GA, for equipment to purchase a mobile clinic

1,350,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

GLITC Adolescent Wellness Recovery Center, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
residential treatment center

4,700,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Gloucester Mathews Care Clinic, VA, for facilities and equipment to create a nursing station and improve building infrastructure

151,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Golder Ranch Fire District, AZ, for equipment to purchase a vehicle and rescue equipment

200,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grady Memorial Hospital Corporation, GA, for equipment to purchase a mobile unit

250,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grand Itasca Clinic and Hospital, MN, for facilities and equipment to renovate an emergency department

1,800,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grande Ronde Hospital, OR, for equipment to provide nuclear medicine services

1,356,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grant County Courthouse, WV, for equipment for purchase of new ambulance

310,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grant County Public Hospital District No 1, dba Samaritan Healthcare, WA, for facilities and
equipment to support a family medicine residency program

2,000,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Greater Fairbanks Community Hospital Foundation, AK, for facilities and equipment for construction of an inpatient psychiatric unit

3,000,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Greenwood Genetic Center, SC, for acquisition of Alzheimer’s research equipment

1,106,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Grove Hill Memorial Hospital, AL, for acquisition of mammography, CT, ultrasound, and EKG
equipment

1,000,000

Tuberville

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Gunderson La Crosse Medical Center Campus, WI, for facilities and equipment to renovate
a substance use disorder treatment facility

750,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hale Makua Health Services, HI, for equipment to replace patient beds

1,850,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Harney District Hospital, OR, for facilities and equipment for building infrastructure improvements

1,250,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hawaii Island Community Health Center, HI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
clinic

1,500,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Healing Hands Clinic of Gordon County, GA, for facilities and equipment, including to repair
a roof

190,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Health Brigade, VA, for facilities and equipment to replace HVAC systems, boilers, and a
roof

750,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Health Care Authority of the City of Eufaula, AL, for acquisition of surgical and laboratory
equipment

500,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

HealthReach Community Health Centers, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate and
expand dental services wing

650,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hennepin Healthcare System, Inc., MN, for facilities and equipment to construct a substance use disorder treatment clinic

3,002,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hennepin Technical College, MN, for facilities and equipment to support dental training
programs

2,089,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Home of the Innocents, KY, for equipment for a pediatric skilled nursing facility

1,000,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hope Unlimited, Inc., KS, for facilities and equipment for construction of new domestic violence shelter that offers therapy, telehealth, primary care services, and complex care referrals

2,700,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hospital Authority of Ben Hill, GA, for facilities and equipment to improve access to wound
care

1,452,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hospital Authority of Irwin County, GA, for facilities and equipment to replace HVAC systems and improve imaging services

1,450,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Houlton Regional Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to modernize and replace critical infrastructure systems

5,458,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Hurley Medical Center, MI, for equipment to replace patient beds

1,800,000

Slotkin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Iliuliuk Family and Health Services, AK, for facilities and equipment for clinic renovation
and acquisition of technology and medical imaging equipment

2,705,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Illinois Eye Institute, IL, for equipment to improve optometry services

750,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Inspira Health Network, NJ, for equipment to support telehealth services

2,000,000

Booker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Jackson County Health Department, IL, for facilities and equipment to renovate a health department

176,000

Duckworth

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00036

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

January 20, 2026

H963

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Requestor(s)

Amount
($)

Project

Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Jackson Parish Hospital, LA, for facilities and equipment for construction of a rural health
clinic

4,000,000

Cassidy,
Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

JAMHI Health and Wellness, AK, for facilities and equipment to support HVAC installation
and acquisition of technology upgrades

938,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Jefferson County Commission, WV, for facilities and equipment for the Jefferson County
Health Department relocation and expansion

345,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Kanawha County Emergency Ambulance Authority, WV, for equipment for purchase of new
ambulances

2,105,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Keefe Memorial Hospital, CO, for facilities and equipment to renovate a rural hospital

2,035,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ketchikan Gateway Borough, AK, for equipment for purchase of new ambulance

347,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Kittitas Valley Healthcare, WA, for facilities and equipment for renovations to support orthopedic and surgery services

2,262,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Klickitat Valley Health, WA, for facilities and equipment to provide MRI services

500,000

Cantwell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Kodiak Island Health Care Foundation, AK, for facilities and equipment for HVAC system
upgrades

300,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lamprey Health Care, Inc., NH, for facilities and equipment to construct a pharmacy

250,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lawrence General Hospital, MA, for equipment to provide infusion services

1,367,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Liberation Programs, Inc., CT, for facilities and equipment to construct an inpatient care
facility

3,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Limen House, Inc., DE, for facilities and equipment to renovate a sober living facility

1,000,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lonesome Pine Community Hospital (Norton Community Hospital), VA, for equipment to purchase an ion lung bronchoscopy

683,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lowell Community Health Center, MA, for facilities and equipment to expand clinical space
and training opportunities

2,000,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans, LA, for acquisition of laboratory research equipment

4,500,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Lummi Nation, WA, for facilities and equipment to construct a substance use disorder recovery facility

500,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Maine Veterans’ Homes, ME, for acquisition of electronic health records technology, upgrading other technology needs, and purchase of ceiling lifts equipment

3,142,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Maine Veterans’ Homes, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation to
upgrade Maine Veterans’ Homes Facilities

518,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

MaineGeneral Health, ME, for facilities and equipment for acquisition and installation of
electronic medical record upgrades

5,000,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mariposa Community Health Center, Inc., AZ, for facilities and equipment to improve access to prenatal, postnatal, and pediatric care

2,000,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Marshall University Research Corporation, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction
of Center for Informatics and Population Analytics in support of Marshall University
School of Medicine

1,861,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Marshall University Research Corporation, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction
of Marshall University Medical Simulation Center and purchase of simulation equipment

15,000,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Martinsville Henry County Coalition for Health and Wellness, VA, for facilities and equipment to improve access to medical, dental, and behavioral health

785,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Maui Memorial Medical Center, HI, for equipment to support bedside monitoring

850,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

McAlester Regional Health Center, OK, for facilities and equipment to support the expansion
of the McAlester Cancer Center

3,000,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

McCall Foundation, Inc. dba McCall Behavioral Health Network, CT, for facilities and equipment, including for a mobile clinic

264,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

McDermott Center, IL, for facilities and equipment to expand dental services

268,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

McLeod Health, SC, for facilities and equipment for construction to renovate fluoroscopy
room and purchase x-ray and CT equipment

1,143,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Medical College of Wisconsin, WI, for equipment to provide imaging services

1,600,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Memorial Health System, MS, for facilities and equipment for Labor and Delivery Department renovations

1,700,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Memorial Health System, MS, for facilities and equipment to support a radiation oncology
equipment project

5,600,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Memorial Hospital Belleville, IL, for equipment to improve intensive care services

1,250,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mescal-J6 Fire District, AZ, for facilities and equipment to purchase emergency response
vehicles

650,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Minnie Hamilton Health Care Center, Inc., WV, for facilities and equipment for renovation of
the Minnie Hamilton Hospital Emergency Department, medical clinic, laboratory, dietary
space, dental clinic, and pharmacy

3,250,000

Capito,
Justice

H/S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi Methodist Hospital & Rehabilitation Center, Inc., MS, for facilities and equipment to replace entrance canopy

714,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi Organ Recovery Agency, MS, for facilities and equipment to expand clinical
organ/tissue recovery facility

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi Public Health Institute, MS, for the Center for Optimizing Maternal Outcomes for
data development and systems implementation

2,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00037

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

Miller

H964

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi State Department of Health, MS, for acquisition of telehealth equipment

801,000

Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mississippi State Department of Health, MS, for the direct certification of healthcare staff
in obstetrics life support and neonatal resuscitation and for program coordination

250,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mitchell County Hospital Health Systems, KS, for facilities and equipment to renovate and
expand the Emergency Department and rehabilitation spaces

1,714,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mon Health Medical Center, WV, for equipment for technical infrastructure upgrades and
cybersecurity technology

8,100,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mon Health Medical Center, WV, for facilities and equipment for renovation of clinical and
kitchen space, elevator modernization, and improvements to critical infrastructure

5,485,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Monroe County Hospital, AL, for acquisition of mammography and CT scan equipment

500,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Montefiore Medical Center, NY, for facilities and equipment to increase power capacity

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Morrow County Health District, OR, for equipment to provide imaging services

652,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction
of the Center for Advancing Science Education

1,935,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Mountain Comprehensive Health Corporation, KY, for facilities and equipment for construction of autism treatment facility

1,500,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Murry State College, OK, for facilities and equipment for construction of nursing education
center and acquisition of nursing simulation laboratory equipment

3,000,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Natchitoches Regional Medical Center, LA, for facilities and equipment to acquire and install PET scanner and CT machine

4,035,000

Cassidy,
Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

National Jewish Health, CO, for facilities and equipment to improve treatment of respiratory
diseases

2,350,000

Bennet

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Nazareth University, NY, for facilities and equipment to renovate a classroom space for
health professionals

1,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Neighborhood Health, VA, for facilities and equipment to renovate a clinic to provide medical, dental, and behavioral healthcare

1,521,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Neosho Memorial Regional Medical Center, KS, for facilities and equipment for renovation
of the Cardiac Rehabilitation Center and for acquisition of imaging equipment

1,220,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Nevada State University, NV, for facilities and equipment to construct a health education
center

2,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

New England College, NH, for facilities and equipment to improve training of health professionals

775,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

New York Stem Cell Foundation, Inc., NY, for facilities and equipment to construct a precision medicine center

5,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Newport County Community Mental Health Center, Inc., RI, for facilities and equipment to
improve access to behavioral health services

1,000,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

North Country HealthCare, AZ, for facilities and equipment to construct a dental clinic

1,800,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

North Penn Comprehensive Health Services, PA, for facilities and equipment to construct a
dental clinic

500,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeast Colorado Health Department, CO, for facilities and equipment to construct a public health facility

3,041,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeast Oregon Area Health Education Center, Inc., OR, for equipment to provide obstetrics training

163,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeastern Oklahoma Community Health Centers, INC., OK, for facilities and equipment to
support construction of new primary care clinic

2,500,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeastern State University, OK, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of nursing simulation laboratory and for the acquisition of nursing simulation laboratory equipment

877,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northeastern Vermont Regional Hospital, VT, for facilities and equipment to expand pharmacy services

1,400,000

Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Northern Neck-Middlesex Free Health Clinic, VA, for facilities and equipment to provide dental services

1,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Norwalk Community Health Center, Inc., CT, for facilities and equipment, including for a
mobile clinic

907,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Norwich University, VT, for expanding rural nursing education and the purchase of equipment

557,000

Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

NYU Langone Hospitals, NY, for equipment to support imaging services

1,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Oakland Integrated Healthcare Network, MI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
health clinic

5,500,000

Slotkin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ochsner LSU Health—Monroe Medical Center, LA, for acquisition of equipment for the labor
and delivery department, neonatal intensive care unit department, and pre- and postpartum care department

1,010,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ogeechee Technical College, GA, for facilities and equipment to improve training for health
professionals

1,064,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ohio Christian University, OH, for acquisition of advanced simulation lab equipment

1,168,000

Moreno

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Oklahoma Primary Care Association, OK, for equipment to support electronic health record
modernization at Federally Qualified Health Centers in Oklahoma

2,000,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

One Brooklyn Health System, Inc., NY, for equipment for a neonatal intensive care unit

1,182,000

Gillibrand

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Oregon Institute of Technology, OR, for facilities and equipment, including mobile dental
clinics

1,700,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00038

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

January 20, 2026

H965

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

OSF HealthCare System, IL, for facilities and equipment to construct a dental clinic

2,000,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

OU Health Partners Inc., OK, for acquisition of mobile stroke units and telehealth equipment

4,584,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Parkland College District 505, IL, for facilities and equipment to construct a dental clinic

3,500,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Philander Smith University, AR, for facilities and equipment for improvements to the Health
and Science Center and acquisition of a mobile unit for the nursing program

7,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Piedmont Access To Health Services, Inc. (PATHS), VA, for equipment to purchase a mobile
unit to provide vision services

250,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Pines Health Services, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction of a new health
center for Pines Health Services to support primary care

8,900,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Portland Recovery Community Center, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction of
Friends and Family Center for peer recovery services

2,647,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Prisma Health-Upstate, SC, for equipment for acquisition of oncology equipment

5,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Project Vision Hawaii, HI, for facilities and equipment to increase access to dental, vision,
and hearing screenings

810,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Pueblo of Pojoaque, NM, for facilities and equipment to expand a behavioral health facility

2,303,000

Heinrich

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe, NV, for facilities and equipment to expand a Tribal health clinic

4,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Racine County, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a mental health facility

5,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Range Mental Health Center, MN, for facilities and equipment to improve accessibility and
security

1,091,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Red Shield 8 Nations Inc., MT, for facilities and equipment for construction of behavioral
health treatment center

3,545,000

Sheehy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rehabilitation Hospital of the Pacific, HI, for equipment to replace patient beds

1,098,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rhode Island Hospital, RI, for equipment to provide dental services and patient monitoring

200,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

RI Department of Behavioral Healthcare, Developmental Disabilities and Hospitals, RI, for
equipment to replace patient beds

2,988,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Richmond Medical Center, NY, for facilities and equipment to renovate a neonatal intensive
care unit

2,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ridgecrest Regional Hospital, CA, for facilities and equipment to construct a behavioral
health facility

1,800,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rincon Valley Fire District, AZ, for equipment to provide cardiac care

300,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rivier University, NH, for equipment to purchase a mobile medical van

317,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rochester General Hospital, NY, for facilities and equipment to establish a hospital logistics hub

800,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Roper St. Francis Hospital, SC, for facilities and equipment to support foundational and
structural construction of new hospital

1,776,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Rumford Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate, expand, and provide diagnostic and patient room equipment for the Emergency Department

6,400,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

RWJBarnabas Health, NJ, for equipment to support health professional training programs

968,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Saint Francis Hospital, DE, for facilities and equipment to construct an outpatient pharmacy

1,475,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Salina Family Healthcare Center, KS, for facilities and equipment for construction of a new
clinical education facility

3,261,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Sauk Valley Voices of Recovery, IL, for facilities and equipment to purchase a mobile clinic

222,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Sea Mar Community Health Centers, WA, for equipment to provide dental services

1,650,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Seattle Children’s Hospital, WA, for facilities and equipment to construct a behavioral
health stabilization unit

3,000,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Seattle Indian Health Board, WA, for facilities and equipment to construct a health clinic

4,500,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

SECU Family House at UNC Hospitals, NC, for facilities and equipment to support the acquisition and installation of commercial-grade generator

316,000

Tillis

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Seldovia Village Tribe Health & Wellness, AK, for acquisition of dental and physical therapy
equipment and medical treadmill

332,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Self Regional Healthcare, SC, for facilities and equipment to construct a new Rural Health
Clinic

4,600,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Seven Hills New Hampshire, Inc., NH, for facilities and equipment to improve access to
clinical services

1,350,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Singing River Health System, MS, for facilities and equipment to acquire and install generators

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Smithsburg Emergency Medical Services, Inc., MD, for equipment to provide ambulance
services

250,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

South Georgia Medical Center, Inc. d/b/a SGMC Health, GA, for facilities and equipment to
support maternal and infant care

1,581,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

South Shore Hospital, MA, for facilities and equipment to increase accessibility

1,500,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

South-Central Colorado Seniors, Inc., CO, for facilities and equipment for a resource center
for older adults

840,000

Hickenlooper

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00039

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H966

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Southern Regional Medical Center, GA, for facilities and equipment to construct a sickle
cell wellness center

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Southern Research Institute, AL, for acquisition of biotechnology research equipment

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Southwest Health System, Inc., CO, for facilities and equipment to expand trauma diagnostic imaging services

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Southwest Minnesota State University, MN, for facilities and equipment to support nurse
training programs

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

HHS

Origination
Senate
Ossoff

S

2,000,000

Britt

S

1,950,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

1,226,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Spanish Peaks Regional Health Center, CO, for equipment to expand ambulance services

50,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Health Resources and Services Administration

Spartanburg Regional Healthcare System, SC, for facilities and equipment to renovate Cardiovascular Recovery Unit and construction of Coronary Care Unit

6,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Spokane County, WA, for facilities and equipment to expand a crisis stabilization center

3,000,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Spurwink Services, Inc, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction of Behavioral
Health Center

5,666,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Barnabas Hospital, NY, for equipment to improve imaging services

1,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Bonaventure University, NY, for facilities and equipment to support a healthcare workforce training and development program

1,100,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Joseph Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate, expand, and equip the
Emergency Department

6,800,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Mary’s Regional Medical Center, ME, for facilities and equipment to renovate, expand,
and modernize the Behavioral Health Emergency Department

2,619,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Peter’s Hospital, NY, for equipment to manage clinical trials using information technology

300,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Tammany Health System, LA, for acquisition of nursing and allied health simulation
equipment

1,050,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

St. Vincent’s Blount, AL, for facilities and equipment to purchase and install CT scanner

1,667,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

StayWell Health Care Inc., CT, for facilities and equipment for health information infrastructure and an electronic health records system

750,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Stephens Memorial Hospital, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction to expand
Emergency Department and oncology infusion center

10,810,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Stillwater Medical Center Authority, OK, for facilities and equipment to expand Stillwater
Medical Center Emergency Department trauma center and ambulance bay

2,200,000

Mullin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Stroger Hospital, IL, for equipment to improve neonatal care

500,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Sussex County Community College, NJ, for equipment to provide imaging and dental services

428,000

Booker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Temple University Hospital, PA, for equipment to improve imaging services

240,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Arc of Delaware, DE, for facilities and equipment to renovate for accessibility

1,000,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois University (School of Dental Medicine), IL, for facilities and equipment to renovate a dental clinic

1,100,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Children’s Advocacy Center of Delaware, DE, for facilities and equipment to enhance
security

443,000

Coons

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The City of Friend, NE, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of operating room and purchase of operating room equipment

2,500,000

Fischer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Jackson Laboratory, ME, for facilities and equipment to purchase research equipment
for biomedical imaging and advanced microscopy

2,679,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC), SC, for facilities and equipment for acquisition and installation of high performance computing equipment and data center infrastructure upgrades

5,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Mental Health Association of Oregon, OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a
behavioral health center

750,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

The Mental Health Center of Greater Manchester, NH, for facilities and equipment for
health information infrastructure and an electronic health records system

354,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Thundermist Health Center, RI, for facilities and equipment to expand access to behavioral
health services

3,740,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Tidelands Health, SC, for facilities and equipment for construction of Tidelands Health’s
Comprehensive Women and Children’s Center

5,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Tidewater Community College, VA, for facilities and equipment to support EMS training

735,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of Bar Harbor Fire Department, ME, for equipment for purchase of new ambulance

125,000

Collins

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of Morristown, VT, for expanding rural health services through a community
paramedicine program and to purchase a mobile unit and supplies

1,000,000

Sanders

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of Plaistow, NH, for equipment to support communication system upgrades and ambulance services

1,500,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of South Kingstown Emergency Medical Services, RI, for equipment to provide ambulance services

450,000

Reed

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Town of Waldoboro, ME, for equipment to purchase a new ambulance

350,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Tuerk House, Inc., MD, for facilities and equipment to expand access to behavioral health
services

500,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00040

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

1,222,000

Requestor(s)
House

January 20, 2026

H967

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Tufts University School of Dental Medicine, MA, for equipment to provide dental services,
including a mobile clinic

950,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Ukiah Adventist Hospital, CA, for equipment to improve cardiac care

1,250,000

Schiff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Uncompahgre Combined Clinics, CO, for a patient transportation initiative in a rural area

100,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Union County Hospital Authority dba Union General Hospital Inc., GA, for equipment to provide mammography services

511,000

Warnock

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Union County Hospital Authority, GA, for equipment to improve cardiac care

2,000,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Alaska Anchorage, AK, for the acquisition of medical equipment and simulation equipment for academic health programs

725,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for equipment for clinical care and medical and allied health professional education

3,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for equipment for life support vans, mobile
care clinics, telemedicine equipment, and supplies for prenatal care

2,500,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of the Wellness, Health, and Education Center

5,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for facilities and equipment for renovations to UAMS Barton Bridge to Translational Research

4,500,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for facilities and equipment for repair and
expansion of the Chemical Waste Facility

2,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for facilities and equipment for the expansion and renovation of the Labor and Delivery Unit

15,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Arkansas-Fort Smith, AR, for facilities and equipment for construction of the
Center for Mother and Infant Healthcare

15,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Detroit Mercy, VT, for facilities and equipment to support dental training

4,600,000

Sanders, Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc., GA, for facilities and equipment to support
access to dementia care

420,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Hawaii Cancer Center, HI, for facilities and equipment to expand preclinical
research

1,500,000

Hirono

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Kansas Hospital, KS, for facilities and equipment to expand Emergency Department

10,000,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Kansas Hospital, KS, for the acquisition of research equipment for cancer center

10,000,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Kentucky, KY, for acquisition of laboratory research equipment

15,000,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Kentucky, KY, for facilities and equipment for construction of biomedical research facility

15,000,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisiana at Monroe, LA, for equipment for acquisition of Mobile Dental Hygiene Unit and dental equipment

905,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisiana Lafayette, LA, for acquisition of laboratory research equipment

2,500,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisville, KY, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of
laboratory space and to purchase imaging systems

12,500,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisville, KY, for facilities and equipment to acquire and install DNA sequencing systems and protein analysis systems

9,326,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Louisville, KY, for facilities and equipment to acquire and install research
computer systems and biobank equipment and software

8,000,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Maine System, ME, for acquisition of equipment for the health care profession
programs

1,500,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Maine System, ME, for facilities and equipment for construction of Health
Care Education Center and purchase of simulators

1,900,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Mississippi Medical Center, MS, for facilities and equipment to renovate and
upgrade research lab

4,530,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Mississippi Medical Center, MS, for facilities and equipment to support Rural
Primary Care Provider system and telehealth strategies

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Mississippi, MS, for construction of lab space and facilities and acquisition of
drug development technology and equipment

7,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Montana Neural Injury Center, MT, for equipment to establish a mobile clinic
and laboratory for vestibular and neurosensory health

455,000

Sheehy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Nebraska Board of Regents, NE, for facilities and equipment for construction
of Infectious Disease Air Transport Training Facility

12,000,000

Fischer

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Nevada Las Vegas, NV, for facilities and equipment to support a nurse training program

2,398,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Nevada Reno, NV, for facilities and equipment to construct a cancer research
center

3,049,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of New Mexico, NM, for a telementoring program to support training of rural providers

1,540,000

Luján

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of New Mexico, NM, for facilities and equipment to expand substance use disorder outreach and services

1,484,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of North Alabama, AL, for acquisition of nursing education equipment

1,024,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of North Georgia, GA, for facilities and equipment to expand a health professions
training program

700,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00041

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H968

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of South Carolina Aiken, SC, for facilities and equipment for construction, renovation, and purchase of simulation equipment and technology for USC–Aiken-Nursing
Simulation Lab

2,000,000

Graham

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Southern Mississippi, MS, for facilities and equipment for construction to upgrade audiology clinic and acquire audiology equipment

396,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of St. Thomas, MN, for equipment to support health professional training programs

716,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Vermont and State Agricultural College, VT, for a rural community health
worker program

996,000

Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Vermont Health Network, VT, for facilities and equipment to improve safety
and building security

694,000

Welch

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Nursing, WI, for facilities and equipment to
construct a rehabilitation facility

400,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Upland Hills Health, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a senior living campus

2,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

UPMC Western Maryland Corporation, MD, for facilities and equipment to expand access to
radiation therapy

2,750,000

Van Hollen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Valley Family Health Care, Inc., OR, for facilities and equipment to construct an integrated
medical, behavioral, and dental clinic

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Valley Hope Association Foundation, KS, for facilities and equipment to renovate and expand residential care treatment center

1,771,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Vernon Memorial Healthcare Foundation Inc., WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a
clinic with consolidated medical and pharmacy services

2,213,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Versiti, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a research facility

3,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Veterans Recovery Resources, AL, for acquisition of addiction treatment, therapy, and patient care equipment

2,000,000

Britt

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Virginia Community Healthcare Association, VA, for a rural health nutrition program and
necessary supplies

342,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Walworth County, WI, for facilities and equipment to construct a residential care facility

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wasco County, OR, for facilities and equipment to construct a behavioral health center

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Washington Poison Center, WA, for equipment to support building infrastructure and
connectivity

250,000

Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Washington State Hospital Association, WA, for a labor and delivery training program in
rural hospitals

1,000,000

Cantwell,
Murray

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wellstar Health System, Inc., GA, for equipment to provide mammography services

500,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wentworth Home for the Aged, NH, for facilities and equipment to improve building security

300,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

West Virginia University Research Corporation, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation of the WVU School of Dentistry and purchase of dental equipment

15,000,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wichita State University, KS, for the acquisition of health sciences education equipment for
Biomedical Campus

10,000,000

Moran

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wilkes University, PA, for facilities and equipment to improve nursing education

500,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wirt County Health Services Association, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction
of Coplin Health Systems Parkersburg health clinic and wellness center

1,500,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

WVU Medicine Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, WV, for facilities and equipment for construction and infrastructure and acquisition of medical equipment to establish the WVU
Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute Center for Neuromodulation and Brain Therapeutics

11,934,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

WVU Medicine-Weirton Medical Center, WV, for facilities and equipment for Emergency Department renovation and expansion

2,450,000

Capito

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Wyoming County Healthcare Center, PA, for facilities and equipment to support a new pharmacy

543,000

McCormick

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

Xavier University, LA, for facilities and equipment for construction and renovation for Xavier
University Medical School

4,000,000

Cassidy

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

York Hospital, ME, for equipment for electronic medical records software upgrades

5,000,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Health Resources and Services Administration

YWCA of Van Wert County, OH, for facilities and equipment for construction of Community
Care Clinic

1,000,000

Husted

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

4th Dimension Sobriety, WI, for behavioral health services including peer support services
training

400,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

AAPI Montclair Inc., NJ, for mental health services

250,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Alaska Eating Disorders Alliance, AK, for behavioral health services to address eating disorders

250,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Amos House, RI, for mental and behavioral health services

540,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, IL, for mental health and trauma
services for pediatric patients

1,000,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Arizona Governor’s Office of Youth Faith and Family, AZ, for a suicide prevention program
for veterans

575,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Asian American Institute for Research and Engagement, NY, for mental health services

150,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Barstow Community College District, CA, for a rural mental health program

750,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00042

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

January 20, 2026

H969

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Beautiful Gate Outreach Center, DE, for mental health services for those living with chronic
conditions

250,000

Blunt
Rochester

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Coastal & Northern New Jersey Inc., NJ, to promote mental
health through a mentorship program

250,000

Kim

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Boys & Girls Club Fox Valley, Inc., WI, for mental health programming for children and
youth

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Bradley Free Clinic, VA, for mental and behavioral health services

167,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Brandywine Counseling & Community Services, Inc., DE, for mobile behavioral and mental
health services

895,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Calhoun County Community Mental Health Authority, MI, for community-based mental
health services through crisis centers

750,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Carson City School District, NV, for mental health services

301,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Catholic Social Services, AK, to establish a substance use treatment program for individuals experiencing homelessness

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Child Health and Development Institute of Connecticut, Inc., CT, for a substance use prevention and education program

371,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Children’s Friend and Service, RI, for mental health services

430,000

Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

City of Albuquerque, NM, for mental health and substance use disorder services

1,135,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

City of Long Beach, CA, for a community crisis response program

1,490,000

Padilla

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

City of Lynn, MA, for a crisis response team

500,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

City of Portland, OR, for a mobile medication program to prevent drug overdoses

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Colorado Meth Project Inc., CO, for substance use prevention programming for youth

518,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Community Health Partnership, CO, to strengthen capacity and improve mental health and
substance use care, including technology

750,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Copiah-Lincoln Community College, MS, for mental and behavioral health services delivered
via telehealth

305,000

Hyde-Smith

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Cornell Scott-Hill Health Corporation, CT, for substance use disorder treatment

822,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Covenant House International, NY, for behavioral health services for youth

500,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Department of New Jersey Veterans of Foreign Wars, Inc., NJ, for mental health services

280,000

Booker

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Eluna, MA, for a grief support and counseling program

119,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Essex County Family Justice Center, NJ, for mental health services for survivors

330,000

Kim

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Finishing Trades Institute of the Upper Midwest, MN, for mental health and supportive
services

1,298,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

For All Ages, Inc., CT, to support the mental health and wellness of college students

222,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Friends of Firefighters, Inc., NY, for mental health services

632,000

Gillibrand

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Friends of Recovery, New Hampshire dba Hope for NH Recovery, NH, for mental health and
substance use disorder services

487,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Georgia Council for Recovery, Inc., GA, for an opioid overdose prevention program, including
supplies

357,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Global Partnership to End Human Trafficking Corporation, CT, for behavioral health services
for survivors

105,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Hope Coalition, NC, to centralize and enhance youth diversion programs

1,014,000

Tillis

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

International Association of Firefighters (IAFF) Local 244 / New Mexico Professional Firefighters Association (NMPFFA), NM, for behavioral health care and substance use disorder treatment

500,000

Luján

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Johnson Health Center, VT, for substance use disorder treatment

2,385,000

Sanders

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Joliet Fire Department, IL, for a community mental health program expansion

1,000,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Legacy Behavioral Health, GA, for behavioral health services, including supplies

348,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Lifeline Horse Rescue and Rehabilitation, MD, for behavioral health and suicide prevention
programming for veterans

95,000

Alsobrooks

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Lily’s Place, Inc., WV, for mental health services for first responders

684,000

Capito

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00043

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H970

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Lines for Life, OR, for youth mental health support through a peer-to-peer crisis line

1,611,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Mercy House Teen Challenge, MS, for substance and alcohol abuse recovery and treatment

765,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

NAMI New Hampshire, NH, for an overdose prevention program, including training

444,000

Shaheen

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

National Alliance Mental Illness Albuquerque, NM, for mental health and substance use
treatment services, including equipment

300,000

Heinrich

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Nevada Department of Education, NV, for mental health programming for youth

567,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

New York Law Enforcement Assistance Program (NYLEAP), Inc., NY, for mental health services for law enforcement officers

500,000

Gillibrand

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Once Upon A Preemie, Inc., PA, for mental health education programming for providers to
support families of premature infants

275,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego, CA, for pediatric mental health services

2,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

ReadyKids, Inc., VA, for mental health and counseling services for youth

200,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Resilience Resource Center, PA, for mental health services

250,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Rhode Island Disaster Medical Assistance Team, Inc., RI, for mental health and peer support programming for law enforcement

360,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Rosecrance, Inc., IL, for behavioral health care services for veterans

1,038,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

San Juan County Partnership, NM, for a substance use prevention program

307,000

Luján

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Ser Familia, Inc., GA, for mental health services

500,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Sinai Health System, IL, for a trauma recovery program

1,500,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Southwest Washington Accountable Community of Health, WA, for a mobile substance use
disorder medical clinic, including a vehicle and equipment

750,000

Murray

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Spectrum Youth & Family Services, VT, for school-based mental health services

250,000

Welch

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

STRYV365, WI, for mental health programming for youth, including professional development for youth-serving organizations

100,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department, WA, for a mobile substance use disorder program, including supplies and equipment

2,600,000

Murray

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Taos Pueblo Health and Community Services, NM, for peer-led recovery programming

331,000

Heinrich

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

The Carnegie Hall Corporation, NY, for a program to promote mental wellbeing for children
and families

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

The Healing Station Counseling Center, VA, for mental health services

245,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

The Pennsylvania State University, PA, for establishing the Pennsylvania Addiction Action
Network, including a statewide system of substance use interventions and data coordination

750,000

Fetterman, McCormick

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

The Sojourners Place, DE, for substance use disorder recovery programming

416,000

Coons

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Tides Family Services, RI, for mental health and mentoring programs for at-risk youth

500,000

Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Turning Point Recovery Center of Springfield, VT, for a community-based program to reduce
substance use and address mental health needs

373,000

Welch

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

University of Oregon, OR, to support pediatric mental and behavioral health care, including
equipment

2,980,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

University of Rhode Island (URI), RI, for mental health programming for youth, including
trainings

1,500,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Vinfen, Inc., MA, for a mental health crisis and substance use disorder treatment program

750,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Virginia Telemental Health Initiative, VA, for mental health counseling through telemedicine

372,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Voices of Community Activists & Leaders (VOCAL–NY), Inc., NY, for mental health services
for at-risk individuals

500,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Voices of September 11, Inc. DBA Voices Center for Resilience, CT, for resources and information for individuals impacted by tragedy

661,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Washington Recovery Alliance, WA, to support statewide networks for substance use disorder recovery

1,500,000

Murray

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

West Care Wisconsin, WI, for a mobile mental health clinic

600,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Windham Region Chamber of Commerce Foundation, CT, for mental health and supportive
services for veterans

380,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

YouthLine, HI, for youth crisis programming

431,000

Schatz

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00044

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H971

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc., GA, for programming to support children and families in
underserved communities

320,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

ABC Parenting Institute, DE, for a child abuse and neglect prevention program

544,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Aloha United Way, HI, to support referral and helpline services for basic needs, crisis, and
disaster response

800,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

American Chinese Christian Education and Social Services (ACCESS), MA, to support afterschool programming for low income children

100,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Anchorage Coalition to End Homelessness, AK, to provide housing support services

450,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Anne Arundel County Food Bank, Inc., MD, to support low income communities through food
distributions, including the purchase of a refrigerated vehicle

133,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Athens Area Diaper Bank, Inc., GA, for a diaper bank, including supplies and equipment

200,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Bangladeshi American Society Inc., NY, for services for low income individuals and families,
including food

160,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Boys & Girls Clubs of Acadiana, LA, funding to increase staffing and services for youth
programs

1,000,000

Kennedy

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Boys & Girls Clubs of Maui, Inc., HI, for mental health and wellness programming for youth

800,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Brighter Bites DC, MD, to reduce poverty through food security, including the purchase of
food

266,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Center for Housing and Health, IL, for supportive services for at-risk individuals, including
housing

1,300,000

Durbin

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Children’s Advocacy Centers of Michigan, MI, for a child abuse prevention program

259,000

Slotkin

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Churches United For Fair Housing, Inc., NY, for a program to support low income families
to find and maintain affordable housing

1,000,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

City of Orchard Hill, GA, to reduce poverty through a digital library program, including
equipment

21,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

City of Whitewater, WI, to reduce poverty through an immigrant liaison

85,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Commonwealth of Massachusetts United Ways, MA, to reduce poverty for low income individuals and families, including for the purchase of food

1,500,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Community Care of West Virginia, WV, to create a connectivity hub to address gaps in foster care

370,000

Capito

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Community Investment Alliance, CO, for supportive services, including housing

800,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA) of Morris and Sussex Counties, NJ, for a program
to prevent child abuse and neglect among foster youth

200,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Craftsbury Saplings Inc., VT, to improve access to child care

1,000,000

Welch

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

DaVinci Center for Community Progress, RI, for community services for low income individuals, including food

440,000

Reed

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

East New York CLT Inc., NY, to support low income tenants and homeowners achieve housing stability

100,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Easter Seals North Georgia, GA, for programming to support children and families

767,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Essex County Legal Aid Association, Inc., NJ, for legal services for children

500,000

Booker

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Federal Hill House Association, RI, for community services and programming

425,000

Reed

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Food Well Alliance, Inc., GA, to support low income community through a mobile kitchen,
including equipment

141,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Foundation for Black Women’s Wellness, WI, for programming to enhance economic security
and family stability for at-risk women and families

750,000

Baldwin

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Friendly House, Inc., MA, to support individuals and families facing housing insecurity

100,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Fulton County Schools, GA, to reduce food insecurity among vulnerable populations, including vehicles and equipment

222,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Garden of Hope, Inc., NY, for community-based programming and services for at-risk families

135,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Georgia Center for Child Advocacy, Inc., GA, for a child abuse prevention program

350,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Good Old Lower East Side Inc., NY, for programming to prevent evictions and homelessness
among at-risk individuals

200,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Haa Yaitx’u Saiani, AK, to provide supportive services

100,000

Murkowski

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Hawaii Children’s Action Network (HCAN) on behalf of Hawaii Diaper Bank, HI, for a diaper
distribution program, including a vehicle

110,000

Hirono

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Helping Mamas, Inc., GA, for a diaper distribution program, including diapers

268,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Jewish Family Services Delaware, DE, for programming and services for at-risk individuals

1,000,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Life Learning Center, KY, for programming, technology, and equipment for the Life Learning
Center

2,700,000

McConnell

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Mitzvah Circle Foundation, PA, to support low income populations, including through the
purchase of supplies and equipment

500,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

National Domestic Workers Alliance, NY, for programming to support low income workers

500,000

Schumer

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00045

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H972

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

New Jersey Coalition to End Domestic Violence (NJCEDV), NJ, for services for survivors of
domestic violence, including housing

500,000

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

NH Hunger Solutions, NH, to support low income individuals and families

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

North Hudson Community Action Corporation, NJ, for afterschool programming and services
for low income families

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

HHS

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate
Booker

S

430,000

Shaheen

S

74,000

Booker, Kim

S

Open Doors for Multicultural Families, WA, to improve a child care center, including equipment

614,000

Murray

S

Administration for Children and Families

Open Hand Atlanta, Inc., GA, to support low income individuals through food, including vehicles and equipment

383,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Partners in Development Foundation, HI, for educational programming to support low-income individuals, including financial literacy

2,300,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Ranch Hope, Inc., NJ, for supportive services and equipment

500,000

Booker

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Share Our Spare, IL, to support family relief initiatives for low income families, including
supplies

627,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

So What Else, Inc., MD, for a hunger relief program for at-risk individuals

750,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

St. Christopher’s Hospital for Children, PA, for programming to support low income children
and families

250,000

Fetterman

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Summit County Family Resource Center, CO, to reduce poverty through a food distribution
program, including food

300,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Children’s Law Center, Inc., CT, to support legal representation for children in family
court

100,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Commercial Fisheries Center of Rhode Island, RI, to support low income communities
through a food access program, including food

300,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Family Tree, MD, for a home visiting program to support new parents and infants

373,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Giving Kitchen Initiative, Inc., GA, for wrap around services for low income workers and
their families

550,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Housing Collective, CT, for a data platform to connect low income individuals with affordable housing

723,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

The Northern Lighthouse, ME, to support technology improvements

92,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

United Way of Aroostook, ME, to create a childcare resource center

153,000

Collins, King

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

United Way of the Chattahoochee Valley, Inc., GA, to expand a 211 system, including technology

2,000,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, AR, for supportive services and related resources for infants and mothers

8,000,000

Boozman

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Wakeman Memorial Association, CT, for after school programming for youth

300,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

West Virginia CASA Association, Inc., WV, to implement a Continuum of Care model to prevent and treat child abuse

766,000

Capito,
Justice

S

HHS

Administration for Children and Families

Westbay Community Action, RI, to support low income families, including food

100,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

All Out Adventures, Inc., MA, for vehicles and equipment

101,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

ALS United Rhode Island, RI, for services supporting individuals living with ALS

68,000

Whitehouse

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

APNA Brooklyn Community Center, Inc., NY, for a meal program, including equipment and
the purchase of a vehicle

530,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Appalachian Agency for Senior Citizens, VA, for supportive services for older adults, including equipment

96,000

Kaine, Warner

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Bergen Family Center, NJ, for supportive services for older adults

85,000

Kim

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Borough of East Rutherford, NJ, for the purchase of a vehicle

29,000

Booker, Kim

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Children’s Therapy Center, WA, for supportive services for parents and caregivers of children with disabilities, including equipment

100,000

Murray

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Chinese Mutual Aid Association, IL, for a vehicle and equipment to support services for
older adults

152,000

Duckworth

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

City of Boston, MA, for enhancing transportation accessibility for older adults, including vehicles and equipment

1,000,000

Markey,
Warren

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Coalition for Food and Health Equity, NJ, for a meal delivery program, including vehicles
and equipment

200,000

Booker

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Denver Regional Council of Governments, CO, for supportive services for older adults

820,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Education Health & Research International, DE, for expanding supportive services and case
coordination for older adults

1,818,000

Blunt
Rochester

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Friends in Action, ME, to purchase equipment for senior center services

140,000

Collins

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Great Bay Services, Inc., ME, for the purchase of accessible vehicles and related expenses

264,000

Collins

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Hands On Hartford, CT, for supportive services for seniors and individuals with disabilities,
including food

586,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Hospice Savannah, Inc., GA, for the purchase of vehicles and equipment

295,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Interfaith Caregivers of Greater Mercer County, Inc., NJ, for expansion of caregiving services

40,000

Booker, Kim

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00046

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

January 20, 2026

H973

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

HHS

Administration for Community Living

J–HAP, MN, for supportive services for individuals with disabilities

50,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Las Cumbres Community Services, Inc., NM, for a kinship care program

333,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Macon Bibb County Economic Opportunity Council, Inc., GA, for the purchase of vehicles
and equipment

280,000

Ossoff

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Madison House Autism Foundation, MD, for supportive services for individuals with disabilities, including equipment

650,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Matrix Human Services, MI, for programming and supportive services for older adults

1,000,000

Slotkin

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Meristem, Inc., CA, for programming and supportive services for individuals with disabilities, including equipment

1,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Middlesex United Way, CT, for supportive services for older adults

75,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Minnesota Assistance Council for Veterans, MN, for supportive services for older veterans

248,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

National Asian Pacific Center on Aging, WA, for outreach and helpline services for older
adults

1,000,000

Murray

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Needs of the Community Society, WA, for programming for young adults with disabilities

200,000

Murray

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

New York City Ballet, Inc., NY, for health and wellness programming for individuals with
disabilities

223,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

SilverSource, Inc., CT, for supportive services for older adults

200,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Special Olympics New Jersey, NJ, for health and wellness programming for individuals with
disabilities

500,000

Booker

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

The Arc of Maryland, MD, for supportive services for individuals with disabilities, including
equipment

200,000

Alsobrooks

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

The Association of Indians In America—New York Chapter, NY, for supportive services for
older adults, including equipment

100,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburg Inc., NY, for supportive services for older
adults and individuals with disabilities

750,000

Schumer

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Vermont Aging Network Consortium, VT, for supportive services for older adults, including
meal deliveries

243,000

Sanders

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Vermont Association of Senior Centers and Meal Providers (VASCAMP), VT, for supportive
services for older adults

500,000

Sanders

S

HHS

Administration for Community Living

Whitfield County Board of Commissioners, GA, for the purchase of a vehicle, including
equipment

92,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Accokeek Foundation, Inc., MD, for an environmental education program, including curriculum development, teacher training, classroom support, and field trips for Prince
George’s and Charles County students

425,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Achieve Twin Cities, MN, for college and career readiness programs

1,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Adams Presidential Center and Foundation, MA, for civics education

900,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

African American Museum in Philadelphia, PA, to expand education programs for students,
including exhibit development

415,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Aha Punana Leo, HI, for an early childhood education Hawaiian language immersion program

1,252,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Alaska Council of School Administrators, AK, for teacher professional development

200,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Alaska Resource Education, AK, for a STEM and natural resources education program

50,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Arts Council of Greater New Haven, Inc., CT, for youth arts journalism initiative

135,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Asian Americans for Equality, Inc., NY, for college readiness and youth development programming

100,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Ballet After Dark Inc., MD, for a comprehensive program for girls and young women focused
on wellness, health education, mentorship, and leadership training

1,071,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Baltimore SquashWise, MD, for youth development programs

200,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Bayonne School District, NJ, for high-impact tutoring programs

160,000

Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Best Buddies International, Inc., MA, to establish and deliver community-based inclusion
services

400,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Big Brothers Big Sisters Hawaii, HI, for college and career readiness programs

1,000,000

Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Eastern Massachusetts, MA, for academic assistance, college
access support, and vocational training

250,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Rhode Island, RI, for youth mentoring

100,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Big Picture Philadelphia, PA, for school-based health and wellness services and nutrition
education

240,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

BMORE Community Theatre, MD, for a summer arts education program

250,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys & Girls Club Of Hawaii, HI, for a digital literacy initiative, including Artificial Intelligence

505,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys & Girls Club of Lanier, Inc., GA, to improve access to youth programs, which may include the purchase of two vehicles

190,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys & Girls Club of the Big Island, HI, to expand afterschool, academic support, substance abuse prevention, and nutrition programs

990,000

Hirono

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00047

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H974

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys & Girls Clubs of Warwick, RI, for out-of-school-time youth programming

640,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys and Girls Club of Paterson and Passaic, NJ, for trauma-informed, wrap around support services and out-of-school time programming

500,000

Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Boys to Men Mentoring Network of Virginia, Inc., VA, to expand mentoring programs

200,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Bright Lights Book Project, AK, for a literacy program

30,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Brockton Public Schools, MA, for a one-to-one laptop computer initiative

2,128,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Cal Ripken, Sr. Foundation, MD, for STEM education

1,000,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Capital District Jewish Holocaust Memorial, Inc., NY, for mobile educational programming
on the Holocaust

600,000

Gillibrand

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Ceeds of Peace, HI, to expand the community school model at Hawaii public schools

836,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Center for an Agricultural Economy, VT, for educational and curricula purposes of a farmto-school nutrition program

100,000

Welch

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Central Michigan University, MI, for distance education technology and in-person instruction
related to health career education

1,226,000

Peters

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Central Vermont Career Center School District acting on behalf of the Vermont Association
of Career and Technical Directors, VT, to expand and enhance career and technical education programs, which may include subgrants

2,498,000

Sanders

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Chesapeake Bay Outward Bound School, MD, for an outdoor education program

250,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Children’s Foundation of Mississippi, MS, for a project to improve education outcomes

500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Citizens Campaign Fund for the Environment, NY, for science education and environmental
stewardship programs

100,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

City of Newark, NJ, for a literacy initiative

700,000

Booker, Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

City Year Providence, RI, for tutoring and mentoring programs

790,000

Reed

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

City Year, Inc., NH, for New Hampshire’s 7–Year Promise program

700,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Collaborative Support Services, HI, for early childhood education programs

1,327,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

College Visions, RI, for college access programming, including student stipends

723,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Collinsville Area Vocational Center, IL, for equipment for education program expansion

3,000,000

Duckworth

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Communities In Schools of Washington State, WA, to improve student wellness

925,000

Murray

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Community Health Center, Inc., CT, for health, nutrition and education programs

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Concilio de Organizaciones Hispanas—Concilio, PA, for youth development and violence
prevention programs

390,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Connecticut Historical Society DBA Connecticut Museum of Culture and History, CT, for a
civics education program

1,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Connecticut Junior Republic Association, Inc., dba CJR, CT, for school-based, after-school,
and summer behavioral and mental health services and programming

1,650,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Connecticut Public Broadcasting, Inc., CT, for educational programming

1,550,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Consortium for Hawaii Ecological Engineering Education, dba Malama Aina Foundation, HI,
for education programs of the Kahikina Learning Center

417,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Corning Museum of Glass, NY, for STEAM education programs, including bus rental for
transportation

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

DC Regional Early Learning Center, MD, for early childhood education

305,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Delta Health Alliance, MS, to improve education outcomes

800,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

DePaul University, IL, for a civic learning initiative

720,000

Durbin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Doc Wayne Youth Services Inc., MA, for youth development and mental health services

450,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Domestic Violence Crisis Center, CT, for youth violence prevention education program

124,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Dual Language Education of New Mexico, NM, for professional development programs related to literacy and math education

321,000

Heinrich

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Educating for Leadership, AK, to improve student safety

1,623,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Employ Milwaukee, WI, for career exploration and youth development programs, including
youth stipends

900,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Explora, NM, for STEAM education and career awareness, including student stipends

250,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Fairbanks North Star Borough School District, AK, for teacher professional development

111,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Fairbanks North Star Borough School District, AK, to improve student safety

300,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Families and Schools Together (FAST), WI, for after school family engagement programs in
Wisconsin

500,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Farm Fresh Rhode Island, RI, for farm to school programming

250,000

Whitehouse

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00048

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H975

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Flagman, Inc., CT, for traffic safety education in Connecticut schools

1,997,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Forrest County Agricultural High School, MS, for the purchase of equipment, technology, and
supplies

700,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Fund for the City of New York, NY, for educational programming at Floyd Bennett Field

800,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Future Focused Education, NM, for youth mental health support, including internships and
student stipends

500,000

Heinrich

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Girls on the Run International, MN, to increase access to youth development programming
in underserved communities

500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hall County School District, GA, for a career pathway program in meat processing

1,000,000

Warnock

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hands on Children’s Museum, WA, for exhibits and equipment to improve after school programming for students

3,000,000

Murray

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hawaii Department of Education, HI, for an educator workforce development initiative, including student stipends

1,000,000

Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hispanic Federation Inc., NY, to expand mentoring and training programs, which may include subgrants to existing and new partner institutions of higher education

900,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hispano Roundtable of New Mexico, NM, for STEAM education

500,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hudson River Museum of Westchester, NY, for equipment for STEM education programs

500,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival, Inc., NY, for out-of-school on-site arts education experiences and arts educational programming

534,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Inupiat Community of the Arctic Slope, AK, for a teacher apprenticeship and mentoring program, including instructor stipends

500,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Jacob’s Pillow Dance Festival, Inc., MA, for an arts education program

375,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

James City County, VA, to expand education and library services, including the purchase of
a vehicle for use as a bookmobile

375,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Joe’s Movement Emporium, MD, for after-school and in-school programs to enhance academic success through arts-based learning at William Beanes Elementary School

610,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Jumpstart for Young Children, Inc., MA, for the Accelerated Workforce program for early
childhood education

250,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Junior Achievement of Georgia, Inc., GA, for workforce development and financial literacy
education programs for middle school students

859,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

KAMP Hawaii, HI, for education and mentoring programs, including the purchase of a vehicle

350,000

Schatz

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Kent Intermediate School District, MI, for career and technical education

750,000

Peters

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Lanai High and Elementary School Foundation, HI, to develop the community school model
at Lanai High and Elementary School

120,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Launching Educational Assistance Program Forward Inc. LEAP Forward Inc., MD, for STEM
education

241,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Learning Point Alaska, AK, for a tutoring program

339,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Learning Undefeated, Inc., MD, for a mobile STEM workforce development program for secondary and postsecondary students

675,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Liberty Science Center, NJ, for environmental education programming, which may include
the acquisition of a vehicle and up to two portable planetariums

559,000

Booker

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, Inc., NY, for arts education programming

750,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Living Classrooms Foundation, MD, for music education, including by acquiring and equipping a mobile music lab bus

810,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), MD, to improve early childhood education
programs, including through a new statewide enrollment system

500,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Melwood Community Services, Inc., MD, for an afterschool program

235,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Mid -Shore Community Foundation—Bellevue Passage Museum, MD, for STEAM education

129,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Millinocket School Department, ME, for equipment, textbooks and educational materials for
education programs

1,448,000

King

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Milwaukee Jewish Federation, WI, for education on and prevention of antisemitism

312,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Mississippi School of the Arts, MS, for a college and career readiness program, including
tuition assistance, and the purchase of equipment and supplies

500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Montclair Film Festival Inc., NJ, for film education programs

80,000

Booker

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

National Youth Science Academy, WV, for the purchase of equipment and technology

500,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Hampshire School Principals Foundation, NH, for a workforce development school leadership initiative

342,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Jersey Performing Arts Center, NJ, for equipment and technology for arts education

552,000

Booker

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Mexico State University, NM, for K–12 AI curriculum development and professional development programs

762,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Mexico State University, NM, for professional development

480,000

Heinrich

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Mexico State University, NM, to improve bilingual education

250,000

Heinrich

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00049

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H20JAPT1

H976

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Innovation and Improvement

New Urban Arts, RI, for education and curriculum development, including student stipends

150,000

Reed

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

NJ Tech Council, NJ, for workforce development, career readiness, and education and training in business development and entrepreneurship

1,450,000

Booker, Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

North Slope Borough School District, AK, for Inupiaq curriculum and instruction

500,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Northwest Maritime, WA, for a maritime workforce pilot program for high school students to
develop workforce-ready skills and competencies

1,500,000

Cantwell

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Ocean Exploration Trust, Inc., CT, for educational exhibit on ocean exploration

407,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Operation Shoestring, MS, for an out of school time program

515,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Pablo Center at the Confluence, WI, for STEAM education and workforce readiness programs

900,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Page Ahead Children’s Literacy Program, WA, for a summer reading program

300,000

Murray

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

PATCH—People Attentive to Children, HI, to improve school readiness through the expansion of a credentialing program for early childhood practitioners, including stipends

250,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Philharmonic-Symphony Society of New York, Inc., NY, for music education programs

2,000,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Pierce County, WA, to improve early childhood school readiness and education outcomes

525,000

Murray

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Prevention and Response Columbia County, WI, for mental health and substance use prevention programs

97,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Project SYNCERE, IL, for equipment for STEM education programs

200,000

Duckworth

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Purple Maia Foundation, HI, for an early college program

360,000

Hirono

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Reach for the Top Therapy Services, NH, to expand speech language and communication
services

181,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Reading Assist, DE, to expand a tutoring program

1,000,000

Coons

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Research Foundation of the City University of New York—CUNY School of Labor and Urban
Studies Foundation, Inc., NY, to develop the Public Service Training Corps, including
scholarships and stipends

600,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Rhode Island Marine Trade Association, RI, for workforce training for high school students

480,000

Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Rhode Island Philharmonic Orchestra & Music School, RI, for music education

450,000

Reed

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

RI Department of State, RI, for civics education programming

130,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Roaring Fork School District, CO, to expand school-based mental health programs

250,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Round Valley School District, AZ, to acquire laptop computers

600,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

SAU #2, NH, for expenses of an Executive Director to develop a proposal for the creation of
a regional school in the Lakes Region for children with intensive learning needs from
preschool through grade 8

225,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Science Museum of Minnesota, MN, to establish regional STEM Educator Resource Centers

2,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

SciTech2U Inc., MD, for science education programs

214,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Shiawassee Regional Education Service District, MI, for equipment for career and technical
education

267,000

Peters

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE), CA, for STEM education programming

236,000

Padilla

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

South Carolina Department of Education, SC, for Liberty STEAM Charter School to support
the expansion of an additional grade

1,752,000

Graham

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

St. Ann’s Warehouse, Inc., NY, for arts education programming

115,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Tacoma School District No 10 DBA Tacoma Public Schools, WA, for a maritime skills program for secondary students

500,000

Murray

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Teaching Matters, Inc., NJ, for professional development and support

500,000

Booker, Kim

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Team Long Run, ME, for a literacy program

250,000

Collins

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Brooklyn Academy of Music, Inc., NY, to improve academic achievement through artsbased education programming

1,000,000

Schumer

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Coalition for African Americans in the Performing Arts, MD, for arts education

150,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Learning Lamp, Inc., PA, to improve early childhood education programs

100,000

Fetterman, McCormick

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Narragansett Indian Tribe, RI, for out-of-school-time programming

500,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The National Aquarium, MD, for an environmental education program, including conservation themed youth programming and community service

172,000

Alsobrooks

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

The Possible Zone, MA, for dual enrollment, career pathways, out-of-school time, and social
emotional learning programs

800,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Three Rivers Education Foundation, NM, for an early childhood literacy initiative

250,000

Heinrich

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Tree of Life, Inc., PA, for educational initiatives on antisemitism and identity-based hate for
elementary and secondary education

1,200,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Tri County Area Schools, MI, to acquire and install playground equipment for an early childhood education center

50,000

Peters

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

United Way of Delaware Inc., DE, for a literacy initiative

1,500,000

Blunt
Rochester

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

United Way of Kenosha County, WI, for literacy programs

278,000

Baldwin

S

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00050

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H977

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Requestor(s)

Amount
($)

Project

Origination
House

Senate

ED

Innovation and Improvement

United Way of the Greater Lehigh Valley, PA, to develop data infrastructure among community schools in the Greater Lehigh Valley

190,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

University of Nevada Las Vegas, NV, for Holocaust and Genocide studies education programs in Nevada

700,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

University of New Mexico, NM, for language instruction and preservation in rural communities

798,000

Luján

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, CO, for Ute language and history preservation curriculum development and education programming

1,400,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Virginia Commemorations, Inc., VA, for education programs related to America’s founding in
honor of the country’s 250th anniversary

900,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Vision To Learn, OR, for vision care services for students in under-resourced schools, including the purchase of a mobile vision clinic and a vehicle

1,369,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Wagner Free Institute of Science, PA, for science and arts education programs

100,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Washington County Public Schools, VA, for equipment and installation of accessible playgrounds at Greendale Elementary and Abingdon Elementary Schools

750,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Wharton Institute for the Performing Arts Inc., NJ, for music education

90,000

Booker

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

YMCA of Greater Nashua, NH, for summer learning programming through the Power Scholars Academy

95,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Innovation and Improvement

Youth Guidance, IL, for mentoring programs in Chicago Public Schools

500,000

Durbin

S

ED

Higher Education

Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College, GA, for improving teacher preparation programs, including the purchase of equipment

790,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Higher Education

Alabama Community College System, AL, for the purchase of equipment

5,746,000

Britt

S

ED

Higher Education

Alaska Christian College, AK, for student support services, including stipends and supplies

100,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Higher Education

Alaska Christian College, AK, for the purchase of equipment

100,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Higher Education

Albertus Magnus College, CT, for improving a nursing education program, including scholarships and the purchase of equipment

1,567,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Higher Education

Applied Research Foundation of West Virginia, WV, for campus security upgrades

1,105,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Higher Education

Arizona State University, AZ, for improving health care workforce training, including the
purchase of equipment

2,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

ED

Higher Education

Barton County Community College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

425,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Bethany College, WV, to support nursing education, including the purchase of equipment

1,150,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Higher Education

Blue Ridge Community and Technical College, WV, for aviation maintenance education, including the purchase of equipment

445,000

Capito

S

ED

Higher Education

Camden County College, NJ, for the purchase of equipment

115,000

Booker

S

ED

Higher Education

Campbellsville University, KY, to support mental health care education

3,000,000

McConnell

S

ED

Higher Education

Canisius University, NY, for expanding education programs, including purchasing equipment

1,000,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Cape Cod Community College, MA, to improve health sciences education, including purchasing equipment and technology

1,135,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Higher Education

Cape Fear Community College, NC, to support technical education, including the purchase
of equipment and supplies

650,000

Tillis

S

ED

Higher Education

Central Maine Community College, ME, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

1,000,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Central New Mexico Community College, NM, for expanding education and workforce training, including the purchase of equipment and providing scholarships

1,135,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

ED

Higher Education

Century College, MN, for expanding access to open educational resources for students, including purchasing e-books, texts and equipment, and providing stipends

346,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Chamber of Commerce of the Borough of Queens Inc., NY, for a cybersecurity education and
training program, including the purchase of technology and equipment

1,500,000

Gillibrand

S

ED

Higher Education

Charleston Animal Society, SC, to support veterinary education, including student stipends
and the purchase of equipment and supplies

1,052,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Charleston Southern University Aeronautics, SC, to support aeronautics education, including
for the purchase of equipment

1,250,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Chesapeake College, MD, for improving health education, including the purchase of equipment

721,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Higher Education

Cincinnati State Technical and Community College, OH, to support the expansion of manufacturing education

3,000,000

Husted, Moreno

H/S

ED

Higher Education

City College of San Francisco, CA, for a transportation program to help postsecondary students access education

1,000,000

Padilla

S

ED

Higher Education

Clark Atlanta University, GA, for improving science education and cancer detection, including purchasing equipment and providing financial aid and stipends

850,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Higher Education

Clayton State University, GA, for a crime scene investigation laboratory, including the purchase of equipment and student salaries

425,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

ED

Higher Education

Clemson University, SC, for curriculum development

500,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Clemson University, SC, for veterinary education, including the purchase of equipment and
technology

7,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

College of Charleston, SC, for applied sciences education, including scholarships and the
purchase of equipment and technology

695,000

Graham

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00051

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

Landsman

H978

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Higher Education

College of DuPage, IL, for improving electric vehicle education and training, including the
purchase of equipment

350,000

Duckworth

S

ED

Higher Education

College of Southern Maryland, MD, for aviation education and training, including the purchase of equipment

997,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Higher Education

College of Southern Nevada, NV, for improving education for firefighters, including the purchase of equipment

305,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

ED

Higher Education

Community College of Vermont (CCV), VT, for increasing health education in rural areas, including purchasing technology

1,662,000

Sanders

S

ED

Higher Education

Community College System of New Hampshire, NH, for improving community college education programs, including the purchase of equipment

2,000,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Higher Education

Curry College, MA, for expanding education and workforce training, including the purchase
of equipment

1,000,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Higher Education

Dalton State College, GA, for expanding teacher training, including providing financial aid
and stipends

556,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

ED

Higher Education

Delaware State University, DE, for aviation program equipment for improving education, including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Blunt
Rochester,
Coons

S

ED

Higher Education

Delta State University, MS, for aviation education, including the purchase of equipment

1,750,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Donnelly College, KS, for the purchase of equipment, technology, and supplies

ED

Higher Education

ED

94,000

Moran

S

East Carolina University, NC, for biomanufacturing education, including the purchase of
equipment and supplies

6,500,000

Tillis

S

Higher Education

East Stroudsburg University, PA, for expanding education programs, including the purchase
of equipment

657,000

Fetterman

S

ED

Higher Education

Eastern Mennonite University, VA, for improving STEM education programs, which may include the purchase of equipment

1,390,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Eastern Michigan University, MI, for expanding aviation education, including the purchase
of equipment

985,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

ED

Higher Education

Eastern Oregon University, OR, for an early college initiative including purchasing equipment and supplies

400,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

ED

Higher Education

Elizabeth City State University, NC, for the purchase of aviation equipment

3,900,000

Tillis

S

ED

Higher Education

Engage NJ, NJ, for expanding education and internship opportunities, including providing financial aid and stipends

1,464,000

Kim

S

ED

Higher Education

Fairmont State University, WV, for the purchase of aviation equipment

1,650,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Higher Education

Felician University, NJ, for improving education, including the purchase of equipment

675,000

Booker, Kim

S

ED

Higher Education

Flint Hills Technical College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

320,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Foundation for Grossmont and Cuyamaca Colleges, CA, For expanding educational opportunities for community college students, including purchasing equipment

655,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

ED

Higher Education

Future 5, CT, for a college access and success program, including financial aid and student supports

559,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Higher Education

Garden City Community College, KS, for the purchase of equipment, technology, and supplies

450,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Grand Valley State University, MI, for improving education for veterans and underserved
students, including the purchase of equipment

500,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Green River College, WA, for increasing educational opportunities for military families, including providing financial aid and purchasing equipment

750,000

Murray

S

ED

Higher Education

Hesston College, KS, for the purchase of equipment and technology

800,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Hinds Community College, MS, for aviation education, including the purchase of equipment

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Hinds Community College, MS, for the purchase of equipment

236,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Horry-Georgetown Technical College, SC, for the purchase of equipment

2,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Husson University, ME, to support marketing education, including for the purchase of
equipment and supplies

1,100,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

Ilisagvik College, AK, to support science education, including the purchase of equipment

191,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Higher Education

Illinois Wesleyan University, IL, to expand nursing and health education, including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Durbin

S

ED

Higher Education

Independence Community College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

300,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Jeremiah Program, MD, for supporting students in postsecondary or graduate education, including financial aid, scholarships, and child care

139,000

Van Hollen

S

ED

Higher Education

Kansas State University, KS, for the purchase of equipment and technology

4,900,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Keene State College, NH, for a workforce training program, including providing stipends and
purchasing supplies

1,000,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Higher Education

Kennebec Valley Community College, ME, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

1,019,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Kennebec Valley Community College, ME, for the purchase of equipment and technology

180,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Lane Community College, OR, for improving education and apprenticeship opportunities, including the purchase of equipment and technology

1,600,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

ED

Higher Education

Lehigh Carbon Community College, PA, to support STEM education, including the purchase
of equipment and technology

463,000

McCormick

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00052

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

January 20, 2026

H979

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Higher Education

Los Rios Community College District, CA, for expanding an adult learning program, including purchasing technology and providing financial aid

901,000

ED

Higher Education

Loyola College of Nursing and Health, LA, for nursing education

2,850,000

Cassidy

S

ED

Higher Education

Macomb Community College, MI, for academic support services, including the purchase of
technology

230,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Madisonville Community College, KY, for the purchase of aviation equipment

2,000,000

McConnell

S

ED

Higher Education

Maine Maritime Academy, ME, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

2,800,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Maine Maritime Academy, ME, to support maritime education

1,170,000

Collins

S

ED

Higher Education

Manhattan Area Technical College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

244,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Maricopa County Community College District, AZ, for expanding radiology education, including the purchase of equipment

2,520,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

ED

Higher Education

Marquette University School of Dentistry (MUSOD), WI, for dental education, including the
purchase of equipment

2,000,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Higher Education

Marshall University Research Corporation, WV, for the purchase of equipment and to develop curriculum, including financial aid

1,500,000

Capito,
Justice

S

ED

Higher Education

Mercyhurst University, PA, for the purchase of equipment and technology

880,000

McCormick

S

ED

Higher Education

Middle Georgia State University, GA, for aviation education, including the purchase of
equipment

3,480,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

ED

Higher Education

Milwaukee Area Technical College, WI, for supporting parenting students, including providing financial aid and scholarships

500,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Higher Education

Minnesota State University Moorhead, MN, for improving education and training for counselors, including financial aid and stipends

901,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Mississippi Community College Board, MS, to expand nursing degree programs, including
for faculty stipends

5,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Mississippi State University, MS, for the purchase of equipment

5,459,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

ED

Higher Education

Mississippi State University, MS, to support physician assistant education

500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

ED

Higher Education

Mohave Community College, AZ, for improving automotive education, including the purchase of equipment

2,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

ED

Higher Education

Mohawk Valley Community College, NY, for education and training, including the purchase
of equipment

800,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Morris Brown College, GA, for workforce development, including the purchase of equipment,
providing financial aid, and providing stipends

1,500,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Higher Education

Nevada Governor’s Office of Economic Development (GOED), NV, for expanding an internship
program, including providing financial aid and stipends

4,530,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

ED

Higher Education

New Jersey Institute of Technology, NJ, for cybersecurity education, including the purchase
of equipment

1,000,000

Booker

S

ED

Higher Education

New Jersey Institute of Technology, NJ, for improving education and research opportunities,
including the purchase of equipment

2,890,000

Kim

S

ED

Higher Education

Niagara University, NY, for improving education, including purchasing equipment and technology upgrades

525,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Northcentral Technical College, WI, for education and workforce development, including providing financial aid, purchasing equipment and supplies, and apprenticeship wages

3,207,000

Baldwin

S

ED

Higher Education

Northeastern Technical College, SC, for the purchase of equipment, technology, and supplies

1,500,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Northern Maine Community College, ME, to support electrical and instrumentation technician education, including the purchase of supplies

1,304,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

Northern Maine Community College, ME, to support nursing and allied health education, including the purchase of equipment

650,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

Northern Michigan University, MI, for improving cybersecurity education, including purchasing equipment and technology

606,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Northern New Mexico College, NM, for improving healthcare career pathways, including curriculum development

40,000

Luján

S

ED

Higher Education

Northwest Indian College, WA, for cybersecurity education, including the purchase of equipment

500,000

Murray

S

ED

Higher Education

Northwest Technical College, MN, for improving manufacturing education and training programs, which may include the purchase of equipment and providing stipends

1,900,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Onward We Learn, RI, for college access and support services

600,000

Reed,
Whitehouse

S

ED

Higher Education

Parkland College, IL, for expanding aviation education and training, including the purchase
of equipment

1,050,000

Duckworth

S

ED

Higher Education

Piedmont Technical College, SC, for a mobile welding lab, including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Piedmont University, GA, for forensic science education, including the purchase of equipment

608,000

Ossoff

S

ED

Higher Education

Plymouth State University, NH, for improving education, including the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Shaheen

S

ED

Higher Education

Pratt Community College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

1,400,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Presbyterian College, SC, for the purchase of equipment and technology

224,000

Graham

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00053

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

Padilla, Schiff

S

H980

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

Account

Amount
($)

Project

Requestor(s)
Origination
House

Senate

ED

Higher Education

Prince George’s Community College, MD, for expanding quantum based education and
training including purchasing equipment and providing stipends

1,826,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

ED

Higher Education

Providence College, RI, for improving neuroscience education, including providing financial
aid and purchasing equipment

800,000

Reed

S

ED

Higher Education

Quincy University, IL, to expand education programs, including the purchase of equipment

1,320,000

Durbin

S

ED

Higher Education

Randolph College, VA, for improving STEM education programs, which may include the purchase of equipment

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Red Lake Nation College, MN, for improving postsecondary and career pathways programs,
including purchasing equipment and providing internship stipends

666,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

Renton Technical College, WA, for aerospace education, including the purchase of equipment and classroom supplies

2,645,000

Murray

S

ED

Higher Education

Research Foundation of the City University of New York—Baruch College, NY, for cybersecurity education, including the purchase of equipment and providing stipends

400,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Research Foundation of the City University of New York—Brooklyn College, NY, for health
education, including purchasing equipment and providing stipends

800,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

Rhode Island College, RI, for academic supports for students, including tutors

690,000

Reed

S

ED

Higher Education

Rhode Island College, RI, for improving cybersecurity and technology education programs,
including the purchase of equipment and technology

3,000,000

Reed

S

ED

Higher Education

Rı́o Hondo Community College District, CA, for improving firefighting education, including
the purchase of equipment

790,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

ED

Higher Education

Roanoke College, VA, to expand education programs, including the purchase of a van

274,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Saginaw Valley State University, MI, for improving environmental research opportunities for
students, including purchasing equipment

1,500,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Salina Area Technical College, KS, for the purchase of equipment

200,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Salt Lake Community College, UT, to purchase equipment, technology, and supplies

1,357,000

Curtis

S

ED

Higher Education

Schoolcraft Community College District, MI, for an apprenticeship program, including purchasing equipment and providing financial aid and student stipends

2,000,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Siena College, NY, for STEM education, including purchasing equipment and providing stipends

1,000,000

Schumer

S

ED

Higher Education

South Dakota State University—College of Nursing, SD, for the purchase of equipment and
supplies

2,953,000

Rounds

S

ED

Higher Education

South Dakota State University, SD, for curriculum development, including the purchase of
technology

750,000

Rounds

S

ED

Higher Education

Southern Arkansas University Tech, AR, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

5,000,000

Boozman

S

ED

Higher Education

Southside Virginia Community College, VA, for improving criminal justice education programs, which may include purchasing equipment and providing financial aid

940,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Spelman College, GA, to expand educational opportunities, including the purchase of equipment and paying rental costs

1,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

ED

Higher Education

St. Cloud Technical & Community College, MN, for improving an aircraft maintenance training program, including purchasing equipment and student supplies

1,154,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

ED

Higher Education

The Civic Action Project, Inc., MA, for an education fellowship program, including providing
financial aid and stipends

100,000

Markey,
Warren

S

ED

Higher Education

The College of New Jersey, NJ, for expanding education programs, including purchasing
vans, providing financial aid and stipends, and providing internships

660,000

Kim

S

ED

Higher Education

Thomas College, ME, for STEM education, including curriculum and the purchase of equipment, technology, and supplies

1,100,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

Tri-County Technical College, SC, for the purchase of equipment

1,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Trident Technical College, SC, to support maritime trades education, including the purchase
of equipment and supplies

1,500,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

Tuskegee University, AL, for an aviation and aerotechnology program, including scholarships

5,290,000

Britt

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Alaska Southeast, AK, for professional development, including the purchase of
equipment

855,000

Murkowski

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Arkansas-Fayetteville, AR, to support national security education

750,000

Boozman

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Maine System, ME, for the purchase of equipment

500,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Maine System, ME, for the purchase of equipment and supplies

2,400,000

Collins, King

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Montevallo, AL, for nursing education equipment and supplies

1,000,000

Britt

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Nevada Las Vegas, NV, for expanding apprenticeships, including the purchase
of equipment and supplies

2,817,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

ED

Higher Education

University of New Mexico, NM, for a teacher residency program, including providing stipends

512,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Northern Colorado Foundation, CO, for improving science education, including
the purchase of equipment

300,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

ED

Higher Education

University of South Carolina, SC, for curriculum development

500,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

University of South Carolina, SC, for curriculum development, including the purchase of
technology and supplies

1,000,000

Graham

S

ED

Higher Education

University of Vermont and State Agricultural College, VT, for expanding education, including
purchasing equipment and providing tuition

2,700,000

Welch

S

ED

Higher Education

University of West Alabama, AL, for nursing education facilities and equipment

1,800,000

Britt

S

PO 00000

H20JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

Frm 00054

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

January 20, 2026

H981

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES—Continued
[Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending]

Agency

Account

Requestor(s)

Amount
($)

Project

Origination
House

Senate

ED

Higher Education

Urban League of Greater Hartford, Inc., CT, for college success programming including financial aid and stipends, school supplies, and the purchase of technology equipment

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Higher Education

Vermont State Colleges System, VT, for education and training, including the purchase of
equipment

2,500,000

Welch

S

ED

Higher Education

Virginia Commonwealth University, VA, for supporting internship opportunities that provide
work-based learning experiences, which may include stipends and scholarships

430,000

Kaine, Warner

S

ED

Higher Education

Washburn Institute of Technology, KS, for the purchase of equipment

1,600,000

Moran

S

ED

Higher Education

Washington State University, WA, for expanding health care pathways programs, including
the purchase of equipment

915,000

Murray

S

ED

Higher Education

Wesleyan University, CT, for improving education programs, including providing financial
aid and scholarships

1,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

ED

Higher Education

West Virginia Wesleyan College, WV, for improving heating and cooling systems, which may
include the purchase of equipment

2,583,000

Capito

S

ED

Higher Education

Western Colorado University, CO, for nursing education, including the purchase of equipment and technology, financial aid for students, and supportive services for students

1,940,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

ED

Higher Education

Western Michigan University, MI, for education and training in aviation, including purchasing equipment

819,000

Peters

S

ED

Higher Education

Western Nevada College, NV, for culinary education, including the purchase of equipment

1,450,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

ED

Higher Education

Western Oklahoma State College, OK, for the purchase of equipment and technology

3,500,000

Mullin

S

ED

Higher Education

Wor-Wic Community College, MD, for education and training in the culinary arts, including
the purchase of equipment

223,000

Alsobrooks,
Van Hollen

S

COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Salina Airport Authority

Salina Airport Advanced
Aviation & Engineering
Research Operations

KS

1,000,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Elizabethtown Regional Airport (EKX)

Runway Reconfiguration
Study

KY

250,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Lee County

Tupelo VHF Omnidirectional
Range Relocation

MS

3,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Greene County Board of Supervisors

Airport Planning and Development

MS

500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

East Orange, New Jersey

Freeway Drive Overbuild
Planning Project

NJ

3,397,000

Booker

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Puget Sound Regional
Council

Regional Mobility Forecast:
Connections to Transportation, Housing and Jobs
for the Puget Sound

WA

500,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Transportation Planning,
Research, and Development

Pacific NorthWest Economic
Region Foundation

Build Northwest Export Accelerator

WA

1,000,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Wasilla Airport (IYS)

Runway Improvements

AK

3,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Tuscaloosa

Tuscaloosa National Airport
(TCL)—Airport Terminal
Improvements

AL

8,500,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Albertville

Albertville Regional Airport
(BFZ) Expansion

AL

5,000,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

HL Sonny Callahan Airport
(CQF)

Airport Improvements

AL

500,000

Moore (AL)

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Craig Field Airport and Industrial Authority

Craig Field Airport Improvements

AL

250,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Huntsville-Madison County
Airport Authority

Huntsville International Airport (HSV) West Aviation
Center Project

AL

2,000,000

Strong

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Enterprise Airport (EDN)

Runway Extension and Refurbishment

AL

2,355,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gulf Shores International
Airport (GUF)

Airport Safety Improvements

AL

150,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Mobile International (BFM)

Airfield Tarmac Improvements

AL

3,000,000

Britt

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00055

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.030

Britt

H20JAPT1

S

H982

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Perry County Airport/Vaiden
Field (A08)

Airport Improvements

AL

400,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Evergreen Airport (GZH)

Infrastructure Improvements

AL

1,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Chilton County Airport
(02A)

Runway Extension

AL

3,850,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Montgomery Regional Airport (MGM)

Runway Rehabilitation

AL

1,145,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Bessemer Airport (EKY)

Aircraft Ramp and Apron
Project

AL

4,000,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Texarkana Airport Authority

Texarkana Regional Airport
Taxiway-Taxilane Construction Rehabilitation
(TXK)

AR

11,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Fort Smith Regional Airport
(FSM)

Inclement Weather Storage
Building

AR

4,100,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Phoenix

Sky Harbor Airport Improvements

AZ

250,000

Ansari, Stanton

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Cochise County

Bisbee-Douglas International Airport Runway
Reconstruction Project
(DUG)

AZ

2,000,000

Ciscomani

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Palm Springs

Palm Springs International
Airport (PSP) Inline Baggage Handling System
Improvement Project

CA

3,000,000

Calvert

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

County of Riverside

French Valley Airport Contract Tower Project (F70)

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Fresno

Fresno Airport Improvements

CA

3,150,000

Costa

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

San Bernardino County

Twentynine Palms Airport
Infrastructure Improvements (TNP)

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

San Diego International Airport

Aircraft Rescue and Fire
Fighting (ARFF) Station
Modernization

CA

250,000

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Greeley-Weld County Airport
Authority

Taxiway Bravo & Echo
Stage II Construction:
Greeley-Weld County Airport (GXY)

CO

3,500,000

Evans (CO)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Melbourne

Melbourne Orlando International Airport Terminal
Upgrades (MLB)

FL

4,000,000

Haridopolos

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Palm Beach County

North Palm Beach County
General Aviation Airport
Runway 14–32 Expansion (F45)

FL

2,000,000

Mast

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Sanford Airport Authority

SFB—Terminal Connector
Corridor

FL

1,000,000

Mills

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

St. Augustine Airport Authority

Northeast Florida Regional
Airport Access Road Expansion Project (SGJ)

FL

9,650,000

Rutherford

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Greater Orlando Aviation
Authority

Airport Public Roadway
Wayfinding and Signage
Phase 1 (MCO)

FL

1,000,000

Webster

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Molokai Airport (MKK)

Runway and Taxiway Reliability Project

HI

1,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Cedar Rapids

Eastern Iowa Airport Aircraft Deicing Facility
(CID)

IA

10,000,000

Hinson

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Polk County Aviation Authority

Ankeny Regional Airport
(IKV)—Runway 18–36
Extension

IA

2,500,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Idaho Falls

Idaho Falls Regional Airport
Terminal Expansion (IDA)

ID

12,000,000

Simpson

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Bi-State Development
Agency

St. Louis Downtown Airport
Aircraft Rescue Firefighting Apparatus and
Snow Removal Equipment Acquisition

IL

250,000

Budzinski

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00056

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Westerman, Moran

H

Boozman

Padilla

Hirono, Schatz

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

S

H

S

January 20, 2026

H983

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

MidAmerica St. Louis Airport (BLV)

Federal Inspection Area Upgrades

IL

4,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Indianapolis Airport Authority

Indianapolis Airport Authority—Optimized Baggage
Handling System

IN

2,000,000

Carson

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Evansville-Vanderburg Airport Authority

Evansville Regional Airport
(EVV) Passenger Terminal Emergency Backup
Generator

IN

1,615,000

Messmer

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gary/Chicago International
Airport Authority

Air Cargo/Logistics Apron
at Gary/Chicago International Airport (GYY),
Gary, IN

IN

850,000

Mrvan

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Fort Wayne-Allen County
Airport Authority

Fort Wayne International
Airport (FWA) Rehabilitate Corporate and General Aviation Apron

IN

2,000,000

Stutzman

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Johnson County Airport
Commission

Air Traffic Control Tower
(ATCT) at New Century
AirCenter (IXD)

KS

2,000,000

Davids

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Miami County (Paola) Airport (K81)

Runway Extension

KS

1,800,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Ottawa Municipal Airport
(OWI)

Airport Construction

KS

2,613,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Kearny County Airport (36K)

Runway Expansion

KS

11,250,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Freeman Field Airport (3JC)

Runway Rehabilitation

KS

4,038,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Topeka Regional Airport/
Forbes Field (FOE)

North Apron Rehabilitation

KS

5,986,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Marion-Crittenden County
Airport Board

Marion-Crittenden County
Regional Airport Parallel
Taxiway (GDA)

KY

1,000,000

Comer

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Kenton County Airport
Board

Concourse A Apron Rehabilitation at CVG Airport

KY

2,000,000

Massie

McConnell

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Cincinnati-Northern Kentucky International Airport (CVG)

Taxiway Reconstruction

KY

7,500,000

Massie

McConnell

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Kenton County Airport
Board

South Airfield Tunnel Rehabilitation at CVG Airport

KY

1,000,000

Massie

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Cities of London & Corbin

London/Corbin Airport Terminal Renovation (LOZ)

KY

2,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Louisville Muhammad Ali
International Airport
(SDF)

Federal Inspection Service
Facility

KY

9,600,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Blue Grass Airport (LEX)

Air Traffic Control Tower
Relocation Enabling
Projects

KY

5,400,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Elizabethtown Regional Airport (EKX)

Runway Reconfiguration

KY

9,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Barkley Regional Airport
(PAH)

Airfield Lighting Rehabilitation

KY

3,100,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Houma-Terrebonne Airport
Commission

West Ramp Rehabilitation
Project Phase II

LA

1,000,000

Higgins

Kennedy

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Hammond

Hammond Northshore Regional Airport Runway
Extension and Related
Improvement Project
(HDC)

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Chennault International Airport (CWF)

Hangar and Apron Development Project

LA

1,700,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Acadiana Regional Airport
(ARA)

East Side Development

LA

6,600,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Maryland Department of
Transportation

Runway Improvement Program—Amtrak Catenary
Line Relocation

MD

850,000

Olszewski

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Capital Region Airport Authority

New Jet Bridges at Capital
Region International Airport (LAN)

MI

7,823,000

Barrett

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00057

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Duckworth

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

S

H

H

H

Peters, Slotkin

H20JAPT1

H

H984

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gerald R. Ford International
Airport Authority (GFIAA)

Taxiway B Lighting Replacement

MI

801,000

Scholten

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Detroit Airport
(Coleman A. Young Airport KDET)

City of Detroit Airport Construction of Taxiway B

MI

250,000

Thanedar

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Chippewa County International Airport (CIU)

Airport Fire Station Improvement

MI

750,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gerald R. Ford International
Airport (GRR)

Federal Inspection Station—Phase 2

MI

800,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Mankato

Mankato Regional Airport
Air Traffic Control Tower
Construction (MKT)

MN

3,500,000

Finstad

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

University of Central Missouri

Economic Growth through
Skyhaven Airport Expansion (RCM)

MO

6,000,000

Alford

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

St. Louis Lambert International Airport

New Central Utility Plant
(CUP) & New West Electrical Substation (WES)
at St. Louis Lambert
International Airport

MO

3,150,000

Bell

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

The City of Jefferson

Jefferson City Memorial Airport (JEF) Snow Removal
Equipment Building

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

John Bell Williams Airport
(JVW)

Hinds Community College
Aviation Training Expansion

MS

1,993,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Brookhaven Lincoln County
Airport (1R7)

Fixed Base Operator Facility

MS

2,500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Golden Triangle Regional
Airport (GTR)

Terminal Baggage Claim
Expansion

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Meridian Regional Airport
(MEI)

Terminal Building

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Gulfport-Biloxi Regional Airport (GPT)

Passenger Boarding Bridge
Replacement

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Billings

Billings Logan International
Airport Stormwater Improvements Project (BIL)

MT

1,500,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Bozeman Yellowstone International Airport (BZN)

Apron Construction

MT

4,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Greater Asheville Regional
Airport Authority

Asheville Regional Airport
Taxiway Expansion (AVL)

NC

2,500,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Raleigh-Durham Airport Authority

RDU Taxiway J Reconstruction

NC

850,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Raleigh-Durham Airport Authority

Raleigh-Durham International Airport, Replacement Runway 5L/
23R and Taxiway B
(RDU)

NC

5,000,000

Knott

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Charlotte

Charlotte Douglas International Airport, Aircraft
Rescue Firefighting Burn
Prop Design (CLT)

NC

1,000,000

Moore (NC)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Raleigh-Durham Airport Authority

John Brantley Boulevard Extension

NC

1,200,000

Ross

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Omaha Airport Authority

Improvements at Eppley
Airfield (OMA)

NE

7,000,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Brenner Field Airport (FNB)

Taxiway Relocation

NE

600,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Blair Executive Airport
(BTA)

Runway Improvements

NE

5,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Hastings Municipal Airport
(HSI)

Electrical Improvements

NE

4,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Alliance Municipal Airport
(AIA)

Airport Improvements

NE

6,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Nebraska City Municipal
Airport (AFK)

Airport Improvements

NE

3,440,000

Fischer

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00058

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Slotkin

H

Downing

H

Sheehy

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

S

January 20, 2026

H985

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Raton Municipal Airport/
Crews Field (RTN)

Apron Reconstruction

NM

2,073,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Angel Fire Airport (AXX)

Snow Removal Equipment

NM

412,000

Luján

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Reno-Tahoe Airport Authority

Terminal Improvements

NV

2,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Clark County Department of
Aviation

Reconstruct the ARFF Station at LAS Phase 2 to
Reconstruct the Airfield
Rescue and Fire Fighting
Station at LAS Airport

NV

850,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Clark County Department of
Aviation

Clark County Department of
Aviation—Phase 2 to
Reconstruct the Airfield
Rescue and Fire Fighting
Station at LAS Airport

NV

250,000

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Clark County Department of
Aviation

Vehicle Replacement at D
and C Tram System at
Harry Reid International
Airport in Las Vegas,
Nevada

NV

2,000,000

Titus

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority

Buffalo Niagara International Airport Vehicles
and Related Infrastructure

NY

1,800,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority

Snow Fighting Equipment
at Buffalo Niagara International Airport (BUF)

NY

1,482,000

Langworthy

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Syracuse Regional Airport
Authority

SYR Baggage System Upgrade

NY

850,000

Mannion

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Jefferson County

Installation of Runway 10
Omni-Directional Approach Lights at Watertown International Airport (ART)

NY

1,000,000

Tenney

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Western Reserve Port Authority

Youngstown-Warren Regional Airport Runway
Rehabilitation (YNG)

OH

5,000,000

Joyce (OH)

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Chandler

Chandler Regional Airport
Runway Extension (CQB)

OK

8,000,000

Bice

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Shawnee

Shawnee Regional Airport
Runway and Taxiway
Strengthening (SNL)

OK

13,500,000

Bice

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

University of Oklahoma

University of Oklahoma
Westheimer Airport Improvements (OUN)

OK

17,065,000

Cole

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Ada

Ada Regional Airport Improvements (ADH)

OK

15,000,000

Cole

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Duncan

Duncan Municipal Airport,
Halliburton Field Improvements (DUC)

OK

7,000,000

Cole

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

OKC Will Rogers International Airport (OKC)

Terminal Access Roadways
Rehabilitation

OK

5,000,000

Lucas

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Boise City

Boise City Airport (17K)

OK

2,660,000

Lucas

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Ponca City Regional Airport
(PNC)

Airport Terminal

OK

7,800,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Philadelphia, Department of Aviation

PNE—Taxiway C Rehabilitation

PA

1,000,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Johnstown-Cambria County
Airport Authority

Johnstown Cambria County
Airport Terminal Renovations and Hold Room Expansion (JST)

PA

750,000

Joyce (PA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Erie Regional Airport Authority

Erie International Airport
Aircraft Rescue Firefighting Vehicle (ERI)

PA

1,050,000

Kelly (PA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Lehigh-Northampton Airport
Authority

ABE Pedestrian Walkway
Elevators and Escalators

PA

2,000,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Philadelphia, Department of Aviation

Taxiway Rehabilitation at
Philadelphia International Airport

PA

850,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Johnstown-Cambria County
Airport (JST)

Hangar Site

PA

1,984,000

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00059

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Gillibrand, Schumer

H

Husted

Mullin

H

H/S

H

Mullin

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

McCormick

H20JAPT1

S

S

H986

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Lancaster Airport (LNS)

Airport Improvements

PA

5,000,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

DuBois Regional Airport
(DUJ)

Pavement Rehabilitation
and Reconstruction

PA

4,190,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Columbia Metropolitan Airport (CAE)

Improvements Project

SC

2,239,000

Graham

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Greenville-Spartanburg Airport (GSP)

Rehabilitation Project

SC

25,000,000

Graham

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Sioux Falls Regional Airport
Authority (FSD)

Concourse Expansion
Project

SD

30,000,000

Rounds, Thune

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Rapid City Regional Airport
(RAP)

Airline Concourse Project

SD

20,000,000

Rounds, Thune

S

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Memphis-Shelby County
Airport Authority

Terminal Modernization and
Seismic Project at Memphis International Airport

TN

250,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Memphis-Shelby County
Airport Authority

Memphis International Airport, Terminal Modernization and Seismic
Program (MEM)

TN

4,000,000

Kustoff

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Lubbock

Airport Improvements for
Lubbock Airport (LBB)

TX

5,000,000

Arrington

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

County of Victoria

Victoria Regional Airport
(VCT) Passenger Terminal

TX

5,500,000

Cloud

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Lancaster

City of Lancaster Taxiway
Relocation Project

TX

2,000,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Sugar Land

Sugar Land Regional Airport Runway Improvements

TX

850,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Texas A&M University System

Easterwood Field Airport Air
Traffic Control Tower Relocation and Construction (CLL)

TX

4,000,000

McCaul

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Sugar Land

Sugar Land Regional Airport Runway Improvement Project (SGR)

TX

2,000,000

Nehls

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of San Angelo

San Angelo Regional Airport
(SJT)—Air Traffic Control
Tower Reconstruction

TX

5,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of Provo

Provo Municipal Airport Terminal Expansion and
Wayfinding Project (PVU)

UT

1,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

H

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

City of St. George

St. George Regional Airport
(SGU)

UT

2,800,000

Maloy

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Spanish Fork

Spanish Fork Municipal Airport (SPK) Airfield
Project

UT

1,000,000

Owens

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Provo Airport (PVU)

Airport Improvements

UT

3,500,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Capital Region Airport
Commission

Richmond Airport Passenger Terminal Apron
Reconstruction

VA

250,000

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Manassas Regional Airport

Replace or Rehabilitate
Taxiway B Bridge

VA

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Brown County

Green Bay Austin Straubel
International Airport
Taxiway and Apron Infrastructure Rehabilitation
(GRB)

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Central West Virginia Regional Airport Authority

Department of
Transportation

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Department of
Transportation
Department of
Transportation

Curtis

H

H

Curtis

S

McClellan

Kaine, Warner

H

850,000

Subramanyam

Kaine, Warner

H

WI

4,000,000

Wied

H

West Virginia International
Yeager Airport, Main Terminal Apron Improvements (CRW)

WV

2,992,000

Miller (WV)

H

Greenbrier Valley Airport
(LWB)

Terminal Renovation

WV

8,000,000

Capito

S

Grants-in-Aid for Airports

Yeager Airport (CRW)

Terminal Modernization
Project

WV

25,000,000

Capito, Justice

S

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AK

Fairbanks Road Reconstruction

AK

5,000,000

Murkowski

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00060

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H987

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

I–22 Connector Feasibility
Studies, Winston and
Franklin Counties

AL

5,000,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

U.S. 278/SR 69 St. Bernard
Bridge Replacement and
Supporting Infrastructure, Cullman County

AL

13,500,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Waterloo Bridge Feasibility
and Construction, Lauderdale County

AL

7,000,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Alabama Capital Maxwell
Gateway Project

AL

2,000,000

Figures

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Hooks Lake Port Connection
Road

AL

250,000

Figures

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

CR 64 Improvements

AL

2,000,000

Moore (AL)

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

City of Southside State
Highway 77 North Coosa
River Bridge Project

AL

3,000,000

Rogers (AL)

Britt, Tuberville

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Co. Rd. 65 Bridge Replacement Over Branch
Creek—Cleburne County

AL

1,000,000

Rogers (AL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Capshaw Road (Old Monrovia Road to Jeff Road)
Additional Lanes

AL

5,500,000

Strong

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Increasing Capacity Over
the Tennessee River

AL

3,000,000

Strong

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Slaughter Road Additional
Lanes

AL

3,500,000

Strong

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Cleburne County Bridge Replacement

AL

1,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Lawrence County Bridge
Study

AL

100,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Sparkman Drive Bridge

AL

2,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Depot Street Bridge Replacement

AL

1,020,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Deerfoot Parkway Extension

AL

4,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Boll Weevil Circle Project

AL

15,680,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Hale County Road 21
Project

AL

1,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Mooresville Road Widening,
Planning, and Design

AL

1,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

County Road 9 Project

AL

1,000,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AL

Swayback Bridge

AL

2,000,000

Britt, Tuberville

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Highway 412 Corridor Improvements

AR

11,000,000

Crawford

Boozman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Future Interstate 57 (Walnut Ridge to Missouri
State Line)

AR

6,734,000

Crawford

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Highway 82 Railroad Overpass

AR

7,000,000

Westerman

Boozman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Arkansas Highway 112

AR

3,000,000

Womack

Boozman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Springdale Northern Bypass

AR

59,000,000

Womack

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

Construction of Future
Interstate I–49

AR

3,000,000

Womack

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00061

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Tuberville

H

H

H

H20JAPT1

H988

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

I–49

AR

15,800,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AR

North Little Rock Main
Street Viaduct Bridge

AR

2,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Duncan Main Street and
High Street Improvements

AZ

1,900,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Buffalo Soldier Trail Reconstruction

AZ

7,000,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Town of Oro Valley: Bridge
Replacement

AZ

7,000,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Frontier Street Mill and
Overlay Project

AZ

1,000,000

Ciscomani

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

AZ

Douglas Commercial Land
Port of Entry Connector
Road

AZ

20,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Highland-Redlands Regional Connector

CA

2,000,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Rossmoor Bar Trail Enhancements Project

CA

850,000

Bera

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Snowy Egret Overcrossing
Study

CA

850,000

Bera

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Marysville Boulevard Vision
Zero Safety Project

CA

2,000,000

Bera

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–15 Express Lanes Southern Extension Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Scott Road/Bundy Canyon
Road Widening Project

CA

2,500,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Indian Canyon Flood Mitigation Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–10 Singleton Road Interchange Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Magnolia Avenue Widening
Project

CA

4,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Santa Barbara County Association of Governments—Cabrillo Project

CA

1,500,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Shell Beach Road Shared
Use Path

CA

2,000,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Temple City Lower Azusa
Road Resurfacing and
ADA Improvements

CA

850,000

Chu

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Industry Regional
Safety and Mobility
Project

CA

1,000,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

San Dimas Canyon Road
Multi-modal Transportation Improvement
Project

CA

850,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

East San Gabriel Valley
Sustainable Multimodal
Improvement Project

CA

250,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Euclid Street Multimodal
Safety Enhancements

CA

2,000,000

Correa

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Danville Townwide Fiber
Project

CA

850,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Antioch and Oakley Smart
Signals Project

CA

1,970,010

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Village Parkway Complete
Streets Improvements
Project

CA

850,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Marsh Drive Class I Bikeway Project

CA

1,200,000

DeSaulnier

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00062

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

H

Gallego, Kelly

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schiff

H20JAPT1

S

H

January 20, 2026

H989

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Treat Boulevard Corridor
Improvements Project

CA

1,000,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Olive Avenue Bridge Replacement

CA

250,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Heart of Fairfield Downtown
Project

CA

1,000,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Markeley Lane Extension
Project

CA

850,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

North Bailey Road Active
Transportation Corridor

CA

850,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

El Cerrito Plaza BART Station TOD Complete
Streets

CA

850,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Richmond Bay Trail Gap
Closure Project

CA

250,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Pacifica Avenue Safe
Routes to School Project

CA

250,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

LA River Path (between
Riverside Drive and Atlantic Boulevard)

CA

250,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–205 Managed Lanes

CA

250,000

Harder

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Pershing Avenue Road
Safety Improvement and
Enhancement Project

CA

250,000

Harder

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Diaz Road Expansion
Project

CA

2,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

SR–52 Operational Improvements Project

CA

4,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–215 and Keller Road
Interchange Right of
Way Acquisition

CA

1,500,000

Issa

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

San Miguel Elementary
Safe Routes to School
Infrastructure Improvements

CA

250,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Pruneridge Avenue Complete Streets Project

CA

1,000,000

Khanna

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Safe Routes to Schools and
Parks

CA

2,000,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Main Street Revitalization
and Safety Project

CA

250,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Cedar Boulevard Complete
Streets Project

CA

850,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Interstate 80 Culvert Resilience Project

CA

1,000,000

Kiley

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Interstate 80/Rocklin Road
Interchange Improvements Project

CA

3,000,000

Kiley

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

White Rock Road Improvement Project

CA

2,000,000

Kiley

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Baseline Road Traffic Safety Improvement and Signal Project

CA

1,000,000

Kiley

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–80/Horseshoe Bar Road
Interchange Improvements Project

CA

1,000,000

Kiley

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

I–5 Improvement Project

CA

1,700,000

Kim

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Savi Ranch Parkway Road
Improvement Project

CA

3,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

State Route 91 Eastbound
Corridor Operations
Project

CA

3,000,000

Kim

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00063

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schiff

Schiff

H20JAPT1

H

H

H990

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

State Route 55 Improvement Project

CA

3,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

North Coast Highway 101
Drainage Improvement
Project, Encinitas, CA

CA

1,000,000

Levin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

La Novia Avenue Bridge
Replacement Project,
San Juan Capistrano, CA

CA

850,000

Levin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Interstate 5 Improvement
Project, Orange County,
CA

CA

850,000

Levin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Strengthening Coastal Resilience: Smart Infrastructure & Emergency
Preparedness for San
Mateo Coastal Communities

CA

1,200,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Mountain Home Road
Bridge, Woodside, California

CA

250,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Campbell PDA Enhancements

CA

250,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

American River Loop Trail

CA

250,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Laguna Creek Trail
Connectivity and Overcrossing Project

CA

850,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Laguna Canyon Road: Protect and Connect

CA

850,000

Min

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Technology and Signal Upgrades Project

CA

250,000

Min

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

East Palo Alto Woodland
Avenue Safety Improvements

CA

2,000,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Redwood City SR 84-US
101 Interchange Reimagined

CA

850,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

San Bruno Huntington Avenue Bicycle and Pedestrians Improvement
Project

CA

850,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

San Carlos US 101-Holly
Street Interchange &
Overcrossing

CA

500,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Millbrae Trail to Bay Connections

CA

250,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Yucaipa Wildwood
Canyon Interchange

CA

2,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Ranchero Road Corridor
Phase IV Street Improvements Project

CA

2,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Trona Roadway and Repairs
Project

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Palm Avenue Pedestrian
Safety Improvements
and Stormwater Drainage Installation

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Boulder Creek Complete
Streets Improvements

CA

850,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Los Angeles’ Reseda
Green and Accessible
Medians and Shaded
School Routes Project

CA

250,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Los Angeles’ Colfax
Ave. Pedestrian Improvement Project

CA

250,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Sepulveda Basin Pedestrian
Safety & Access Improvements

CA

850,000

Rivas, Sherman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Indian Canyon Drive Bridge
Project

CA

850,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Monroe Street & Interstate10 Interchange Project
(Construction Phase)

CA

850,000

Ruiz

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00064

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H991

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

State Street Rehabilitation
Project

CA

850,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Salton Sea Reimagined: CV
Link Extension

CA

250,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Advanced Traffic Controllers at the Future Metro
L Line Norwalk and
Lambert Stations Areas

CA

250,000

Sanchez

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Los Angeles River Greenway
Studio City Habitat Restoration, Beautification,
and Safety Project

CA

250,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Malibu Canyon Road and
Kanan Dume Road Tunnel Lighting Upgrade
Project

CA

250,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Lincoln Avenue/Marshall
Way/Pacific Avenue Corridor Improvement
Project

CA

850,000

Simon

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Limonite Avenue Roadway
Improvement

CA

850,000

Takano

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Donald Gap

CA

1,200,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

The Amtrak Depot/Olive
Drive Connection

CA

1,000,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

South Main Street Road
Rehabilitation Project

CA

850,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Napa Valley Vine Trail—
Yountville to St. Helena
Gap Closure

CA

850,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Moorland Pedestrian and
School Access Project

CA

850,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Del Amo Boulevard Bridge
Replacement and Roadway Improvement Project

CA

3,150,000

Tran

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Brea Safe Routes to
School

CA

850,000

Tran

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

City of Fullerton—Local
Street Rehabilitation
Project

CA

250,000

Tran

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

SR 43/7th Standard Rd
Roundabout—Last-Mile
Truck-Rail Access Safety
Project

CA

2,500,000

Valadao

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Wasco Downtown Revitalization

CA

5,000,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Road 192 Farm to Market
Corridor Improvements

CA

2,500,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

The Monitor Street Safe
Route to Schools Project

CA

3,000,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

4th Street Development
Project-Arvin

CA

1,250,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Streamview Drive Safety
Improvements Project

CA

850,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Lawndale’s Hawthorne Boulevard Rehabilitation
Project

CA

850,000

Waters

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Rancho Vista Boulevard
Grade Separation Right
of Way Acquisition

CA

2,000,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Traffic Circulation and Pedestrian Safety Improvements Project

CA

1,200,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Avenue G Interchange
Project

CA

850,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

The Santa Clarita Valley
Multimodal Transportation and Safety Enhancement Project

CA

850,000

Whitesides

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00065

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Padilla

Schiff

H20JAPT1

H

H

H992

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Oakland Ferry Terminal
Modernization Project

CA

1,980,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Tenderloin Neighborhood
Pedestrian Safety Signal
Upgrades

CA

1,500,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CA

Grangeville Boulevard
Grade Separation Project

CA

2,000,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Highway 85 Widening
Project

CO

500,000

Boebert

Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

SH 71 Corridor Improvements Project (Heartland
Expressway)

CO

2,000,000

Boebert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Windsor Colorado Blvd and
Crossroads Blvd Intersection Improvements
Project

CO

500,000

Boebert

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Constitution and Peterson
Road Traffic Safety
Project

CO

1,000,000

Crank

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Havana Street Corridor
Multimodal Improvements Project

CO

850,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Box Elder Creek Roadway
Improvement Project

CO

500,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Mineral/Santa Fe Operational Improvements
Project

CO

850,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Montview Boulevard Complete Streets Project

CO

250,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

I–70/Aerotropolis Parkway
Interchange Project

CO

250,000

Crow

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

E. 88th Avenue Corridor
Improvement Project—
Segment B

CO

850,000

Evans (CO)

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

35th Avenue Multimodal
Safety Enhancements

CO

850,000

Evans (CO)

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

I–76 and Bromley Lane
Capital improvement
Project

CO

900,000

Evans (CO)

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Mesa County E Road Improvements

CO

2,000,000

Hurd

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Pueblo Rest Area at Exit
108

CO

1,000,000

Hurd

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

City of Fort Collins Taft Hill
Road Improvement, CO

CO

250,000

Neguse

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Town of Silverthorne’s
‘‘Stephens Way’’ Improvement, CO

CO

250,000

Neguse

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

McCaslin Multi-Use Trail
Project, CO

CO

250,000

Neguse

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Birch Elementary Safety
Improvement Project

CO

850,000

Pettersen

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

Town of Parachute—US 6/
1st Street Safety Enhancements, Repairs,
and Revitalization

CO

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CO

City of Federal Heights—
North Pecos Street Culvert Replacement

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

Department of
Transportation
Department of
Transportation

H

H

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

Bennet

H/S

H

H

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

3,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

CO

1,250,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Mansfield Phase II of Bike
and Pedestrian Connection

CT

1,952,000

Courtney

H

CT

Mohegan-Pequot Bridge Rehabilitation Project

CT

1,000,000

Courtney

H

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Town of Bethany—Round
Hill Road

CT

344,000

DeLauro

H

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Washington Boulevard Pedestrian and Bicycle Improvements

CT

2,500,000

Himes

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00066

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Blumenthal, Murphy

H20JAPT1

H/S

January 20, 2026

H993

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Norwalk River Valley Trail
Extension to Calf Pasture Beach

CT

850,000

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

CT

Maple Avenue in Hartford

CT

1,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DC

Suitland Parkway Safety
Enhancements

DC

850,000

Norton

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DC

Solar Charging for Capital
eBikes

DC

250,000

Norton

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DE

Wilmington Riverwalk Extension Shared-Use Path

DE

250,000

McBride

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DE

Lewes-Georgetown Highway
(US 9) Pedestrian Bridge

DE

850,000

McBride

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DE

Washington Street Separated Bike Lane

DE

2,000,000

Blunt Rochester

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

DE

Georgetown to Lewes
Trail—US 9 Pedestrian
Bridge and Approaches

DE

1,400,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Construction of Wilton Way
Connector Road on
Speros FL Development

FL

500,000

Bilirakis

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

51st Street West Extension,
Manatee County

FL

1,500,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

State Road 64 Traffic Congestion Alternatives, City
of Bradenton

FL

1,000,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Pedestrian Greenway Corridor, New College of
Florida

FL

800,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

West River Walk Expansion

FL

250,000

Castor

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

San Martin Boulevard
Bridge Replacement

FL

850,000

Castor

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

I–75 Project Development
and Environmental
Study, NW 170th ST and
NW 154th ST

FL

6,000,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Feasibility Analysis for Proposed Interchange at I–
75 and Everglades Boulevard

FL

2,000,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Palm Beach Lakes Boulevard Bridge

FL

1,000,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Willowbrook Road Design
and Construction

FL

3,000,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Berman Road SR 710 Extension

FL

1,000,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Sugarloaf Boulevard Bridge
Replacement Project

FL

2,300,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

South Dade Corridor Project

FL

1,000,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Minton Road Widening
Project

FL

1,000,000

Haridopolos

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Kathleen Road Widening
and Extension Project

FL

3,000,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Collier Parkway & S
Countyline Rd—Turn
Lanes & Sidewalk

FL

1,000,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Oldwoods Avenue at
Wyndfields Blvd—
Connectivity & Intersection Safety Improvements

FL

1,000,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Lighthouse Point NE 28th
Street Bridge Replacement Phase 1

FL

250,000

Moskowitz

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00067

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Himes

H

Blumenthal, Murphy

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Blunt Rochester

S

H

H

H20JAPT1

H994

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Port Everglades Bypass
Road

FL

1,000,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Dixie Highway Safety Fence
Phase 2

FL

850,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Roadway Resurfacing along
Coral Way from SW 77
Avenue to SW 87 Avenue

FL

960,000

Salazar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Fruitville Road Corridor Capacity Improvement
Project

FL

1,500,000

Steube

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

River Road Regional Interstate Connector MultiModal Capacity Improvement Project

FL

1,500,000

Steube

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

SW 61st Avenue Bridge
Widening and Roadway
Improvements

FL

250,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

FL

Town of Montverde CR 455
Complete Street

FL

1,500,000

Webster

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

I–16 Widening 4 to 6
Lanes, Chatham,
Effingham, & Bryan
Counties

GA

5,000,000

Carter (GA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Quacco Road Phase II

GA

4,000,000

Carter (GA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Dallas Hwy/SR 120 at Lost
Mountain Rd/Mars Hill
Rd

GA

1,000,000

Greene (GA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Chestnut Drive Realignment

GA

1,000,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Old 41 Highway Roundabouts

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Cass White Phase II Road
Widening Project

GA

3,000,000

Loudermilk

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Bells Ferry Road over Noonday Creek Bridge Replacement

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

George Busbee Parkway

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Cobb Parkway Pedestrian
Bridge North

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Austell-Powder Springs
Road Intersection Improvement Project

GA

500,000

McBath

Ossoff, Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Factory Shoals Pedestrian
Bridge Over I–20

GA

2,000,000

McBath

Warnock

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

South Cobb Drive/SR 280
Improvement Project

GA

2,000,000

McBath

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Roosevelt Highway
Streetscape Phase II

GA

2,000,000

McBath

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Ball Ground Truck Bypass

GA

1,000,000

McCormick

Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Old Alabama Bridge Replacement Project

GA

2,500,000

McCormick

Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

Roswell’s Norcross Street
Bridge Replacement
Project

GA

1,500,000

McCormick

Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Atlanta—Peachtree
Street Streetscape

GA

1,200,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Riverdale—Sidewalk
Connectivity Improvements

GA

1,000,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Clarkston—
Clarkston Greenway Trail
Phase I

GA

2,000,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Stone Mountain—
Main and Mimosa Intersection Improvement

GA

1,781,000

Ossoff

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00068

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Warnock

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H995

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

GA

City of Atlanta—Beltline
Southside Trail Pedestrian Bridge Over Interstate 20

GA

2,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

HI

North South Collector Road
Shared Use Path

HI

2,500,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

HI

Kamehameha Highway
Shared Use Path

HI

6,980,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

HI

Waimea to Kekaha Shared
Use Path

HI

2,300,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

HI

Daniel K. Inouye Highway
Extension

HI

7,250,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

City of Burlington Cascade
Bridge Project

IA

6,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

Keokuk County, Iowa Route
G13 Pavement Improvement Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

U.S. Highway 6/Deer Creek
Road Intersection Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

Iowa County, Route W21
Pavement Improvement

IA

2,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

P33 Rehabilitation

IA

2,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

White Pole Road Revitalization Project

IA

500,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

Alice’s Road Reconstruction

IA

1,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IA

Highway 141/Towner Drive
Interchange Project within the City of Johnston

IA

500,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ID

Soda Springs US–30 Reconstruction

ID

9,367,000

Simpson

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Flora West Side Transportation Improvements

IL

1,329,000

Bost

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Decatur-Macon County
Beltway Northeast Connector Segment Design
Engineering

IL

1,000,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Weber Road, 135th Street
to Airport Road for Will
County

IL

850,000

Foster

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

79th/Stony Island Planning
and Environmental Linkages Study

IL

850,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

100th St Bridge over the
Calumet River

IL

850,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Route 25/West Bartlett Rd
Intersection Improvements

IL

1,500,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Hammond Drive at
Algonquin Road Intersection Improvements

IL

1,152,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Radnor Road Complete
Street Corridor Plan

IL

1,000,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Furrow Road Bridge Replacement

IL

500,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Park & Bilger Bridges

IL

1,000,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

New Interchange Minooka
Road/I–80 Project

IL

5,000,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Capital Improvement—IL–
16 Access Point and
Loop Road

IL

1,500,000

Miller (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Weber Spur Trail

IL

850,000

Quigley

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00069

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H996

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Niles Howard Street Bridge
Replacement Project

IL

250,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Cook County East Lake Avenue Bridge Project

IL

850,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Forest Hill Avenue and
Sterling Avenue Intersection Improvements

IL

250,000

Sorensen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Sycamore Street Bridge Replacement

IL

1,500,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IL

Town of Normal—Trail Extension

IL

1,900,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IN

Market Street Improvement
Project

IN

500,000

Carson

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IN

Town of Liberty Bridge Reconstruction

IN

1,300,000

Shreve

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

IN

City of Richmond Bridge
Reconstruction

IN

1,800,000

Shreve

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Metcalf Ave. and I–435
Signal Replacement

KS

1,300,000

Davids

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Intersection of 191st Street
and US Highway 169
Safety Improvements

KS

850,000

Davids

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Massoni Bridge Replacement

KS

2,376,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

235th Street Road Improvement

KS

6,200,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Buhler Road Bridge and
Roadway Improvements

KS

5,962,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KS

Arkansas River Crossing
and 95th Street

KS

3,000,000

Moran

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Louisville Loop: Jefferson
Memorial Forest—Dodge
Gap

KY

500,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Cooper Chapel Road Extension and Construction

KY

250,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Belvedere Redevelopment
Project

KY

250,000

McGarvey

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Mountain Parkway Expansion

KY

36,500,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Somerset Northern Bypass

KY

37,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

I–69 Ohio River Crossing

KY

10,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

KY

Hal Rogers Parkway Improvement

KY

20,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

LA 47: Hayne Blvd. Improvements

LA

2,550,000

Carter (LA)

Kennedy

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

LA73-LA429 Intersection
Improvement Project

LA

150,000

Carter (LA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Interstate 20 Lighting Upgrades

LA

1,000,000

Fields

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Bernice Street Bridge Replacement

LA

250,000

Fields

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Ouachita Parish Capels
Road Corridor Reconstruction Improvement
Project

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

City of West Monroe, LA
Downing Pines Road Improvements Thomas
Road to US–80 Project

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00070

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

McConnell

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H997

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Ascension Parish Airline
Highway Raising Project

LA

6,000,000

Scalise

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Highway 11, St. Tammany
Parish

LA

10,000,000

Scalise

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Burbank Drive Safety Improvements

LA

2,000,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Johnston Street Safety Mitigation and Enhancements

LA

7,500,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Livingston Parish Browns
Road Improvement
Project

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

US 190 Widening Project

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Tangipahoa Parish Airport
Road and Highway 3158
Roundabout Project

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Millhaven Interchange
Mega-Project

LA

7,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

Topsy Bel Road Bridge Replacement

LA

3,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

LA

St. Bernard Transportation
Corridor

LA

10,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Merrymount Parkway Bridge
Replacement

MA

2,000,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Pearl Street/Ivory Street/
John Mahar Highway
Intersection Reconstruction, Braintree, Norfolk
County, MA, 8th District

MA

500,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Route 20 Corridor Improvements Project in Shrewsbury

MA

850,000

McGovern

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Oxford, MA Roadway Rehabilitation on Route 12
(Main Street)

MA

2,000,000

Neal

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MA

Lawrence Bridges Restoration Project

MA

1,200,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Guilford Road Pedestrian/
Bicycle Improvements,
Phase 3

MD

2,000,000

Elfreth

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

MD–99 Pedestrian
Connectivity Improvements

MD

500,000

Elfreth

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Town of Upper Marlboro
School and Wilson Lane
Road Renewal Project

MD

250,000

Hoyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Gaithersburg Pedestrian
Safety Improvements

MD

1,000,000

McClain Delaney

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Grantsville Sidewalk Project

MD

2,000,000

McClain Delaney

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Bridge Repair Program

MD

850,000

McClain Delaney

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

I–795 & Dolfield Blvd.
Interchange

MD

2,000,000

Olszewski

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Cheverly MD 201 Bike Trail

MD

650,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Sidewalks for All: The
Downtown Frederick
Streetscape Project

MD

2,478,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Thompson Creek Connector
Road & Trail Extension

MD

1,416,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Town of Easton—Rails To
Trails Expansion

MD

411,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00071

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Cassidy, Kennedy

H/S

H

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

Van Hollen

H20JAPT1

H

H

H998

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Revitalize Hanover Street:
Bridging Futures Transforming South Baltimore
Neighborhoods

MD

500,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MD

Baltimore Regional Trail
Hub

MD

3,000,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Madrid to Rangeley State
Route 4 Rehabilitation

ME

10,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Bucksport Main Street
Safety Improvements

ME

7,200,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Jackman US Route 201 Rehabilitation

ME

2,450,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Androscoggin State Route 4
Safety Improvements

ME

5,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Route 26–100 Roundabout
Construction

ME

9,600,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

ME

Deer Isle State Route 15
Causeway Improvements

ME

12,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Reconstruction of the
Houghton Canal Road,
Stanton Township,
Houghton County

MI

5,100,000

Bergman

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Cross Street and Prospect
Street Bridge Rehabilitation

MI

250,000

Dingell

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Silverwood Road from
Clifford Road to Castle
Road Resurfacing Project

MI

3,112,000

McClain

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

State Park Drive Rehabilitation Project

MI

850,000

McDonald Rivet

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Frances Road Bridge Replacement over Butternut Creek

MI

850,000

McDonald Rivet

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Patterson Avenue Resurfacing

MI

250,000

Scholten

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Non-motorized, Shared-use
Crossing over I–96 at
Forest Hill Avenue, SE

MI

250,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Countywide Bridge Repair
Project

MI

2,000,000

Walberg

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

North River Road Safety
Improvement Project

MI

5,000,000

Walberg

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Reconstruction of Mound
Road from 8 Mile to I–
696

MI

750,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Saginaw Road Bridge Reconstruction Project

MI

955,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Red Run Park Bridge Installation Project

MI

1,000,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

Detroit/Wayne County Port
Authority—Detroit Windsor Tunnel Roadway Column Rehabilitation and
Infrastructure Upgrades

MI

1,613,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MI

City of Mt. Pleasant Mill
and Overlay—Preston
and Bradley

MI

500,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Dakota County I–35
Bridges and CH 50
Interchange Project

MN

2,000,000

Craig

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Town Line Road Reconstruction

MN

1,500,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Heatherwood Road Infrastructure & Multi-Modal
Improvements

MN

7,000,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Minnesota State Highway
65 & Bunker Lake Blvd
Project

MN

7,000,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00072

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Peters

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H999

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

CSAH 19 & CSAH 123
Intersection Improvements

MN

1,500,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Highway 24—Clearwater

MN

3,700,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Interchanges on U.S. Highway 14 at CSAH 3 and
CSAH 5

MN

2,000,000

Finstad

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Weir Drive Reconstruction
Phase II

MN

1,350,000

McCollum

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

CH 18 and Settlers Ridge
Parkway Reconstruction

MN

250,000

McCollum

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Highway 169 & County
Road 130 Interchange
Mobility Project

MN

850,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Main Street (CSAH 150)
Reconstruction

MN

850,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Trunk Highway 610 & East
River Road Full Access
Interchange

MN

250,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Highway 47 Corridor and
BNSF Railroad Grade
Separation

MN

250,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Fridley Northtown Railyard
Overpass Connector

MN

1,000,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Oxford Louisiana Area Infrastructure Investment

MN

250,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

County Highway 32 Pedestrian and Safety Improvement Project

MN

5,000,000

Stauber

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

US Highway 8 Reconstruction

MN

5,000,000

Stauber

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

Highway 23 Coalition
Willmar Bypass Project

MN

3,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

City of Saint Paul Reconstruction of Randolph
Avenue Bridge

MN

2,102,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MN

City of Bloomington—
Normandale Boulevard
Sidewalk and Trail Improvements

MN

600,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

White Road Non-NBI Bridge
Replacement

MO

397,000

Alford

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

Compton Bridge Reconstruction Phase 2

MO

500,000

Bell

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

Kentucky Ave. Bridge Replacement

MO

1,200,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

Highway 54 Shared 4 Lane
Project

MO

4,900,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

US 136 Bridge Project

MO

1,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

Holt County Bridge Improvement Project

MO

1,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

US 36 Interchange

MO

1,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MO

I–29 to I–35 Ramp Bridge

MO

1,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MP

Route 36 Improvement
Phase 1B

MP

2,000,000

King-Hinds

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Edwards Street Reconstruction

MS

1,000,000

Ezell

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Lincoln Road Phase 2

MS

1,000,000

Ezell

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00073

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

H

H20JAPT1

H1000

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Madison Avenue Widening
for the City of Madison

MS

1,000,000

Guest

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Bozeman-Reunion Crossing
Interconnectivity System
for Madison County

MS

2,000,000

Guest

Wicker

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Dale Drive Intersection Improvement and Road
Widening for the Town of
Marion

MS

2,000,000

Guest

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Lincoln County-Brookhaven
Industrial Park Road Improvements for Lincoln
County

MS

2,000,000

Guest

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Wright Road Bridge Project

MS

3,500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Starkville Eastern Connections

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Desoto County I–55 Improvements

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

CR 306 Rehabilitation

MS

1,048,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Jackson County US 90 Improvements

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Jackson Multi-use Connection

MS

640,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Deerbrook Road Improvements

MS

4,500,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

MS 19 Neshoba County

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Lake Okhissa Access and
Utilities Project

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Canal Street Bridge Replacement Project

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Texas Flat Road Reconstruction

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Star Landing Road

MS

7,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Highway 80 East Widening
Project

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

US Highway 80 Improvements

MS

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MS

Dedeaux Road Widening
Project

MS

1,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

MT

Noxon Bridge

MT

10,000,000

Sheehy

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

Crow Tribe of Montana

BIA 91 Highway Reconstruction

MT

4,000,000

Sheehy

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NC

Fordham Boulevard
Sidepath

NC

1,000,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NC

Basin Street Extension

NC

3,900,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Omaha Urban Core Renewal

NE

3,500,000

Bacon

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

38th Street Viaduct in
Omaha

NE

5,000,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Gretna Hwy 6/31 Overpass

NE

1,500,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Morningside Road Improvements for Inland Port
Development

NE

3,000,000

Flood

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00074

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Zinke

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Fischer

H20JAPT1

S

January 20, 2026

H1001

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Elkhorn River Bridge Replacement

NE

1,500,000

Flood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Schram Road Parkway
Grading and Surfacing

NE

5,120,000

Flood

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Sheridan County Road Rehabilitation

NE

3,434,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Fairbury Highway 136 Improvements

NE

4,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Garfield County Asphalt
Project

NE

3,200,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Village of Exeter Paving
Project

NE

700,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Brown County Bridge
Rehabs and Replacement

NE

897,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Stromsburg 9th Street Reconstruction

NE

2,275,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Garden County Bridge Replacement

NE

5,200,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Gage County Hickory Road
Improvements

NE

4,733,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Village of Adams Pavement
Project

NE

880,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NE

Chadron North on Highway
385

NE

6,000,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NH

Lebanon Mechanic Street
Sidewalks Project

NH

250,000

Goodlander

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NH

Pettengill Road Traffic Improvements and Widening Project

NH

2,000,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Probasco Road Freight Bypass Project

NJ

2,000,000

Conaway

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Kenilworth Boulevard &
Lenape Park Intersection
Improvements

NJ

850,000

McIver

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Route 440 Pedestrian
Bridge Project

NJ

2,000,000

Menendez

Booker

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

City of Newark—Safe Gateway Pedestrianization
and Safety Improvements Project

NJ

1,500,000

Menendez

Booker

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Passaic Avenue Safety Improvements

NJ

3,000,000

Menendez, Pou

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Extension of Thomas Edison
Parkway (CR–641 Spur)
from US Route 322 to
Lambs Road (CR 635) in
Mantua Township

NJ

850,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Highland Park Pedestrian,
Bicycle, and Roadway
Safety Improvements

NJ

850,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

New Brunswick Traffic
Safety Improvements

NJ

500,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Livingston Avenue
Streetscape Improvement

NJ

850,000

Sherrill

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

County Route 537 Corridor
Improvements Section B
Project

NJ

2,000,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Route 522 Realignment Extension Project

NJ

450,000

Watson Coleman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

County of Cumberland—
Extension of Nabb Avenue

NJ

1,000,000

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00075

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Kim

H

H

Booker

H20JAPT1

S

H1002

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

County of Middlesex, New
Jersey—Veterans Memorial Bridge Safety Enhancements, CR–535

NJ

1,200,000

Booker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Pleasantville Pedestrian
Bridge

NJ

1,500,000

Booker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

County of Atlantic—Intersection Improvements to
Wrangleboro Road (CR
575) and Tilton Road
(CR 563)

NJ

350,000

Booker

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NJ

Hudson County—JFK Boulevard Roadway and Pedestrian Safety Improvements

NJ

1,500,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

City of Las Vegas, NM
South Pacific Road Improvements

NM

850,000

Leger Fernandez

Luján

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

Raton, NM Ports to Plains

NM

1,000,000

Leger Fernandez

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

Sunland Park Drive Intersection Phase I

NM

250,000

Vasquez

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

Ports-to-Plains Corridor
Interstate Planning—
Raton I–27 / I–25—
Interchange Alignment
Study

NM

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

City of Bloomfield—East
Blanco Road

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NM

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

Department of
Transportation

H

Luján

H

1,600,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

NM

1,210,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

City of Bloomfield—Solar &
Electric Vehicle Charging
Infrastructure

NM

600,000

Luján

S

Navajo Division of Transportation

N321 Environmental Assessment and Roadway
Improvements

NM

519,000

Luján

S

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

US 93 Safety Enhancements in Wells, NV

NV

2,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

US 6 in White Pine County

NV

2,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

US 6, Tonopah Downtown
Rehabilitation

NV

850,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

SR 596 Jones Blvd Preservation

NV

250,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Revitalizing Bonanza Road
for Safer Mobility

NV

250,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

CC–215 Trail Bridges at
Summerlin Parkway

NV

1,200,000

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Nevada Department of
Transportation—SR 159
Preservation

NV

2,000,000

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Vision Zero School Zone
Safety Improvements

NV

1,100,000

Lee (NV), Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

SR 147 Improvements

NV

1,000,000

Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Nevada Way Rehabilitation

NV

850,000

Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Charleston Boulevard Preservation

NV

1,200,000

Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

City of Henderson—Via
Nobila Interchange
Project

NV

5,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

Tahoe Transportation District—Sand Harbor
Multi-Use Trail Project

NV

5,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NV

US 50A Fernley Cottonwood
Roundabout

NV

2,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Jamaica Bay Greenway
Gateway Link

NY

250,000

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00076

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Jeffries

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1003

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

House

Origination
Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Reconstruction of Broadway

NY

1,850,000

Jeffries, Velázquez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Como Park Ave./Borden Rd.
Roundabout

NY

250,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Losson Rd./Borden Rd.
Roundabout

NY

250,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Liberty Avenue Plaza

NY

850,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

City of Poughkeepsie—
Washington Street
Bridge Reconstruction

NY

3,400,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

County of Chautauqua Industrial Development
Agency—Ripley Interstate Industrial Park
Left-Hand Turn Lane

NY

650,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

NY

Safe & Accessible Flatbush
& Foxhall

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Thornwood Drive South Improvement Project, City
of Heath

OH

4,000,000

Balderson

Moreno

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Ety Road South Improvement Project, City of
Lancaster

OH

2,000,000

Balderson

Moreno

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Sunbury Parkway Phase D
Project

OH

1,000,000

Balderson

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Brooksedge Boulevard Mobility Improvements

OH

1,200,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Havens Corners Road
Roundabout

OH

1,000,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Cooke Road Reconstruction

OH

250,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Sancus Boulevard Shared
Use Path

OH

850,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Morse Road Improvements

OH

250,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Stabilization and Rehabilitation of Irishtown Bend

OH

1,200,000

Brown

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

East 66th Complete Street
(DREAM 66)

OH

1,850,000

Brown

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

The Emerald Connector

OH

3,000,000

Carey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Franklin US 33 Corridor

OH

2,000,000

Carey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Millikin Road at Interstate
75, Future Exit 26

OH

2,200,000

Davidson

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Chessie Circle Trail Buildout

OH

1,000,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Village of Gibsonburg
Downtown Improvement
Project

OH

250,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

State Route 48 Improvement Project

OH

2,000,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Downtown Lebanon Pedestrian Safety Improvement
Project

OH

600,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

State Route 741 Improvement Project

OH

250,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Van Wert US 30 Interchange

OH

1,500,000

Latta

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

City of North Royalton—
Royalton Road Reconstruction Phase II

OH

4,000,000

Miller (OH)

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00077

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Moreno

Moreno

H20JAPT1

H

H

H1004

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Solon Ohio Diverging Diamond Project

OH

2,000,000

Miller (OH)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

US 224 Corridor Safety Enhancements

OH

1,500,000

Rulli

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Blaine Barton Road Intersection Safety Improvements

OH

3,840,000

Rulli

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Clinton Road Rehabilitation
Project

OH

250,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OH

Wooster Beall Avenue Safety Improvement Project

OH

3,750,000

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Sweetwater Shoulder

OK

4,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Beaver Shoulder Construction

OK

1,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Pawnee Shoulder Construction

OK

1,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Harmon Shoulder Construction

OK

1,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

Oklahoma City Congestion
Relief

OK

10,000,000

Mullin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OK

I–40 Bridge Replacement

OK

35,200,000

Mullin

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Gateway to OMSI

OR

850,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Broadway Bridge Deck Replacement

OR

250,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Williams Creek Trestle and
Learning Mile

OR

250,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Kellogg Creek OR–99E
Community Project (Kellogg Project)

OR

850,000

Bynum

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

OR 126: 35th Street Signal
and Pedestrian Improvements (Redmond)

OR

250,000

Bynum

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Roundabout at Shaff and
Wilco Road

OR

850,000

Bynum

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Safer Sandy: Safety Improvements to Sandy
Blvd

OR

850,000

Dexter

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Lower César E. Chávez
Boulevard Safety and
Resilience Project

OR

250,000

Dexter

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

OR 99W Corridor Safety
and Intersection Improvements

OR

850,000

Salinas

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

65th and Borland Intersection Improvement Project

OR

250,000

Salinas

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Verda Lane Pedestrian
Safety Project

OR

850,000

Salinas

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

OR

Feather Drive Bridge Replacement

OR

1,787,000

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

SR 6 Over Wallenpaupack
Creek Bridge

PA

2,000,000

Bresnahan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Route 309/Mundy Street
Crossroads Improvement
Project

PA

2,500,000

Bresnahan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Lederach PA 113
(Harleysville Pike Alternate Route) Shared Use
Path—Phase 1 Project

PA

250,000

Dean

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Verona Road Bridge Replacement

PA

850,000

Deluzio

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00078

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Husted

H

Merkley, Wyden

H

H

H

Merkley, Wyden

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

S

Fetterman, McCormick,

H20JAPT1

S

H

January 20, 2026

H1005

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Freeport Road Safety Improvement and Brilliant
Avenue Realignment

PA

2,000,000

Deluzio

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Crafton Blvd Streetscape—
School Plaza

PA

1,338,581

Deluzio

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Route 30 Corridor Improvements Project

PA

3,150,000

Houlahan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Ekastown West 3R Rehabilitation

PA

7,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

SR 422, Business 422 to
Butler County Line

PA

3,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

SR18, Wilmington Road
Betterment

PA

2,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Fetterman, McCormick,

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Versailles Avenue Viaduct
Replacement—McKeesport, PA

PA

850,000

Lee (PA)

McCormick

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

City of Jeannette—2nd
Street Bridge Reconstruction

PA

850,000

Lee (PA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Rex Road Bridge Repairs

PA

375,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Lower Saucon Road Bridge
Replacement

PA

242,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

SR420 Advance Warning
Safety Improvements

PA

425,500

Scanlon

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Third Street Pedestrian and
Bicycle Bridge

PA

500,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Lenni Road Quad Gate Installation

PA

250,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Improvements of Falls
Creek Streets and Sidewalks

PA

1,150,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Pedestrian Bridges for the
Connellsville Urban Passage

PA

500,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Carbon County Bridge Replacement

PA

1,119,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Country Club Road Bridge
Replacement

PA

1,901,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

PA

Johnstown Dellwood Street
Bridge Project

PA

806,000

McCormick

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Greystone Bridge Reconstruction

RI

1,000,000

Amo

Reed

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Wood Street Stormwater
and Flooding Mitigation
Project

RI

1,500,000

Magaziner

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Town of Scituate—Drainage Infrastructure Improvements

RI

970,000

Reed

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Town of Barrington—
Massasoit Avenue Sidewalk

RI

800,000

Reed

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Pell Bridge Ramps Beautification

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Blackstone Bikeway Segment 8B–2

RI

2,200,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

Woonasquatucket River
Greenway—Esmond Village Park

RI

4,400,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

RI

City of East Providence—
Traffic Signal Improvements

RI

4,200,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

SC

Clemson Intersection Improvement Project

SC

4,300,000

Graham

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00079

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Fetterman

H

H

H20JAPT1

H1006

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

SC

Airport Connector Road
Project

SC

20,500,000

Graham

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

SD

Box Elder Regional Transportation Improvement
Project

SD

4,000,000

Rounds

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

SD

SD44 Bridge Replacement
and Improvement

SD

25,000,000

Rounds, Thune

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TN

Loudon Co I–75 Widening
from Exit 81 to I–40

TN

1,000,000

Burchett

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TN

I–69 Troy Bypass North &
South

TN

5,000,000

Kustoff

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TN

New Middleton Elementary/
New Middleton Highway
Lane Addition

TN

2,000,000

Rose

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

US–87

TX

5,000,000

Arrington

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Study of Lamesa Improvements/Interstate Upgrade Option

TX

640,000

Arrington

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

SH 195 Project

TX

10,000,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Wirtz Dam Bridge Construction

TX

10,000,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Connell Street Widening
Project

TX

9,680,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Sawdust Bridge Elevation

TX

5,000,000

Crenshaw

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

City of Cedar Hill Loop 9
Highway Project

TX

250,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

BOLT—Bridge Operations &
Logistics Transformation,
Pharr International
Bridge

TX

3,520,000

De La Cruz

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

West Bouldin Creek Trail
Extension

TX

3,500,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Connecting Windsor Park:
Belfast Bridge & Trail

TX

2,000,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

I–10 Deck Plaza

TX

3,150,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Paso Del Norte Trail—
Socorro Spine Alignment

TX

500,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Segundo Barrio Safe
Streets

TX

1,000,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Ysleta Port of Entry Engineering Design

TX

3,100,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Texas Spur 228 Widening
Project; Amarillo

TX

1,880,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Interstate Planning Funds
for City Location Study
at Dumas

TX

1,000,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

SL 335—Upgrade to Freeway—Amarillo West of
FM 2590 to South to FM
2186; Amarillo

TX

1,000,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Centennial at Buckingham
Intersection Improvements

TX

1,000,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

White Rock Lake Trail Relocation

TX

1,200,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Hemlock Avenue Safe
Streets Enhancements

TX

850,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Ferguson Road Corridor
Safety Enhancements

TX

850,000

Johnson (TX)

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00080

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1007

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Lakewood Park Pedestrian
Bridge & Accessibility

TX

250,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Marshall Relief Route

TX

2,000,000

Moran

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Future Interstate Planning
between San Angelo and
Sonora (Future Interstate
Segment FIS 0159–01)

TX

1,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Mineral Wells Bridge

TX

1,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Rancier Avenue Reconstruction Project

TX

1,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Corridor A2 Segment Advanced Technology Route

TX

7,000,000

Sessions

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Future I–69/U.S. 59 Feasibility Study and Environmental Clearance

TX

3,000,000

Sessions

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

City of Colleyville Arterial
Bridge

TX

2,000,000

Van Duyne

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Pipeline Road Reconstruction

TX

1,000,000

Van Duyne

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

City of Dallas Royal Lane
Corridor

TX

250,000

Van Duyne

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

TX

Bachman Area Transportation Plan Implementation—Safety Improvements to Improve Neighborhood Access to
Bachman Lake and the
Bachman Creek Greenbelt

TX

250,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Quitchupah Creek Road Rehabilitation Project

UT

3,000,000

Maloy

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Droubay Road Project

UT

5,200,000

Maloy

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Brush Wellman Road
Project, Juab

UT

1,000,000

Maloy

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Utah Paradise Parkway
Corridor

UT

2,000,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Utah Ogden Canyon Trail

UT

1,000,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Summit County, Utah
Kimball Junction Overpass

UT

1,000,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

South Jordan City Bingham
Creek Trail Project

UT

500,000

Owens

Curtis

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Lehi Freeway Evaluation
Project

UT

500,000

Owens

Curtis

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

Salem City Road Transportation Infrastructure
Project

UT

1,000,000

Owens

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

North Shore Freeway Development

UT

2,000,000

Curtis

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

UT

SR–224 Pedestrian Overpass at Kimball Junction

UT

1,396,000

Curtis

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Roadside and Trailside
Comfort Station at Gravelly Point

VA

550,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

S. George Mason Dr.
Multimodal Improvements

VA

850,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Mason Neck Trail Extension
(Southern Segment)

VA

250,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Interstate 81 Corridor—
Widening

VA

17,000,000

Cline

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00081

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

H1008

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Fairfax County Transportation Safety Initiative—
Springfield

VA

3,150,000

Connolly

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Corridor Q—U.S. Connector
Phase II Paving Project

VA

3,000,000

Griffith

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

I–264/Independence Blvd.
Interchange Improvements

VA

10,000,000

Kiggans

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

I–95 and Willis Road Interchange Improvements
Phase 1

VA

850,000

McClellan

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Plaza Street Sidewalk Safety Improvements

VA

1,000,000

Subramanyam

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Route 15 Trail and Crossing at Catharpin Creek

VA

850,000

Subramanyam

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Route 15/Braddock Road
Roundabout

VA

3,150,000

Subramanyam

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Pedestrian Bridge Route 1
VRE Station Connection

VA

1,000,000

Vindman

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Leeland Road Improvement
Project

VA

250,000

Vindman

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Harrison Road/Salem
Church Road Intersection
Improvements

VA

850,000

Vindman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

I–95/Exit 126 SB Onramp
Improvements

VA

250,000

Vindman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Powhite Parkway Extension
Phase II—Preliminary
Engineering

VA

8,000,000

Wittman

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

National Park Service

Appalachian National Scenic Trail McAfee Knob
Trailhead Parking and
Transit Access Improvements

VA

6,304,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Shelton Shop Road Widening and Safety Improvements

VA

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Newport News—Citywide
Signal System Upgrade

VA

1,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

City of Suffolk—Townpoint
Sidewalk

VA

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VA

Fall Line Trail Segment 4A

VA

1,454,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

VT

Burlington—Winooski River
Bridge Replacement

VT

850,000

Balint

Sanders, Welch

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Bigelow-Sullivan Corridor:
Sullivan and Trent Interchange Project, City of
Spokane Valley

WA

4,000,000

Baumgartner

Cantwell

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Alderwood Mall Parkway:
SR525 to 168th St SW

WA

1,000,000

DelBene

Cantwell

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

SR–531 Trail

WA

850,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

156th Street NE Railroad
Overcrossing

WA

4,100,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

City of Shoreline Trail Along
the Rail Project

WA

850,000

Jayapal

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Pepin Flood, Agriculture,
Salmon, and Safety
Transportation (FASST)
Project

WA

1,000,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Wenatchi Landing Interchange

WA

10,000,000

Newhouse

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

The Port of Warden Road
Project

WA

2,500,000

Newhouse

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00082

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Kaine, Warner

Murray

H20JAPT1

H

H/S

H

January 20, 2026

H1009

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

54th Ave E and Taylor Way
Corridor Improvements

WA

500,000

Randall

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Kittitas County I–90 Widening—Kittitas County,
WA, WA–08

WA

2,000,000

Schrier

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Bellevue Grand Connection:
I–405 Crossing—Downtown to Eastrail

WA

2,000,000

Smith (WA)

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Airport Station Area Pedestrian Improvements
Project

WA

250,000

Smith (WA)

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Ceres Hill Bridge Rehabilitation

WA

3,350,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Port Orchard Bay Street ReConstruction

WA

3,554,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

The Kalispel Tribe of Indians

Dike Road Emergency Access and Flood Control

WA

717,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

South Royle Road Corridor
Improvements Project

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Portland Avenue Freight
Improvement Program

WA

2,500,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Columbia Heights Road
Safety Improvement
Project, Phase II

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Clinton Passenger-Only
Ferry Dock Replacement

WA

1,900,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

Vancouver Heights Infrastructure Phase II

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WA

City of Washougal—Rail
Crossing Project

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WI

Waukesha County Trunk
Highway O/Moorland
Road Construction

WI

5,500,000

Fitzgerald

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WI

Great Sauk State Trail Bicycle Rail Trail Connection

WI

1,200,000

Pocan

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WI

Monroe County CTH ET
Multimodal & Freight
Corridor

WI

8,455,000

Van Orden

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

Northern Parkway Improvements

WV

2,000,000

Moore (WV)

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

WVDOH District 4 City
Bridges

WV

5,000,000

Moore (WV)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

Market Street Bridge

WV

1,000,000

Moore (WV)

H

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

Sutton Elk River Trail Improvements

WV

2,240,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

Corridor H Parsons to Davis

WV

4,000,000

Justice

S

Department of
Transportation

Highway Infrastructure Programs

WV

WV Route 2 Improvements

WV

5,000,000

Justice

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Alabama Port Authority

Port Railroad Expansion

AL

2,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Port of Fort Smith

Transload Yard

AR

8,100,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Southeast Arkansas Economic Development District, Inc.

Port of Yellow Bend Rail
Improvements

AR

5,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Southern California Regional Rail Authority

Southern California Regional Railroad Authority
(Metrolink) Arroyo Simi
Bridges Scour Mitigation
Project

CA

250,000

Brownley

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Carlsbad

Carlsbad Village Railroad
Double Track Trenching,
Carlsbad, CA

CA

1,000,000

Levin

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00083

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Cantwell

H

H

Cantwell

H

H

Capito, Justice

H20JAPT1

H

H1010

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

North County Transit District

Positive Train Control Rail
Safety Enhancement
Project, Oceanside, CA

CA

600,000

Levin

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

San Diego Association of
Governments (SANDAG)

LOSSAN Rail Bridge Replacements

CA

2,000,000

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Beaumont

Pennsylvania Avenue Grade
Separation Project

CA

2,000,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

San Joaquin Regional Rail
Commission

Modesto & Empire Terminal
Railroad Positive Train
Control Installation

CA

1,934,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

San Diego Association of
Governments

Sorrento to Miramar Double
Track Project

CA

2,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Colorado Department of
Transportation

Fort Collins and Loveland
Station Planning Study

CO

900,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Cocoa

Cocoa Multi-Modal Passenger Station

FL

2,000,000

Haridopolos

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Des Plaines

Algonquin Rd Grade Separation

IL

1,800,000

Quigley,
Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Town of McCordsville

Mt. Comfort Road Regional
Underpass

IN

2,000,000

Shreve

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Pittsburg

Rehabilitation of Pittsburg
Industrial Park Rail
Lines

KS

2,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

New Orleans Public Belt
Railroad

Bywater Rail Relocation
Project

LA

1,200,000

Carter (LA)

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Lake Charles Harbor & Terminal District (Port of
Lake Charles)

Industrial Park East Industrial Lead Railroad Rehabilitation Project

LA

1,800,000

Higgins

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Jefferson Parish

Westbank Rail Alignment
Project

LA

8,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Massachusetts Department
of Transportation

Knowledge Corridor Positive
Train Control

MA

1,200,000

Neal

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Maryland Department of
Transportation

Enhancing Eastern Shore
Freight Rail Growth and
Reliability

MD

8,000,000

Harris

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Detroit

Michigan Central Station
Intermodal Passenger
Project

MI

3,000,000

Thanedar

Peters, Slotkin

H/S

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Shakopee

City of Shakopee Downtown
Quiet Zone Improvements

MN

850,000

Craig

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Minneapolis

Logan Park Rail Crossing
Improvements

MN

250,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

George County

Coastal Railroad Rehabilitation and Velocity Improvement Project

MS

4,000,000

Ezell

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Brookhaven

Railroad Safety Fencing

MS

641,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Mississippi Department of
Transportation

Tupelo Rail Improvements

MS

10,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

North Carolina Department
of Transportation

Charlotte Gateway Station

NC

500,000

Adams

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Town of Tabor City

Tabor City Railroad Improvements

NC

900,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Palmetto Railways

Lowcountry Region Rail
Bridge and Track Rehabilitation Program

SC

5,449,000

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Houston (Houston
Public Works)

East End Railway Improvement Project

TX

850,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Virginia Passenger Rail Authority

Alexandria Fourth Track
and Related Infrastructure Projects

VA

250,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Port of Pend Oreille

Locomotive Facility Upgrade
Project

WA

852,000

Baumgartner

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00084

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Moran

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

H

H

Hyde-Smith

S

Wicker

S

Graham

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

S

Cantwell

H20JAPT1

S

H

January 20, 2026

H1011

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

City of Monroe

Rail Grade Separation Feasibility Study and Design

WA

850,000

DelBene

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Snohomish County

Everett Intermodal Yard
and Curve Improvements

WA

250,000

Larsen

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Port of Quincy (Grant County Port District 1)

Port of Quincy Rail Infrastructure Expansion
Project

WA

2,500,000

Newhouse

Department of
Transportation

Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements

Port of Benton

White Bluffs Rail Modernization and Intermodal Facility Project

WA

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Inter-Island Ferry Authority

Lifesaving Equipment Upgrade

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Omnitrans

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Department of
Transportation

Senate
Cantwell

H

H

Cantwell

H

2,500,000

Cantwell

S

AK

1,575,000

Murkowski

S

Battery Electric Buses and
Installation of Charging
Infrastructure

CA

1,000,000

Aguilar

H

City of Simi Valley

City of Simi Valley Additional In-Route Charges
for the Simi Valley Transit Hub Project

CA

1,120,000

Brownley

H

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation
Authority

Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation
Authority’s (Metro) Regional Bus Stop Enhancement Program

CA

2,600,000

Brownley, Friedman, Gomez,
Rivas,
Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Foothill Transit

Foothill Transit Zero Emissions Bus Program

CA

850,000

Chu, Sanchez

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Contra Costa Transit Authority

Solar Integrated Battery
Storage System Project

CA

2,000,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Southern California Regional Rail Authority
(Metrolink)

Updating and replacing
Customer Information
Systems at Glendale and
Burbank Stations

CA

250,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

San Francisco Bay Area
Rapid Transit District
(BART)

BART Station LED Lighting
Program

CA

500,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

County of Los Angeles

El Sol Shuttle Zero-Emission Battery Electric
Buses

CA

1,000,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Cupertino

Silicon Valley Hopper OnDemand Microtransit
Shuttle

CA

1,200,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Culver City

Hydrogen Bus Pilot Project

CA

1,200,000

Lieu, KamlagerDove

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Sacramento Regional Transit District

City College & Fruitridge
Light Rail Station Modernization

CA

850,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Peninsula Corridor Joint
Powers Board

Burlingame Broadway
Grade Separation Project

CA

3,150,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

San Mateo County Transit
District

SamTrans Bus Stop Amenity Improvements

CA

250,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

North County Transit District

Bus Stop Security and Enhancement Project

CA

250,000

Peters

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

San Francisco Bay Area
Rapid Transit District
(BART)

Station LED Lighting Program

CA

850,000

Simon

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Riverside County Transportation Commission

Mead Valley Metrolink Station/Mobility Hub Project

CA

850,000

Takano

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Riverside Transit Agency

Veterans Riverside National
Cemetery ADA Bus Stop
Enhancement

CA

250,000

Takano

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Riverside County Transportation Commission

Metrolink Double Track
Project

CA

850,000

Takano

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Los Angeles County Department of Public Works

Link Willowbrook and King
Medical Center Shuttle
Zero Emission Bus
Project

CA

850,000

Waters

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Southern California Regional Rail Authority

Modernizing Rail in CA–27
through Technology Improvements

CA

250,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

North County Transit District

SPRINTER Platform and
Track Enhancement
Project

CA

1,200,000

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00085

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Padilla

H20JAPT1

S

H1012

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Peninsula Corridor Joint
Powers Board

South County Service Wi-Fi
Project

CA

1,100,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
District (RTD)

Downtown Track Replacement

CO

850,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Lakewood

Colfax Transportation Safety Infrastructure Improvements

CO

250,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Colorado Department of
Transportation

Gunnison Valley RTA Bus
Expansion Project

CO

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of New London

Water Street Garage and
Transit Station in New
London

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pinellas Suncoast Transit
Authority

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Department of
Transportation

Origination
House

Senate
Padilla

S

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Pettersen

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

1,508,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

CT

3,500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Ferry Dock at the St. Pete
Pier

FL

850,000

Castor

H

Central Florida Regional
Transportation Authority
(LYNX)

LYNX Bus Shelter Program
Project

FL

850,000

Frost

H

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Florida Regional
Transportation Authority
(LYNX)

LYNX Bus Acquisition
Project

FL

500,000

Frost

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pinellas Suncoast Transit
Authority

Ferry Dock Reconstruction
at Dunedin Marina

FL

828,000

Luna

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Jacksonville Transportation
Authority

JTA Autonomous Transit Deployment

FL

4,096,000

Rutherford

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Florida Regional
Transportation Authority
(d/b/a LYNX)

LYNX Digital Signage Program

FL

250,000

Soto

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Cobb County

South Cobb Transit Center

GA

1,200,000

McBath

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid
Transit Authority

MARTA Securing Rail and
Bus Facilities Project

GA

400,000

Scott (GA)

Ossoff, Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid
Transit Authority
(MARTA)

Securing Rail & Bus Facilities

GA

250,000

Williams (GA)

Ossoff, Warnock

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Champaign-Urbana Mass
Transit District

Champaign-Urbana Real
Estate Procurement for
Transit Station Expansion

IL

850,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Village of Glen Ellyn

Village of Glen Ellyn Metra
Station and Multimodal
Access Improvements
Project

IL

2,000,000

Casten

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pace, the Suburban Bus
Division of the Regional
Transportation Authority

Pace Harlem Avenue Transit Signal Priority

IL

840,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pace, the Suburban Bus
Division of the Regional
Transportation Authority

Pace North Avenue Transit
Signal Priority

IL

250,000

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority

79th and Halsted Bus
Turnaround Improvement
Project

IL

2,500,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority

CTA-Rail Station Concession Facilities Improvements

IL

1,080,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pace, the Suburban Bus
Division of the Regional
Transportation Authority

Pace Pulse bus queue-jump
for 95th St/Western Ave

IL

530,190

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Commuter Rail Division of
the RTA d/b/a Metra

Metra’s 91st Street/Beverly
Station Improvements
Project

IL

520,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Commuter Rail Division of
the RTA d/b/a Metra

Station Displays Across
Chicago’s South Side
and Suburbs Project

IL

250,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Pace, the Suburban Bus
Division of the Regional
Transportation Authority

Pace Golf Road Transit Signal Priority

IL

840,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority

CTA Brown Line-Rockwell
Brown Line

IL

1,200,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority
(CTA)

Belmont Station Red Line
Improvement

IL

500,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Commuter Rail Division of
the RTA d/b/a Metra

Metra’s O’Hare Express Infrastructure Study

IL

1,500,000

Ramirez

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00086

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Durbin

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1013

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Chicago Transit Authority

Track Reconstruction Design

IL

2,000,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Illinois Department of
Transportation

Transit Improvements

IL

3,711,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Bloomington Normal Public
Transit System (dba
Connect Transit)

Transportation Center Pedestrian Access Improvements

IL

1,600,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Illinois Department of
Transportation

Station Improvements

IL

134,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Indianapolis Public Transportation Corporation
(IndyGo)

Fixed Route Fleet Replacement

IN

1,200,000

Carson

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Transit Authority of River
City

Paratransit Vehicle Replacement

KY

850,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Woburn

Anderson Regional Transit
Center Pedestrian Bridge
Project

MA

500,000

Clark

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Woods Hole, Martha’s Vineyard and Nantucket
Steamship Authority

Steamship Authority Shuttle
Bus Replacement

MA

2,000,000

Keating

Warren

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Maryland Department of
Transportation

Bowie State MARC Station
Joint Development
Project

MD

250,000

Ivey

Alsobrooks

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT)
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA)

West Baltimore MARC Station Replacement—NonAmtrak Funded Station
Amenities

MD

250,000

Mfume

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Montgomery County Department of Transportation

Georgia Avenue Bus Lanes

MD

3,150,000

Raskin

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Maryland Transit Administration

Southern Maryland Rapid
Transit

MD

5,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Oakland County

Oakland County Transit
Fleet Expansion

MI

2,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Interurban Transit Partnership

The Rapid’s Collision
Avoidance and Pedestrian Alert System
Project

MI

750,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transit Authority
of Southeast Michigan

Woodward Avenue Dedicated Transit Lanes

MI

2,600,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Ann Arbor Area Transportation Authority (AAATA)

Ypsilanti Transit Center
Safety and Security Improvements

MI

750,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

St. Louis County

Operation SmartStreet—
Roadside and Vehicle
Equipment Upgrades

MO

1,200,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Gulfport

Memorial Hospital Gulfport/
Coast Transit Authority
Intermodal Center

MS

2,029,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Research Triangle Regional
Public Transportation
Authority, d/b/a
GoTriangle

Triangle Mobility Hub

NC

2,000,000

Foushee, Ross

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Long Branch

Elberon Station and Pedestrian Improvements

NJ

250,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Borough of Carteret

Carteret Ferry Building
Project

NJ

3,500,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

North Central Regional
Transit District

Chama, NM Transit Operations Facility

NM

750,000

Leger Fernandez

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Las Vegas

Vision Zero School Zone
Safety Improvements

NV

500,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

RTC Dual Direction Bus
Shelters

NV

250,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada—Dual Direction
Bus Shelters

NV

250,000

Lee (NV)

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

Dual Direction Bus Shelters

NV

850,000

Titus

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00087

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

H

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen
Stevens

H

Bell

H

Hyde-Smith

Booker, Kim

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

S

S

S

H

H20JAPT1

H1014

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

Transit Infrastructure Safety Improvements

NV

3,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

New York State Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Interborough Express Light
Rail Transit Project (IBX)

NY

850,000

Clarke

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

New York State Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Long Island Rail Road
Bellerose ADA Upgrade
and Station Renewal

NY

250,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Metropolitan Transportation
Authority

Interborough Express Light
Rail Transit Project (IBX)
Preliminary Engineering

NY

250,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority

NFTA Paratransit Vehicles

NY

1,888,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

New York State Metropolitan Transportation Authority

179th Street Station Renewal (Queens Boulevard
Line)

NY

500,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rochester Genesee Regional
Transportation Authority

Rochester Genesee Regional
Transportation Authority:
Hydrogen Fueler Boil Off
Capture System

NY

850,000

Morelle

Gillibrand

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Roosevelt Island Operating
Corporation (RIOC)

Roosevelt Island Tram Modernization

NY

250,000

Nadler

Gillibrand

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

New York State Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Broadway Station ADA Upgrades

NY

2,000,000

Ocasio-Cortez

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rockland County

Village of Kaser—Bus
Transit

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Town of Ramapo

Town of Ramapo—Ready
Transit

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Ohio Transit Authority

COTA Paratransit and
COTA//Plus Vehicles

OH

250,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Greater Cleveland Regional
Transit Authority
(GCRTA)

GCRTA Light Rail Track Reconstruction Program

OH

250,000

Brown

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Toledo Area Regional Transit Authority (TARTA)

New State-of-the-Art TARTA
Garage & Zero Emission
Bus Transition

OH

2,450,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Tri-County Metropolitan
Transportation District of
Oregon (TriMet)

LIFT Vehicle Replacement
Project

OR

500,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Clackamas County

Mt. Hood Access to Transit

OR

500,000

Dexter

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Tri-County Metropolitan
Transportation District of
Oregon (TriMet)

Traffic Signal Efficiency
Improvements

OR

931,200

Dexter

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rogue Valley Transportation
District

Zero Emission Paratransit
Vehicles and Charging
Improvements

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rhode Island Public Transit
Authority

Passenger and Operations
Technology Improvements

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Rhode Island Public Transit
Authority

RIPTA Bus Purchases

RI

3,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Cleveland

Relocation of the Cleveland
Urban Area Transit System Depot

TN

1,500,000

Fleischmann

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Corpus Christi Regional
Transportation Authority

Architectural Services for
CCRTA’s New Maintenance Facility

TX

1,943,000

Cloud

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Dallas Area Rapid Transit

DART Ledbetter Light Rail
Station Facility Modernization Project

TX

250,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Dallas Area Rapid Transit

Cityplace/Uptown Station
Inclinator Replacement
and Modernization
Project

TX

850,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

North Central Texas Council
of Governments

City of Coppell Circulator

TX

1,500,000

Van Duyne

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Fort Worth Transportation
Authority

Bus Stop Improvements

TX

2,000,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Utah Transit Authority

Utah Transit Authority TRAX
Light Rail Vehicles

UT

5,000,000

Moore (UT)

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00088

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

S

H

Merkley, Wyden

H

H

Curtis

H20JAPT1

H/S

January 20, 2026

H1015

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Hampton Roads Transit

Hampton Roads Transit
Paratransit Fleet

VA

850,000

Scott (VA)

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Community Transit

Swift Green Line Extension
Southern Terminal Facility

WA

2,000,000

DelBene

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Central Puget Sound Regional Transit Authority

Link Reliability Improvements

WA

4,000,000

Jayapal

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Washington State Department of Transportation

Seattle Ferry Terminal
Shoreside Electrification

WA

1,200,000

Jayapal

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Snohomish County Public
Transportation Benefit
Area Corporation

Bus Replacement Project

WA

2,000,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Washington State Ferries

Washington State Ferries
Southworth Terminal Redevelopment

WA

850,000

Randall

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Community Transit

Swift Gold Line Bus Rapid
Transit Expansion Service between Everett and
Arlington

WA

3,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

Milwaukee County Department of Transportation

Bus Replacement project

WI

1,000,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

City of Madison

City of Madison Metro
Transit Safety Initiative

WI

850,000

Pocan

H

Department of
Transportation

Transit Infrastructure
Grants

West Virginia University Research Corporation

Personal Rapid Transit
Guideway Rehabilitation
Project

WV

6,400,000

Moore (WV)

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Ouzinkie

Harbor Modernization

AK

1,100,000

Begich

Murkowski

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Homer

Homer Port FREIGHT: Critical Float System Replacement

AK

250,000

Begich

Murkowski

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Kodiak

St. Hermans Harbor Infrastructure

AK

5,000,000

Begich

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Municipality of Anchorage

Port of Alaska Modernization Program Electric
Substation

AK

1,750,000

Begich

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Seldovia

Jakolof Bay Dock Replacement

AK

482,000

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Alabama State Port Authority

Facilities Modernization—
Pier D2 Berth Completion

AL

850,000

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Alabama State Port Authority

McDuffie Coal Terminal
Modernization

AL

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

American Samoa Department of Port Administration

Port of Pago Pago Reconstruction Initiative

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

City of Monterey

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Department of
Transportation

H

Murray

Murray

H/S

S

Murkowski

S

Figures

Britt

H

2,000,000

Moore (AL)

Britt

H

AQ

1,000,000

Radewagen

H

Monterey Wharf Critical Repairs

CA

1,920,000

Panetta

H

Diamond State Port Corporation

Port Wilmington Infrastructure Improvement and
Revitalization

DE

2,000,000

McBride

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Miami-Dade County Seaport
(PortMiami)

Reefer Yard Expansion
Project

FL

5,000,000

Salazar

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Hawaii Department of
Transportation

Port Improvements to Support Farmers

HI

2,400,000

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Lake Providence Port Commission

Delta Link Louisiana Regional Ports Improvement Project

LA

5,000,000

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Lake Charles Harbor & Terminal District

Lake Charles Harbor & Terminal District Improvements

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy, Kennedy

S

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Port of Monroe

Strategic Cargo Infrastructure Project

MI

3,600,000

Peters

S

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Duluth Seaway Port Authority

Gantry Crane Refurbishment Project

MN

5,000,000

Stauber

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Yellow Creek State Inland
Port Authority

Yellow Creek Port Wharf
Reconstruction and Rail
Project

MS

4,000,000

Kelly (MS)

Hyde-Smith

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00089

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

H

Hirono, Schatz

Letlow

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H/S

S

H

H20JAPT1

H1016

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

South Jersey Port Corporation

High Mast Lighting for Expanded Cargo Storage

NJ

250,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Erie County Industrial Development Agency

Buffalo Port Modernization
Project

NY

850,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Port of Garibaldi

Engineering for Seawall Replacement

OR

2,000,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Port of Beaumont Navigation District of Jefferson
County, Texas

Port of Beaumont Island
Park Terminal Stabilization Project

TX

5,000,000

Babin

H

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

Port of Seattle

Pier 86 Grain Terminal
Switcher Locomotive Replacement Project

WA

250,000

Jayapal

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

The Northwest Seaport Alliance

Northwest Seaport Alliance
Berth Deepening on the
Blair Waterway

WA

2,000,000

Randall

Department of
Transportation

Port Infrastructure Development Program

The Northwest Seaport Alliance

Terminal 18 Shore Power
Expansion

WA

8,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Petersburg Borough

Banana Point Breakwater
Improvements

AK

2,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Soldotna

Marydale Avenue Improvements

AK

2,387,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Native Village of Diomede

Teacher Housing Renovation

AK

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairbanks Youth Advocates

The Door Youth Shelter

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yukon Koyukuk School District

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Cantwell

H

H

Murray

S

Begich

Murkowski

S

Begich

Murkowski

H/S

1,500,000

Murkowski

S

AK

700,000

Murkowski

S

Minto Teacher Housing

AK

608,000

Murkowski

S

Cordova Family Resource
Center

Cordova Shelter

AK

750,000

Murkowski

S

Community Development
Fund

Anchorage Community Land
Trust

Nonprofit Hub & Service
Center Repairs

AK

750,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Nome

Rural Teacher and Police
Housing

AK

4,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Thorne Bay

Thorne Bay EMS Hall

AK

1,574,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Council of the
Tlingit & Haida Indian
Tribes

Village Public Safety Officer
Quarters Project

AK

2,500,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Anchorage Neighborhood
Housing Services dba
NeighborWorks Alaska

Fire Alarm System Upgrade

AK

287,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northwest Arctic Borough
School

Teacher Housing Renovations

AK

330,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nulato Village

Waterfront Transportation
Infrastructure Development

AK

4,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Helping Ourselves Prevent
Emergencies (HOPE)

Building Acquisition

AK

900,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Denali Commission

Emmonak Women’s Shelter

AK

4,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Catholic Social Services

Shelter Safety and Accessibility Improvements

AK

320,000

Murkowski

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00090

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1017

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Covenant House Alaska

Dena’ina House

AK

1,600,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Native Village of Unalakleet

Housing for Victims of Violent Crimes

AK

255,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sunshine Station Child
Care Center

New Childcare Center

AK

4,500,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Star Council on
Aging

Rehabilitation of MLH
Manor

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Angoon

Angoon Harbor Access Improvements

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Naknek Village Council

Affordable Housing Construction

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kake Tribal Corporation

Dock Replacement

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yakutat Borough

Forest Highway Housing
Project

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ketchikan Indian Community

KIC S’eenáa Hit Navigation
Center

AK

2,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairbanks Neighborhood
Housing Services Inc.

Cowles Street Affordable
Housing

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southeast Alaska Independent Living, Inc.

SE Alaska Disability Resource Center

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saint Paul

Fire Station Renovations

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sitkans Against Family Violence

Domestic Violence Shelter

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Haines

Early Childhood Education
Building

AK

1,000,000

Murkowski

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lauderdale County Agriculture Center Authority

Lauderdale County, AL Agriculture Multipurpose
Complex

AL

1,500,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wallace State Community
College

Hanceville Affordable Housing

AL

2,540,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winston County

Winston County Road 57
and County Road 61 Resurfacing and Rehabilitation

AL

1,553,000

Aderholt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montgomery

Montgomery Regional Tech
& Innovation Ecosystem
Initiative (MRTIEI) Hub

AL

1,650,000

Figures

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Auburn University

Rural Studio’s Development
and Housing Construction in Africatown

AL

2,500,000

Figures

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monroe County Commission

Monroe County Economic
Industrial Park Phase I

AL

1,000,000

Figures

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Auburn University

Advanced Manufacturing
Center for Workforce Development

AL

6,500,000

Rogers (AL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gadsden

Regional Fire, EMS, & Police Substation Replacement

AL

6,300,000

Rogers (AL)

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00091

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Britt

H20JAPT1

H

H1018

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jacksonville State University

JSU Center for Manufacturing Support

AL

6,500,000

Rogers (AL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jacksonville State University

JSU Law Enforcement
Training Center

AL

1,500,000

Rogers (AL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Selma

Alabama Avenue Redevelopment Project

AL

1,656,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bessemer Housing Authority

Bessemer Dream Center

AL

850,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pleasant Grove

Pleasant Grove Sidewalk &
Safety Upgrades

AL

700,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tuscaloosa

Tuscaloosa Public Library

AL

250,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Auburn University

Selma Resilient Housing

AL

500,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hueytown

Hueytown Streetscaping

AL

850,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jefferson County Greenways
Commission

Red Mountain Park

AL

250,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Homewood

Homewood Culvert Project

AL

250,000

Sewell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Athens State University

Workforce Development and
Multipurpose Center

AL

1,000,000

Strong

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Talladega

Accessibility Infrastructure

AL

300,000

Britt

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Abbeville

Public Safety Firefighting
Equipment

AL

1,500,000

Britt

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Alabama in
Huntsville

Artificial Intelligence Research Infrastructure

AL

10,000,000

Britt

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Memphis

Utility Infrastructure Power
Substation and Water
Tank Upgrades

AR

1,000,000

Crawford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi County

Blytheville—North End
Clean Up

AR

3,200,000

Crawford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jonesboro

Lost Creek Drainage and
Flood Mitigation Infrastructure

AR

1,000,000

Crawford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of Arkansas

ACTI Remediation

AR

9,234,000

Westerman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tontitown

Water System Improvements

AR

12,200,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Benton County

Fire Station Improvements

AR

1,250,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mountainburg

North Central Crawford
County Water System
Improvements

AR

4,400,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Huntsville

Water System Improvements

AR

3,000,000

Womack

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00092

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1019

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Farmington

Bridge Repairs

AR

6,500,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mulberry

Mulberry Food Pantry

AR

500,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Benton County Water District #1 PWA of Arkansas

Benton County Water System Improvements

AR

1,750,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fort Smith

Water System Improvements

AR

3,000,000

Womack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southern Arkansas University Tech

Technology Innovation Center

AR

15,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Arkansas Division of Agriculture

University of Arkansas Food
Safety, Science, and Research

AR

30,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Arkansas Pulaski Technical College

Project LIFT

AR

20,000,000

Boozman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Phoenix Emergency Shelter

AZ

830,000

Ansari

Gallego, Kelly

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Guadalupe

Biehn Colony Park Reconstruction

AZ

2,000,000

Ansari

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Alternative Fuel Vehicle Fire
Mitigation and Acquisition Project

AZ

800,000

Ansari

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Phoenix Fire Department
Wildland and Emergency
Response Acquisition

AZ

2,175,000

Ansari

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glendale

Glendale Arizona CD–03
Transportation Improvements and Streetscaping

AZ

850,000

Ansari

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Pima

High School Road Construction

AZ

1,000,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Casa Grande Elementary
School District #4

Community Center Revitalization

AZ

1,000,000

Ciscomani

Gallego, Kelly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Casa Grande Union High
School District

Affordable Workforce Housing Construction

AZ

1,800,000

Ciscomani

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Phoenix Fire Member Services Building Renovation

AZ

1,500,000

Hamadeh

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chandler

Chandler Sewer Rehabilitation

AZ

2,000,000

Stanton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

City of Phoenix—Fire Station Improvements

AZ

850,000

Stanton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tempe

City of Tempe—Affordable
Housing Development
and Construction

AZ

850,000

Stanton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dishchii’bikoh Community
School

Cibecue Teacher Housing
Construction

AZ

1,275,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Graham County

Graham County Affordable
Housing

AZ

345,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fort Thomas Unified School
District 7

Mt. Turnbull Elementary
School Teacher Housing

AZ

900,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00093

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1020

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arizona Department of
Housing

Spanish Trail Village Transitional Housing

AZ

3,000,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Avondale

Avondale Heat Mitigation

AZ

639,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Flagstaff

Flagstaff Shelter

AZ

2,500,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Apache County

Ganado School Bus Loop
Reconstruction

AZ

2,155,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Phoenix

Veterans Center Renovation
Project

AZ

1,000,000

Gallego, Kelly

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
County of San
Bernardino

Arrowhead Grove Inclusive
Redevelopment Project
Phase V

CA

3,000,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Bernardino County

Bloomington Animal Shelter
Construction

CA

2,000,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fontana

Aldea Apartments Acquisition and Development

CA

1,200,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Redlands

Texonia Park Modernization
Renovations

CA

1,000,000

Aguilar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Normandale Park Upgrades

CA

3,000,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles

Torrance Boulevard Safety
Improvements

CA

1,500,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles

Normandie Avenue Bus
Stop and Shelter Improvements

CA

1,500,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles

Wishing Tree Park Shade
Enhancement

CA

1,200,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Normandie Avenue Sidewalk
and Green Corridor Improvements

CA

1,000,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Los Angeles Fire Station 79
Critical Infrastructure
Repairs

CA

850,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles Harbor College

Los Angeles Harbor College
Center for Community
Engagement and Workforce Development

CA

850,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Houghton Park Improvements

CA

850,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lynwood

Lynwood Community Center
Improvements

CA

850,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paramount

Paramount Park Community
Center Expansion

CA

500,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South Gate

South Gate Electric Buses
and Charging Infrastructure

CA

250,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Scherer Park Signature
Playground

CA

250,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carson

Carson Safe Routes to
School

CA

250,000

Barragán

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00094

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1021

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Wilmington Athletic Complex Lighting and Security

CA

250,000

Barragán

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sacramento County

Watt Avenue Safe Stay Facility—Furnishing and
Equipment Acquisition

CA

1,500,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rio Linda Elverta Recreation and Park District

Central Park Rehabilitation—Phase 1

CA

2,000,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sacramento, Parks
and Community Enrichment Department

Del Paso Heights Sports
Complex Development,
Construction, and Equipment

CA

1,000,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

American River College of
the Los Rios Community
College System

Increasing Food Access via
Fleet Replacement & Facility Expansion

CA

260,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

California State University,
Sacramento

North Sacramento Technology Center

CA

850,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fulton-El Camino Recreation and Park District

Bohemian Park Community
Center Expansion

CA

850,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Citrus Heights

San Juan Avenue Phase 2
Development and Construction

CA

500,000

Bera

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clean Power Alliance

Clean Power Alliance Power
Ready Program for Critical Public Facilities Improvements

CA

250,000

Brownley

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Calabasas

Citywide Green Street
Project

CA

850,000

Brownley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Agoura Hills

City of Agoura Hills Affordable Housing Microgrid

CA

850,000

Brownley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Ventura

Ventura County Agricultural
Training, Resource, and
Community Center Development and Reconstruction

CA

250,000

Brownley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Indian Wells

Whitewater Channel Lining

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norco

Recycled Water Distribution
and Transmission Mainline Construction

CA

2,400,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Eastern Municipal Water
District

Quail Valley Septic to
Sewer Conversion Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Palm Desert

Cook Street Bridge Project

CA

5,671,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rancho Mirage

Via Vail Roadway Improvements

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lake Elsinore

Lake Elsinore Water Quality
Project

CA

8,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Quinta

Washington Street Improvement Project

CA

5,000,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Corona

Trails Improvement Project

CA

1,700,000

Calvert

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Maria

City of Santa Maria—Fire
Department Station 1
Expansion Project

CA

1,200,000

Carbajal

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00095

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Padilla, Schiff

Schiff

H20JAPT1

H

H

H1022

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Barbara,
CA

Santa Barbara County
Lompoc Animal Shelter

CA

850,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carpinteria

City of Carpinteria Community Center

CA

850,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santa Barbara County

Santa Barbara Sexual Assault Response Team
Cottage Relocation

CA

236,375

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Ventura

Ventura County Meiners
Oaks Botanical Park

CA

850,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Barbara

City of Santa Barbara
Eastside Library Improvements

CA

850,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Buenaventura
(Ventura)

City of San
Buenaventura—New Beginnings Interim Shelter

CA

250,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Morro Bay

Morro Bay Storm Drain Resiliency Project

CA

250,000

Carbajal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Gabriel Valley Regional
Housing Trust

San Gabriel Valley Regional
Housing Trust Project
Pipeline

CA

250,000

Chu

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles Department of Consumer
and Business Affairs

Altadena Community Center
Facility Improvements
and ADA Upgrades

CA

500,000

Chu

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pasadena

Pasadena Jackie Robinson
Community Center—Facility Improvements and
ADA Upgrades

CA

1,000,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Claremont

Claremont South Village
Public Infrastructure Improvements

CA

850,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Arcadia

Arcadia and U.S. Forest
Service Joint Fire Training Center

CA

2,000,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Monterey Park

Fire Station 63 Reconstruction Project

CA

250,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rosemead

Garvey Community Center
Renovations

CA

500,000

Chu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Baldwin Park, CA

Baldwin Park Family Services Center

CA

3,150,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Monte, CA

Pioneer Park Construction
Project

CA

2,000,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glendora, CA

Sandburg Middle School
Park Field and Track
Conversion

CA

1,200,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Irwindale, CA

Irwindale Dan Diaz Recreation Center Improvements Project

CA

850,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Covina, CA

Fire Station #1 Replacement

CA

250,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Puente, CA

La Puente Park Access Initiative Project

CA

820,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South El Monte, CA

New Temple Park Facility
Improvements

CA

500,000

Cisneros

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Stanton

Community and Senior
Center Complex Enhancement

CA

250,000

Correa

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00096

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Padilla

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1023

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fullerton

Fire Stations Rehabilitation
Project

CA

250,000

Correa

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Ana

Chepa’s Park Reconstruction and Upgrades

CA

2,000,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Anaheim

OC River Walk—Santa Ana
River Impoundments
Project

CA

1,200,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Anaheim

Boysen Park Expansion, Improvements, and Facility
Development and Construction

CA

1,000,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Anaheim

Haskett Branch Library Improvements

CA

850,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orange

Orange County Riverwalk
Upland Habitat Restoration

CA

500,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fullerton

Independence Park Revitalization

CA

250,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santa Ana College

Automotive, Diesel-Electric
Transportation Technology and Robotic Manufacturing/Welding Program Infrastructure

CA

850,000

Correa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central California Food
Bank

Central California Food
Bank Volunteer Center
Expansion

CA

1,000,000

Costa

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fresno

San Joaquin River Parkway
Project

CA

2,000,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Reedley College

Reedley College Ag Innovation Center

CA

2,000,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Tulare

Neighborhood Village Salt
and Light Phase II
Project

CA

1,200,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fresno

Clean Air Mobility Network

CA

850,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Exeter

Exeter Street Improvement
Project

CA

500,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fresno

Fresno Area Business Development Incubator

CA

250,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Visalia

Riggin Avenue Widening
and Streetscaping

CA

250,000

Costa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Contra Costa County Fire
Protection District

East Bay Regional Communications System Improvements and Upgrades Project

CA

1,915,000

DeSaulnier

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Bay Regional Park
District

South of Bailey Road Community Development

CA

850,000

DeSaulnier

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Kings

Fire and Office of Emergency Services Headquarters

CA

3,000,000

Fong

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kern Council of Governments

Centennial Corridor SB 99
to WB 58 Connector

CA

3,000,000

Fong

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Burbank

Burbank Central Library

CA

3,000,000

Friedman

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00097

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schiff

Schiff

Padilla

Schiff

H20JAPT1

H

H/S

H

H/S

H1024

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

PATH Villas Hollywood—Infrastructure Improvements

CA

850,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glendale

Central Park Block

CA

2,000,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Hollywood

Hart Park Improvements
Project

CA

850,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Fire
Department

Los Angeles County Fire
Station 8 Replacement

CA

500,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Hollywood Active Transportation Improvements

CA

250,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Greater Wilshire Street Repairs and Safety Upgrades

CA

850,000

Friedman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Contra Costa County Library

Bay Point Library

CA

2,000,000

Garamendi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Long Beach Community
College District

Childcare Development
Center Rehabilitation

CA

1,500,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

California State University
Long Beach, Research
Foundation (CSULB Research Foundation)

Long Beach Research Center and Special Collections Archives Development and Construction

CA

2,175,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bell Gardens

Ford Park Gym And Community Building Renovation

CA

250,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cudahy

Lugo Park Facilities Rehabilitation

CA

500,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Downey

Downey Downtown Development and Revitalization

CA

1,000,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Downey

Rio San Gabriel Park Facilities Upgrades

CA

250,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Signal Hill

Walnut Bluff Workforce Affordable Housing, Community Facility, and Outdoor Facilities—Development, Construction and
Equipment

CA

2,000,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Maywood

Maywood Teen Center

CA

850,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Admiral Kidd Park Improvements

CA

750,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Colorado Lagoon and Marina Vista Park

CA

850,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Broadway Improvements

CA

850,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Washington Neighborhood
Youth Center Facility Development and Construction

CA

250,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bellflower

Simms Park Community
Center Renovation
Project

CA

250,000

Garcia (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Development Authority

Nueva Maravilla Extreme
Heat Measures—Cooling
Equipment and Installation

CA

1,200,000

Gomez

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00098

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Padilla, Schiff

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1025

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of California Department of Parks and
Recreation

Bowtie State Park Enhanced Welcome Center

CA

2,000,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Air Conditioners at Estrada
Courts

CA

2,000,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Ramona Gardens Air Conditioners

CA

2,000,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Project Homekey Transitional Housing Hotel
Conversion

CA

850,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Clark Residence

CA

850,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Fast Tracking Affordable
Housing in El Sereno

CA

850,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mountains Recreation and
Conservation Authority
(MRCA)

Elyria Canyon Park Wildfire
Education and Workforce
Development Community
Center Improvements

CA

500,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Benjamin Franklin Library
Renovations Phase II

CA

500,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Union Towers, The View at
Soto, and Ramona Gardens Computer Lab Renovations and Technology
Upgrades

CA

850,000

Gomez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mendota

Mendota Community Center
Project

CA

2,000,000

Gray

Padilla

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Modesto

City of Modesto Fire Station
#1 Rehabilitation

CA

850,000

Gray

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Joaquin

County Service Area 44—
Sewer Treatment Consolidation and Infrastructure Improvements

CA

1,000,000

Gray

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Merced

Bear Creek Infrastructure
and Flood Protection

CA

3,150,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Madera

City of Madera Avenue 13
Sewer Rehabilitation,
Phase III

CA

2,000,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Fresno

Biola Community Sidewalk
and Lighting Upgrades

CA

230,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Huron

Huron Avenue Improvements

CA

850,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Fresno

Caruthers Complete Streets

CA

250,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Madera

Courthouse Park Renovation
Phase 3 Project

CA

250,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Merced

Childs Avenue and Canal
Street Roadway and Active Transportation Safety Improvements in
South Merced, California

CA

850,000

Gray

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Byron Bethany Irrigation
District

Wicklund Cut Water Supply
Reliability Improvements

CA

3,000,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South San Joaquin County
Fire Authority

South San Joaquin County
Fire Authority (SSJCFA)
Regional Fire Training
Facility

CA

2,000,000

Harder

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00099

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1026

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Joaquin Delta Community College District

Cyber Innovation Hub Facility Development and
Construction

CA

850,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Joaquin

San Joaquin County Food
Security Hub Facility Expansion

CA

1,150,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Manteca

Animal Shelter Enhancement Project

CA

850,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
County of San Joaquin

French Camp Crossings

CA

500,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Joaquin

San Joaquin County’s Be
Well Campus

CA

250,000

Harder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Marin

Fairfax-San Anselmo Children’s Center Safety Upgrades

CA

850,000

Huffman

Padilla

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Marin

Point Reyes Workforce
Housing Development
and Construction

CA

2,000,000

Huffman

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sonoma County

Spud Point-Bodega Bay
Ice-Making Plant

CA

1,200,000

Huffman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marin County Public Financing Authority

Oak Hill Workforce Housing

CA

250,000

Huffman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Barona Group of the Capitan Grande Band of Mission Indians of the
Barona Reservation

Water Infrastructure Improvements

CA

1,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Miguel Consolidated
Fire Protection District

Fire Station 19 Construction

CA

1,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Cajon

Community Outreach Center
Reconstruction, Improvements, and Installation
Project

CA

1,000,000

Issa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Diego

Expanding Affordable Child
Care Facilities

CA

2,000,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego State University

Child Care Facility for
Former Foster Youth

CA

1,500,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Housing Commission

Linda Vista Affordable
Housing—Via Las
Cumbres Redevelopment

CA

2,000,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego State University

Child Care for Children
with Disabilities

CA

1,000,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego County Office of
Education

Linda Vista Innovation Center Support

CA

850,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Unified School
District

Mobile Washer and Dryer
Units for Homeless San
Diegans

CA

850,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Miguel Consolidated
Fire Protection District

San Miguel Aerial Apparatus

CA

500,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Cajon

El Cajon Emergency Operations Center Development and Construction

CA

250,000

Jacobs

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Diego

Safe Sleeping Pilot Program
Site Expansion

CA

1,200,000

Jacobs, Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Inside Safe Program—Acquisition and Capital
Improvements

CA

850,000

Kamlager-Dove

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00100

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Padilla

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1027

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Culver City

Culver City Crossroads
Community Connector—
Active Transportation Infrastructure Improvements

CA

1,000,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Blackwelder Community
Greenbelt

CA

200,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles Department of Military and
Veterans Affairs

Veteran Wellness Facility

CA

250,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Urban Awnings

CA

850,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Culver City

Jubilo Village Affordable
Housing Construction

CA

850,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Vermont Ave. and Manchester Ave.—Infrastructure Improvements

CA

500,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Broadway Sur: Transportation Safety Improvements and Community
Development

CA

250,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Pueblo Del Rio Housing
Units Climate Control
Upgrades

CA

250,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County

South LA Community Food
Hall Facility Redevelopment

CA

250,000

Kamlager-Dove

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Clara

Restoration of Emergency
Shelter and Transitional
Housing for Homeless
Veterans

CA

3,150,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Milpitas Unified School District

MUSD Workforce Development Center

CA

500,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fremont

Automall Pkwy Median
Project

CA

850,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Berryessa Union School
District

Berryessa Youth Center
Renovation and Improvements Project

CA

250,000

Khanna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South Lake Tahoe

Lake Tahoe Boulevard
Apartments

CA

1,000,000

Kiley

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mission Viejo

Oso Creek Trail Accessibility Improvement
Project

CA

500,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orange

Fire Station 3 Improvement
Project

CA

1,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County Fire Authority

Mission Viejo Fire Station
#9 Renovation

CA

1,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Laguna Hills

Citywide Intersection Safety
Enhancements

CA

1,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santiago Canyon College

Classroom Retrofitting

CA

1,000,000

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Marysville

Site Cleanup and Preparation

CA

3,500,000

LaMalfa

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southern Cascades Community Services District

Emergency Services Enhancement Project

CA

2,605,000

LaMalfa

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00101

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schiff

H20JAPT1

H

H1028

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Clemente

Mariposa Walkway and
Coastal Trail Improvement Project, San
Clemente, CA

CA

3,000,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vista

Vista’s New Navigation
Center Facility

CA

850,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vista

Emerald Drive Complete
Streets Project, Vista, CA

CA

2,000,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dana Point

Coast Highway Sidewalk
Improvements and
Streetscaping, Dana
Point, CA

CA

850,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Oceanside

Pier View Bridge, Oceanside, CA

CA

2,000,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Solana Beach

Glencrest Safe Routes to
School Infrastructure Improvements

CA

500,000

Levin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mountain View

Evelyn Avenue Affordable
Housing Redevelopment

CA

2,000,000

Liccardo

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Mateo

Mirada Road Resiliency
Project

CA

850,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Los Gatos

West Valley Mobile Navigation Center Van Acquisition and Upgrades

CA

200,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Jose

Seismic and Climate Resiliency Rental Unit Preservation

CA

2,000,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pacifica School District

Pacifica School District
Workforce Housing
Project

CA

2,000,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Palo Alto

Fire Station #4

CA

850,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Half Moon Bay

Eastside Parallel Trail, Segment 2

CA

250,000

Liccardo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palos Verdes Peninsula
Unified School District

Miraleste Intermediate
School Modernization
Project

CA

2,000,000

Lieu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles Housing
Department

Hotel to Homes Conversion

CA

850,000

Lieu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Redondo Beach

Affordable Housing Acquisition to Lease Project

CA

250,000

Lieu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of California, Los
Angeles

EV Buses Project

CA

250,000

Lieu

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Soledad

City of Soledad Streetscape
Enhancement Project

CA

250,000

Lofgren

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of King City

City of King City Downtown
Streetscape

CA

850,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Clara

Agricultural Resource Center Development

CA

850,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Benito County Office of
Education

Renewable Energy Infrastructure and Improvements

CA

850,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Monterey

Salinas Regional Soccer
Complex Expansion

CA

500,000

Lofgren

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00102

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Padilla, Schiff

Padilla

H20JAPT1

H

H

January 20, 2026

H1029

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hartnell Community College
District

Hartnell College Child Development Center Outdoor Learning Environment Renovation

CA

250,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gonzales

Dennis and Janice Caprara
Community Center Complex

CA

250,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Cruz, Department of Parks

Watsonville Veterans Hall

CA

1,200,000

Lofgren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sacramento

Sacramento Stitch Park
Riverfront Reconnection
Project

CA

3,150,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

California State University,
Sacramento

Downtown Campus Revitalization and Expansion

CA

2,000,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Sacramento

Mosaic Village Housing and
Community Development
Campus

CA

2,000,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Sacramento

Florin Safe Stay Community
Facility Project

CA

1,000,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cosumnes Community Services District

William Perry Schulze Fire
Training Center Improvements

CA

250,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of California,
Davis

UC Davis MIND Institute Intellectual/Developmental
Disability (IDD) Workforce Development
Project

CA

500,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sacramento

Wah Avenue Homeownership Housing Development

CA

250,000

Matsui

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Laguna Beach

South Laguna Beach Fire
Station Replacement

CA

850,000

Min

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Irvine

Center of Innovation and
Entrepreneurship Development and Construction

CA

1,000,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Orange

Newport Harbor Facility and
Infrastructure Renovations

CA

2,000,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Costa Mesa

Costa Mesa Senior Center
Renovation, Roof, and
HVAC Replacement

CA

250,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newport Beach

Balboa Branch Library and
Fire Station #1 Replacement

CA

850,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Golden West College

Facilities Reconstruction
and Improvements

CA

500,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Huntington Beach

Huntington Beach Navigation Center Renovation
and Upgrades

CA

850,000

Min

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of San
Francisco

Visitacion Valley Family
Center Improvements

CA

959,982

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Mateo

City of San Mateo Lakeshore Community Day
Care Center

CA

1,200,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South San Francisco

South San Francisco
Westborough Early Childhood Education Center

CA

850,000

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of San
Francisco

San Francisco Crocker
Amazon Playground—
Purple Playground
Project

CA

250,000

Mullin

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00103

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Padilla

H20JAPT1

H

H1030

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Barstow

Barstow Route 66 Main
Street Rehabilitation for
Tourism and Highway
Circulation

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Crestline Village Water District

Water Efficiency and Infrastructure Update

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Redlands

Public Safety Hall Construction

CA

1,000,000

Obernolte

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Jose

Yerba Buena Bridge Reconstruction

CA

2,000,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Jose

Guadalupe River Trail Construction and Expansion

CA

1,000,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Atascadero

Atascadero Police Station
Improvements Project

CA

850,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Seaside

San Pablo Bridge Project

CA

850,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paso Robles

Pine Street Affordable
Housing

CA

850,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Jose

Traffic and Road Safety
Improvements in South
San Jose

CA

500,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Capitola

Capitola Traffic Safety Improvements

CA

250,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Santa Clara

Martial Cottle Park Improvements Project

CA

250,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Cruz

Santa Cruz Wharf Resilience and Rehabilitation
Project

CA

3,150,000

Panetta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Department
of Homelessness and
Supportive Housing

Jerrold Commons Site and
Facility Upgrades

CA

2,000,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Municipal
Transportation Agency

San Francisco MTA Transit
Stop Lighting Infrastructure

CA

1,200,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Recreation
and Park Department

Blue Heron Boathouse Replacement and Expansion

CA

850,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Office of
Employment and Workforce Development

CityBuild Facility Acquisition, Development and
Improvements

CA

850,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Department
of Homelessness and
Supportive Housing

San Francisco SafeHouse
Facility Renovations

CA

850,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Department
of Disability and Aging
Services

Self-Help for the Elderly
Safe Passage Program—Vehicles Acquisition

CA

850,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Office of
Economic and Workforce
Development

Code Tenderloin’s Workforce
Facility Development and
Construction

CA

500,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Office of
Economic and Workforce
Development

Treasure Island Job Corps
Facility Modernization
and Redevelopment

CA

250,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Francisco Department
of Disability and Aging
Services

Home for Good—Housing
Development and Construction

CA

250,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Franciso Bay Area
Rapid Transit (BART)

BART LED Lighting Replacement

CA

250,000

Pelosi

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00104

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1031

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Francisco

772 Pacific Avenue Community and Housing Development Project

CA

250,000

Pelosi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Escondido

Downtown Escondido Economic Development
Project

CA

1,000,000

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Marcos

Mission Road Lighting Upgrades

CA

850,000

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Marcos

City of San Marcos Comprehensive Park Restroom Upgrades

CA

500,000

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Diego

La Jolla Streetscape

CA

850,000

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of San Diego

B Street and Broadway
Piers—Above Pier Infrastructure Repairs and
Upgrades

CA

250,000

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Fire
Department

Los Angeles County Fire
Department’s Pacoima
Warehouse Renovation

CA

968,000

Rivas

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles Mission College

Los Angeles Mission College’s Pacoima Center
Land Acquisition Project

CA

2,000,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles, Council
District 7

City of Los Angeles’s
Sylmar Fire Station
(FS31)

CA

850,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles, Council
District 6

City of Los Angeles’s
Pacoima Wash Bridges
Safety Mitigation

CA

850,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Parthenia Place Computer
Lab Renovation and
Tech Upgrade Project

CA

750,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles

Housing Authority of Los
Angeles’s San Fernando
Gardens Housing’s Energy Efficiency Project

CA

850,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles, Council
District 6

City of Los Angeles’ Wakefield Sidewalk Improvements

CA

250,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles, Council
District 6

City of Los Angeles’
Parthenia Place Median
Improvements

CA

250,000

Rivas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brawley

Main Street Rehabilitation
and Water Main Extension Project

CA

850,000

Ruiz

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Imperial

Community Regional Park
Project

CA

1,500,000

Ruiz

Schiff

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Desert Recreation District

Air Filtration Improvements
at Critical Community
Facilities in the
Coachella Valley

CA

850,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Coachella Valley Public
Cemetery District

Road Rehabilitation Project

CA

1,000,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Calexico

Heber Park Expansion
Project

CA

500,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Holtville

City of Holtville Public
Safety Building

CA

2,000,000

Ruiz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Mirada

City of La Mirada Neff Park
Infrastructure Improvements

CA

1,500,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Whittier

Broadband Infrastructure
Expansion

CA

250,000

Sánchez

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00105

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Padilla

H20JAPT1

H

H1032

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pico Rivera

Durfee Avenue Community
Center Development and
Construction

CA

850,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Walnut

Suzanne Park Improvements

CA

1,200,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Downey

Water Treatment Plant
North

CA

250,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norwalk

Holifield Park Parking Lot
Site Development and
Construction

CA

500,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montebello

City of Montebello Fire Department Brush Fire Station Development and
Construction

CA

1,000,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Walnut Valley Water District

Emergency Operations Center (EOC) Equipment Acquisition

CA

850,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Santa Fe Springs

River Parcel Passive Park
Redevelopment

CA

850,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Habra Heights

Park and Gymnasium Improvements, Renovations, and Equipment

CA

250,000

Sánchez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Department of Military and
Veterans Affairs

The West Los Angeles VA
Modular Home Construction

CA

850,000

Sherman

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles Pierce College

The Community Engagement & Enrichment Center at LA Pierce College

CA

250,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles City Fire Department

Los Angeles Fire Department Station Renovations

CA

2,000,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Southwest Valley Park Improvements

CA

850,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles Department of Economic
Opportunity

Labor Community Services
Food Bank Equipment
and Facility Upgrades

CA

1,200,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Grancell Village Affordable
Senior Housing Development and Construction

CA

850,000

Sherman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Oakland

Brooklyn Basin Blight Removal and Shoreline Improvements

CA

250,000

Simon

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Oakland

Capital Improvements for
Core Service Providers

CA

250,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Emeryville

40th Street Multimodal Infrastructure Improvements

CA

500,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Berkeley

East Bay Regional Fire
Training Facility

CA

850,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Peralta Community College
District

Peralta Community College
District (PCCD) Manufacturing and Fabrication Pathway (FabLab)

CA

250,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albany

East Bay Regional Fire
Training Center Development and Construction

CA

250,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Berkeley

Adeline Complete Street
and Ashby BART Transit
Plaza

CA

850,000

Simon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Union City

Fire Equipment Enhancements

CA

850,000

Swalwell

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00106

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schiff

Padilla, Schiff

Padilla

H20JAPT1

H

H

H

January 20, 2026

H1033

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Union City

Safer Streets with Enhanced Lighting Replacements

CA

250,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Livermore

Open Heart Food Bank Expansion

CA

226,026

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Livermore

Aviation and Manufacturing
Workforce Igniter

CA

1,200,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pleasanton

West Las Positas
Multimodal Improvement
Project

CA

250,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Alameda County Community
Development Agency

Improved Broadband Access in Downtown Castro
Valley

CA

500,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dublin

Sunflower Hill at Grace
Pointe

CA

2,000,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Alameda County Community
Development Agency

Sunol Downtown Revitalization Plan Implementation

CA

500,000

Swalwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Perris

Fire Safety Project

CA

850,000

Takano

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Riverside

Northside Agriculture Innovation Center

CA

250,000

Takano

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Riverside Community College District

Riverside Community College District Community
Sites

CA

500,000

Takano

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Moreno Valley

Business and Employment
Resource Center Expansion

CA

850,000

Takano

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vacaville

Solano-Napa Habitat for
Humanity Harmony Village Affordable Housing

CA

250,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sonoma County Community
Development Commission

Tierra de Rosas Public
Plaza, Park Furnishings
and Equipment

CA

250,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Yountville

Yountville Resiliency

CA

250,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winters Joint Unified School
District

Winters JUSD Facility Modernization and Equipment

CA

850,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habematolel Pomo of Upper
Lake

Habematolel Pomo of Upper
Lake Community Center

CA

3,150,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of American Canyon

Napa River Ecology Center
Project

CA

2,000,000

Thompson (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Eastvale

Eastvale Library & Innovation Center

CA

3,100,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fontana

Cypress Grove Supportive
Housing

CA

2,000,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chino

Chino Valley Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Center

CA

2,000,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ontario

City of Ontario Vista Verde
II

CA

1,000,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Bernardino

County of San Bernardino
Crisis Response Unit Rehabilitation

CA

1,100,000

Torres (CA)

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00107

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schiff

H20JAPT1

H

H1034

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montclair

City of Montclair Fire Department Tractor Tiller
Truck Acquisition

CA

850,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ontario

City of Ontario ‘‘The Hub
on Holt’’ Facility Construction and Revitalization

CA

1,000,000

Torres (CA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Palma

City of La Palma—Public
Safety Center

CA

850,000

Tran

Padilla

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fountain Valley

City of Fountain Valley Fire
Station 1

CA

2,000,000

Tran

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County Housing Finance Trust

Orange County Housing Finance Trust Construction
of Affordable Housing
Units

CA

250,000

Tran

Schiff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Westminster

Westminster Community
Service and Senior Center Building Renovations

CA

1,000,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County Mosquito &
Vector Control District

Orange County Mosquito &
Vector Control District
Infrastructure Improvements

CA

500,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Garden Grove

City of Garden Grove—Fire
Station 84 Retrofits

CA

1,000,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Buena Park Library District

Buena Park Library District—Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing
Modernization

CA

850,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Placentia

City of Placentia—Old
Town Infrastructure Improvements

CA

250,000

Tran

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
County of Kern

Bakersfield Senior Center
Affordable Housing &
Facility Construction

CA

7,575,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Delano

Water Plant No. 6 Blending
Tank Project

CA

8,145,000

Valadao

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Association of
Governments

San Ysidro Transit Center
Improvements

CA

3,150,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chula Vista

Palomar Motel—Permanent
Supportive Housing

CA

1,000,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of National City

El Toyon Multipurpose Community Center

CA

850,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bonita Sunnyside Fire Protection District

New Bonita Fire Engine

CA

850,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southwestern Community
College District

Sustainable Infrastructure
at Southwestern College

CA

850,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego County Water
Authority

Moosa Canyon Pipeline
Project

CA

250,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Unified Port District

Marina Way Road Realignment

CA

1,200,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Diego Community College District

Utility and Water Improvements at San Diego College of Continuing Education—Phase 2

CA

500,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of San Diego

Tijuana River Revitalization

CA

1,000,000

Vargas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Los Angeles
(HACLA)

HACLA Digital Equity & Infrastructure Renewal for
South LA Public Housing

CA

3,150,000

Waters

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00108

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1035

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gardena

Mas Fukai Park Renovation
Project

CA

1,000,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hawthorne

Hawthorne Civic Park Development and Construction

CA

850,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Torrance

Torrance Community Parks
Accessibility Improvements

CA

850,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Compton Community College

Compton College Facilities
Improvements

CA

1,200,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Compton

Compton Public Works Corp
Yard Rehabilitation

CA

250,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Los Angeles

Algin Sutton Restroom Replacement Project

CA

500,000

Waters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles County Fire
Department

Los Angeles County Fire
Station 81 Replacement

CA

1,000,000

Whitesides

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santa Clarita Community
College District, College
of the Canyons

Renovations and Expansion
for Community College
Student Basic Needs
Center

CA

850,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lancaster

National Soccer Center
Safety Lighting Upgrades

CA

850,000

Whitesides

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Cerrito

Community HousingWorks
Development

CA

3,000,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Los Angeles House of Ruth

Sister Cedars Senior Housing

CA

815,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Diego

San Diego Homeless Shelter

CA

1,000,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The People Concern

The Village Renovation
Project

CA

1,000,000

Padilla

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Del Norte

Veterans Memorial Hall Improvements Project

CA

1,500,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Salinas

Salinas Firefighter Training
Tower Facility

CA

2,000,000

Padilla, Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Los Angeles Department of Parks and
Recreation

Charles White Park Community Resilience Project

CA

1,682,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Merced Community College
District

Project FIRE (First-Responder Instruction and
Regional Education)
Training Facility

CA

1,500,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of Kern
County

Life & Workforce Readiness
Center

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yosemite Community College District

Construction of a Regional
Fire Training Center

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fresno Housing

Downtown Fresno Affordable Housing Development

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montclair

Montclair Community Park

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Larkin Street Youth Services

Capital Improvements to
Benefit Youth Experiencing Homelessness

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00109

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schiff

H20JAPT1

H

H1036

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Neighborhood Housing
Services of Los Angeles
County

Wildfire Relief and Home
Repair

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jurupa Valley

School of Nursing Building

CA

1,000,000

Schiff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Aurora

Aurora Fire Rescue Fire Apparatus Acquisition

CO

850,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arapahoe County

High Line Canal Safety and
Accessibility Improvements

CO

850,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Aurora

Fire Flashover Simulator
Acquisition

CO

250,000

Crow

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arapahoe County

Arapahoe County Supportive
Housing

CO

1,000,000

Crow

Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arapahoe County School
District #6

LPS Elementary Schools
Playground and Facilities
Upgrades

CO

1,000,000

Crow

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community College of Aurora

CCA Center for Applied
Science and Technology—Expanding Critical Workforce Training
Equipment Acquisition

CO

919,000

Crow

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Adams Arapahoe School
District 28J

APS Sixth Avenue Elementary School Renovation
and Expansion

CO

469,000

Crow

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Adams Arapahoe School
District 28J

Aurora Public Schools Sable
Child Development Center Revitalization and
Expansion

CO

851,000

Crow

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Denver

Central Utility Plant Critical
Infrastructure

CO

1,200,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Denver

Shelter for People Experiencing Homelessness

CO

2,000,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Denver

Electrification, Energy Efficiency, and Resiliency
Improvements

CO

1,000,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Denver

Energy Efficiency Improvements at Public Facilities

CO

850,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Colorado Coalition for
the Homeless

Renaissance at Civic Center Apartments

CO

5,000,000

DeGette

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City and County of Denver, CO

655 Broadway Windows Replacements

CO

2,000,000

DeGette

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community College of Denver

Lower Downtown Denver
Campus Expansion Development

CO

850,000

DeGette

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Thornton

Northstar Neighborhood Mobility Improvements

CO

1,000,000

Evans (CO)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Aims Community College

Oil and Gas Demonstration
Wellhead Project

CO

1,197,000

Evans (CO)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mead

Weld County Road 7 Paving
Project—Mead to Berthoud

CO

1,000,000

Evans (CO)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Westminster Public Schools

Expanding Quantum Workforce by Creating Advanced Manufacturing
Pathways

CO

1,000,000

Evans (CO)

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00110

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Bennet

Bennet

Bennet

H20JAPT1

H

H

H

January 20, 2026

H1037

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Colorado State University

Agricultural Facility Improvements

CO

1,000,000

Hurd

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Colorado Northwestern
Community College

Rangely Airport Terminal
Hangar/Lab Renovation

CO

643,000

Hurd

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Upper Pine River Special
Fire District

Upper Pine River Community Room Construction

CO

1,000,000

Hurd

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Patrick A. Lucero Public Library

Renovations and Expansion

CO

500,000

Hurd

Bennet

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Summit County Sheriff’s
Office

Pine Cove Ranger Station
Facility Development and
Construction

CO

1,129,322

Neguse

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Boulder

East Boulder Community
Center Improvements

CO

1,000,000

Neguse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Colorado Mountain College

Colorado Mountain College
Trades Center, CO

CO

250,000

Neguse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Larimer County Sheriff’s
Office

Larimer County Sheriff’s
Office Emergency Operations Center, CO

CO

850,000

Neguse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lakewood

The Commons at Emory Facility Expansion

CO

1,500,000

Pettersen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Foothills Regional Housing

Senior Affordable Housing—Demolition, Development and Construction

CO

850,000

Pettersen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Eagle County Government

Housing Energy Independence Project

CO

585,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NeighborWorks Southern
Colorado

Pikes Peak Park Affordable
Homeownership Project

CO

3,743,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Steamboat Springs

Childcare and Workforce
Housing Site Work
Project

CO

1,300,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Saguache County

Energy Independence
Project

CO

1,041,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Paradox Community Trust

Ouray County Affordable
Housing Neighborhood

CO

1,462,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harrison School District 2

Bricker Community Schoolyard Project

CO

1,500,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northwest Colorado Innovation Center

Northwest Colorado Innovation Center Building

CO

1,050,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Urban Peak

Housing for Youth Experiencing Homelessness

CO

3,078,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

La Puente Home, Inc.

PALs Childcare Facility

CO

750,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Food Bank of the Rockies

Food Bank Delivery Vehicles
and Equipment

CO

920,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Weld Food Bank

Food Rescue and Distribution Project

CO

400,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dream Centers of Colorado
Springs

Dream Centers Early Care
and Education Center

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00111

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

H20JAPT1

H

H1038

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Fraser

St. Louis Landing Community Housing and Early
Childhood Education
Center

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

La Plata Economic Development Alliance

Bayfield Early Childcare
Center

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

CARE Communities

Heartside Hill Early Childhood Education & Community Center

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Carbondale

Carbondale Affordable
Housing

CO

2,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

We Fortify

Colorado Springs Affordable
Housing for Teachers

CO

1,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

TEENS, Inc.

Nederland Early Childhood
Education Center

CO

1,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Commún Denver Inc.

Loretto Heights Community
Center

CO

1,000,000

Bennet,
Hickenlooper

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stonington

Pawcatuck Village Community Park

CT

850,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New London

New London Addition to
Early Childhood Center
at B.P. Mission

CT

850,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of Connecticut Department of Housing

Colchester Country Place
Housing Upgrades

CT

2,000,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Vernon

Rehabilitation of the Rockville Public Library

CT

1,200,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Thompson

Town of Thompson Blighted
Property Reuse for Economic Development

CT

732,007

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Vernon

Town of Vernon Daniel’s
Mill Remediation and
Renovation

CT

250,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hebron

Hebron Church Street Housing Rehabilitation

CT

250,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norwich

Public Dock Replacement
at Howard Brown Park

CT

600,000

Courtney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New Haven

Westville Manor Redevelopment

CT

2,000,000

DeLauro

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Naugatuck

Borough of Naugatuck
Connectivity & Transit
Oriented Development
Project—Phase II Pedestrian Bridge

CT

2,500,000

DeLauro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Woodmont

Borough of Woodmont—
Stormwater Outlet Structure

CT

750,000

DeLauro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southern Connecticut State
University

The Hive at Southern: Community-Based Innovation, Sustainability, and
Emerging Technologies

CT

2,254,329

DeLauro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Southbury

Southbury Public Library
Restoration and Infrastructure Improvements

CT

1,500,000

Hayes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Connecticut State
University

Central Connecticut Workforce and Innovation
Hub

CT

850,000

Hayes

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00112

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Blumenthal, Murphy

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1039

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Thomaston

Seth Thomas Park Revitalization

CT

850,000

Hayes

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Stamford

Glenbrook Community Center Rehabilitation and
Upgrades

CT

250,000

Himes

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Stamford d/b/a
Charter Oak Communities

Oak Park Phase 2

CT

2,000,000

Himes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Park City Communities

Beardsley Street Housing
Reconstruction and Development

CT

1,100,000

Himes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Ridgefield

Venus Building Complex
Parking Lot & Pedestrian
Improvements

CT

1,000,000

Himes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bridgeport

Bridgeport Police Headquarters Design

CT

850,000

Himes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of East Hartford Fire
Department

Town of East Hartford Fire
Station 2

CT

850,000

Larson

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bristol Fire and Police Department

Bristol Fire and Police Department CPAT and
ASHER Training Facility

CT

3,150,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of East Hartford

Hockanum Linear Park Trail
Improvements

CT

2,000,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of East Hartford

Infrastructure Improvements to Downtown
Main and Church Corners/Center Cemetery
National Historic Districts

CT

2,000,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Goodwin University Educational Services (GUES)

Goodwin University CTRA
Magnet Middle School
Building Construction

CT

250,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hartford

City of Hartford Road
Phase of Hartline Project

CT

1,200,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hartford

Hartford Public Library
(HPL) Downtown Location
Restoration and Renovation

CT

500,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hartland

Inclusive Playground Development and Construction

CT

250,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hartford Department
of Public Works

North Main Street Drainage
Improvements

CT

250,000

Larson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Britain Housing Authority

Redevelopment of Public
Housing

CT

4,325,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mercy Learning Center of
Bridgeport, Inc.

HVAC System Replacement

CT

877,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Curtis Home

Campus Renovation

CT

1,100,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Health Resources

Affordable Supportive Housing

CT

2,740,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

HOPE Partnership

Construction of the William
F. Palmer Site

CT

1,406,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Norwalk

Construction of Affordable
Housing

CT

1,020,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00113

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Blumenthal, Murphy

Blumenthal, Murphy

H20JAPT1

H

H

H1040

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Goshen Housing Trust, Inc.

Accessible Affordable Housing

CT

550,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Housing Collective

Fairfield County Coordinated Access Network
Housing Stability Program

CT

600,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Juan Center, Inc.

Construction of El Pocito
Dulce Residences

CT

1,050,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

H.O.P.E., Inc.

Affordable Housing Renovations

CT

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Beulah Land Development
Corporation

Dixwell Redevelopment Affordable Housing Initiative

CT

2,638,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Forge City Works

Culinary Training Center

CT

900,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ledge Light Health District

The Place for CommUNITY
Wellbeing

CT

675,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

American Legion Post 17

Facility Renovations

CT

400,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Warren Affordable Housing
Corporation

Affordable Housing

CT

800,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

National Veterans Council
for Legal Redress Inc.

Veterans Living Community
Initiative

CT

1,862,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mercy Housing and Shelter
Corporation

Facility Improvements

CT

1,500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Cornerstone Foundation, Inc.

Facility Renovations

CT

1,332,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Way of Greater New
Haven

State & Chapel Affordable
Housing

CT

1,500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northeastern Connecticut
Community Development
Corporation

Renovations to Senior LowIncome Housing Facility

CT

484,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Britain Museum of
American Art

Facilities Reinvestment

CT

2,611,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rivera Memorial Foundation, Inc.

Rehabilitation Project

CT

600,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Thames Valley Council for
Community Action Inc.

Expansion of Early Childhood Education Center
in New London

CT

450,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Keeping North Stonington
Affordable, Inc.

Main Street Housing

CT

500,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Neighborhood Housing
Services of Waterbury
DBA NEST

Property Acquisition

CT

250,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Vincent de Paul Middletown, Inc.

Construction of St. Vincent’s Commons

CT

1,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hilliard-Jones-Cookson
American Legion Post 66

Facility Renovations

CT

1,000,000

Blumenthal, Murphy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

District of Columbia

Lederer Gardens Facility
Improvements

DC

850,000

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00114

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Norton

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1041

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

District of Columbia

Duke Ellington Park

DC

850,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

District of Columbia

Riggs & South Dakota Triangle Park Upgrades

DC

600,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

District of Columbia

Carver Langston Park Upgrades

DC

500,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of the District of
Columbia

University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) Research Facility Infrastructure Upgrades

DC

2,000,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of the District of
Columbia

University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) Firebird
Farm Infrastructure Upgrades

DC

1,200,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of the District of
Columbia

University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) Food
Hubs Infrastructure Upgrades

DC

2,000,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of the District of
Columbia

University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) Aviation
Maintenance Facility Infrastructure Upgrades

DC

1,000,000

Norton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Magnolia

Town of Magnolia Water
Storage Tower Infrastructure Improvements

DE

1,200,000

McBride

Blunt Rochester

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of Delaware Criminal
Justice Council

Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of Delaware’s
Family Justice Centers

DE

2,600,000

McBride

Blunt Rochester

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Castle County Vocational Technical School
District

Workforce Development at
the Delaware Skills Center and New Castle
County Vo-Tech Adult
Education Division Facility Acquisition and Renovations

DE

1,000,000

McBride

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Capital City Transformation
Alliance, Inc.

Downtown Redevelopment
Project

DE

500,000

Blunt Rochester

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Children’s Beach House

Capital Improvements

DE

500,000

Blunt Rochester

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

REACH Riverside Development Corporation

Affordable Housing Development

DE

5,284,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West End Neighborhood
House, Inc.

Neighborhood and Housing
Development

DE

3,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Interfaith Community Housing of Delaware, Inc.

Affordable Housing Development and Revitalization

DE

2,500,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Delaware Affordable Housing Group, Inc.

Affordable Housing Renovation and Development

DE

2,500,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Children And Families First
Delaware, Inc.

Seaford House Renovation
and Expansion

DE

632,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Police Athletic League of
Wilmington

Wilmington Education Resource Center

DE

3,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Delaware HIV Services, Inc.

Delaware Housing Assistance Program

DE

300,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Anthony’s Housing for
the Elderly, Corp.

Capital Improvements

DE

600,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Castle County

New Castle County Hope
Center Capital Improvements

DE

2,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00115

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

H1042

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Todmorden Foundation

Affordable Housing Development and Preservation

DE

2,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Latin American Community
Center

Early Learning Center

DE

1,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
New Castle County

Empowerment through Affordable Housing

DE

1,000,000

Blunt Rochester,
Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wilmington Neighborhood
Land Bank

Affordable Housing Acquisition and Rehabilitation

DE

500,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Better Homes of Seaford

Affordable Housing Development

DE

716,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Friendship House, Inc.

Housing Development and
Renovations

DE

1,585,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Green Beret Project

Capital Improvements and
Expansion

DE

300,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Delaware

Capital Improvements

DE

1,915,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Education
Building Corporation

Capital Improvements

DE

5,000,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Milford Housing Development Corporation

Affordable Housing Development

DE

750,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Delaware Habitat
for Humanity, Inc.

Affordable Housing in Central Delaware

DE

1,008,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NeighborGood Partners

Affordable Housing Development

DE

2,000,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ministry of Caring, Inc.

Affordable Housing Development and Renovations

DE

2,000,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sussex County Habitat for
Humanity

Southern Delaware Affordable Housing Development

DE

1,000,000

Coons

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

School District of Hernando
County, Florida

Hernando County Incubation Center

FL

1,000,000

Bilirakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pasco County

Affordable Supportive Housing for Seniors

FL

4,000,000

Bilirakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of South Florida

Center for Entrepreneurship

FL

3,000,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Manatee County

Gateway Greenway Rails to
Trails

FL

1,500,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Manatee County

Veterans Service Center

FL

2,800,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bradenton

Stormwater Facilities

FL

3,000,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Holmes Beach

Spine Flood Improvements

FL

1,500,000

Buchanan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of St. Petersburg

Ed White Senior Housing
Redevelopment

FL

3,150,000

Castor

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00116

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1043

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Petersburg College
(grants accepted under
‘‘Board of Trustees of St.
Petersburg College’’)

SMART Tech Industry 4.0
Lab

FL

850,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tampa Housing Authority

Robles Park Village Critical
Infrastructure Upgrades

FL

1,200,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hillsborough Community
College

Hillsborough Community
College Training Center
Facility

FL

250,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hillsborough County Public
Schools

HCPS Family Community
Center Expansion and
Equipment

FL

2,000,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hillsborough County Public
Schools

Chamberlain High School
Technical Training Center Development and
Construction

FL

250,000

Castor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of South Florida

Veterans, Military Families,
and First Responder
Services Complex

FL

3,000,000

Castor, Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Collier County

Veterans Community Center

FL

9,000,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Everglades City

Everglades City Community
Center

FL

7,200,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Miami Lakes

Miami Lakes Big Cypress
Drainage Improvements

FL

973,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hialeah

City of Hialeah Southeast
Stormwater Improvements

FL

4,900,000

Diaz-Balart

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Fort Myers Beach

Stormwater and Utilities
Improvements

FL

3,000,000

Donalds

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bonita Springs

Rosemary Drive Stormwater
Drainage and Pedestrian
Safety Project

FL

2,000,000

Donalds

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Panama City-Bay County
Airport and Industrial
District

Northwest Florida Beaches
International (ECP)—
North Access Road

FL

2,000,000

Dunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tallahassee

Tallahassee International
Airport (TLH) Improvements

FL

2,850,000

Dunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Panama City Beach

Potable Water Redundancy
Improvements—Phase 2

FL

2,000,000

Dunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Panama City

Area Q/R–1: Critical Infrastructure Improvements

FL

2,000,000

Dunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Delray Beach

Palm Beach County, Critical Infrastructure Improvements

FL

1,450,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Palm Beach

Fern Street Extension and
Rail Safety Project

FL

2,000,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake Worth Beach Community Redevelopment
Agency

Lake Worth Beach Affordable Housing Program

FL

850,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Palm Beach

Dreher Park Water Quality
and Habitat Restoration

FL

1,000,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palm Beach State College

Palm Beach State College
Quantum Computing
Center Facility Development and Construction

FL

2,050,000

Frankel

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bowling Green

Wastewater Treatment Facility Advanced Wastewater Treatment Improvements

FL

4,987,000

Franklin

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00117

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1044

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Moore Haven

Moore Haven Water Plant
Expansion and Improvements

FL

2,000,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wauchula

Wastewater Improvements

FL

1,000,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hendry County

Hendry Country CR 78
Roadway Improvements

FL

1,000,000

Franklin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orlando

Women and Families Homeless Shelter Redevelopment and Construction

FL

3,000,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Winter Park

Tuscany at Aloma Interior
Renovation

FL

1,260,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County, Florida

IDignity Facility Construction

FL

750,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Orlando

Roof Replacements at West
Oaks Apartments

FL

1,200,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Orlando

Villas at Carver Park Elevator and Shower Improvements Project

FL

974,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County, Florida

Orange County Innovation
Center in Pine Hills
Project

FL

850,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orlando, Florida

Lake Eola Park Improvements Project

FL

850,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Orlando

Griffin Park Apartments Redevelopment

FL

850,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Valencia College West
Campus

West Campus Building 7
Roof Replacement

FL

250,000

Frost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County

Orange County Green
PLACE Environmentally
Sensitive Lands Acquisition Project

FL

850,000

Frost, Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monroe County School District

Historic Reynolds School
Renovation Project

FL

3,000,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami-Dade County

Housing and Community
Development’s Sweetwater Housing Development Project

FL

6,000,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Homestead

Pump Station 11 Upgrades

FL

2,200,000

Gimenez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Indian River County

Fellsmere Public Library
and Community Resource Center—Public
Facilities Development

FL

2,000,000

Haridopolos

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lakeland

Fire Station 8 Construction

FL

984,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tampa

City of Tampa Fire Station
#24

FL

3,000,000

Lee (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Petersburg College

Lab Construction

FL

1,000,000

Luna

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palm Beach County

Peanut Island Coast Guard
Facility and Kennedy
Presidential Bunker Restoration

FL

1,500,000

Mast

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Indian River State College

Veterans Center Expansion

FL

1,800,000

Mast

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00118

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1045

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Boca Raton

Jeffrey Street Highway
Grade Crossing Project

FL

2,000,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Parkland

Park Improvements for
Parkland

FL

1,500,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fort Lauderdale

Las Olas Corridor Improvements Project

FL

1,200,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palm Beach County

Burt Aaronson South County Regional Park Improvements

FL

850,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Coral Springs

Everglades Memorial Loop
Phase 2

FL

800,000

Moskowitz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Escambia County

South Navy Boulevard Infrastructure Improvement

FL

3,000,000

Patronis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jacksonville Beach

13th Avenue South Access
Improvements

FL

875,000

Rutherford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kids Hope Alliance

Youth Crisis Center Youth
Multi-Purpose Recreation
Center

FL

534,000

Rutherford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Miami

Senior Activity Center

FL

1,000,000

Salazar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miami

Auburndale Flood Improvements

FL

5,000,000

Salazar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Osceola County

Buenaventura Lakes
Stormwater Project

FL

2,000,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orlando, Florida

Narcoossee Road and Vista
Lake Stormwater Improvements

FL

2,000,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kissimmee

Columbia Avenue Complete
Street Improvements and
Revitalization

FL

1,200,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Belle Isle

Belle Isle Floodwater Mitigation Project

FL

850,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Polk County, Florida

Poinciana Children and Pedestrian Safety Project

FL

850,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tohopekaliga Water Authority

Poinciana Village Water
Main Replacement
Project

FL

250,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Valencia College Osceola
Campus

Valencia College Outdoor
Learning Project

FL

500,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edgewood

Edgewood Pedestrian and
ADA Safety Sidewalk
Project

FL

850,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Osceola County

Oakwood Senior Housing
Construction

FL

850,000

Soto

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami-Dade County

Miami-Dade County Saving
Rosewood

FL

2,000,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fort Lauderdale

City of Fort Lauderdale
Public Safety Complex

FL

1,000,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Broward College

Broward College: Aviation
Training Center Remodel
and Expansion

FL

1,000,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00119

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1046

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miramar

Pembroke Road Expansion
and Streetscaping

FL

1,050,000

Wasserman
Schultz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Winter Garden

Lake Apopka Shoreline Restoration Project Phase 1

FL

3,000,000

Webster

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miramar

Miramar Youth Center

FL

850,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miami

Liberty Square Launchpad:
Small Business Incubator

FL

850,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami-Dade County Homeless Trust

Mia Casa Senior Housing
Expansion

FL

250,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Miami Beach

City of Miami Beach Fire
Station #1 Development
and Construction

FL

250,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami-Dade County Public
Schools

Parkway Educational Complex Upgrades

FL

1,000,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Miami Dade College

Dyer Federal Courthouse
Revitalization for Education Facilities

FL

850,000

Wilson (FL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Americus

Downtown Americus
Streetscape Project

GA

1,700,000

Bishop

Warnock

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Macon County

Macon County Multipurpose
Facility Development,
Construction and Equipment

GA

1,000,000

Bishop

Warnock

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albany

Albany Medical District
Housing

GA

1,129,036

Bishop

Warnock

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plains

City of Plains Streetscaping
and Public Facilities Upgrades

GA

302,000

Bishop

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Crawford County

Crawford County Youth
Center

GA

1,000,000

Bishop

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Whigham

Designing Future-Ready
Sewage Infrastructure
for a Sustainable Community

GA

1,000,000

Bishop

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Savannah-Georgia Convention Center Authority

Riverwalk Renovation and
Critical Infrastructure
Improvements Project

GA

4,200,000

Carter (GA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Murray County

Sidewalk Construction

GA

1,000,000

Greene (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cedartown

Davis Road Widening

GA

1,000,000

Greene (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of West Georgia

Love Valley Stormwater
Pipe Replacement

GA

638,000

Jack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Thomaston

Pedestrian Safety Downtown Redesign Project

GA

3,000,000

Jack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pike County Parks and
Recreation Authority

Infrastructure Improvements

GA

1,900,000

Jack

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tucker, Georgia

Greenway Connector Project
Development and Acquisition

GA

850,000

Johnson (GA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Stone Mountain

City of Stone Mountain
Medlock Park Improvements

GA

1,000,000

Johnson (GA)

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00120

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Warnock

Warnock

H20JAPT1

H

H

H

January 20, 2026

H1047

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks and
Cultural Affairs

Avondale Dunaire Soccer
Field

GA

1,985,160

Johnson (GA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metro Atlanta Rapid Transit

MARTA Rail & Bus Facilities Safety and Security
Upgrades

GA

400,000

Johnson (GA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brookhaven, Georgia

Ashford Forest Preserve Facilities & Restoration

GA

560,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks &
Cultural Affairs

Arabia Mountain Bridge Improvements

GA

349,475

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks and
Cultural Affairs

County Line Park Improvements Phase II

GA

250,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks and
Cultural Affairs

Rowland Park Construction

GA

1,200,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Department
of Recreation, Parks and
Cultural Affairs

Wade Walker Park Improvements

GA

850,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DeKalb County Government

Development, Construction,
Furnishings and Equipment for Service Center
for Children Impacted by
Domestic Violence

GA

250,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gwinnett County

Gwinnett County Loop Trail
Segments 3 and 4

GA

850,000

Johnson (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cumberland Community
Improvement District

New Day Palisades Phase 2
Funding

GA

1,000,000

Loudermilk

Ossoff, Warnock

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mableton

Mableton Economic Development Project - Acquisition, Remediation, and
Blight Removal

GA

250,000

McBath

Warnock

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Douglasville

Fowler Field Improvements

GA

250,000

McBath

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austell

Austell Recreation Center
Development and Construction

GA

3,150,000

McBath

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jonesboro

City of Jonesboro Pedestrian Improvements
Project

GA

3,028,359

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Newton County Water and
Sewage Authority

Newton County Salem Road
Utility Relocation Project

GA

850,000

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Henry County Government

Henry County Panola Road
Resurfacing

GA

1,200,000

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockdale County

Rockdale River Trail Improvements

GA

500,000

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockdale County

Rockdale Veteran Transportation Program Vehicle
Acquisition

GA

165,200

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gwinnett County

Gwinnett County Harvest
Gwinnett Mobile Kitchen
Vehicle Acquisition

GA

250,000

Scott (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clayton County Government

Small Business Incubator
Facility in Clayton County, GA

GA

1,200,000

Williams (GA)

Ossoff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlanta Public Schools

Building Two New Schoolyards in the Atlanta
Area

GA

700,000

Williams (GA)

Ossoff, Warnock

H/S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00121

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Ossoff, Warnock

H20JAPT1

H

H1048

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Atlanta

Food Ecosystem—Farms
and Gardens Development and Expansion

GA

850,000

Williams (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Atlanta

Thomasville Heights Apartments Green Infrastructure

GA

2,000,000

Williams (GA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County

Howard Park and Community Center Expansion

GA

3,491,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Hall County

New Homes Construction in
Hall County

GA

1,005,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Atlanta

Bowen Homes Chivers
Street Plaza & Community Transformation

GA

1,500,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Salvation Army of Gainesville

Homeless Resource Center
Upgrades

GA

1,800,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fulton County Government

Senior Centers Modernization

GA

2,015,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Valdosta

Burn Building Training Facility

GA

845,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ser Familia

A Place for Familia: Renovations to Expand Programming

GA

1,894,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baldwin County

Affordable Housing Development

GA

1,312,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chickamauga

Historic Downtown Chickamauga Blight Remediation

GA

1,450,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockdale County Board of
Commissioners

Senior Center Satellite
Project

GA

1,900,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hancock County Board of
Commissioners

Recreational Park Renovation

GA

1,750,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlanta Braves Foundation

Hank Aaron Academy at
Southside Park

GA

1,000,000

Ossoff

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cobb & Douglas Public
Health

South Cobb Integrated
Health Campus

GA

3,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlanta Technical College
Foundation, Inc.

Center for Transportation
and Logistics

GA

1,500,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Augusta/CSRA Habitat for
Humanity

Building Affordable Homes
in Turpin Hill

GA

1,850,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Metropolitan Atlanta, Inc.

Upgrading YMCA Facilities

GA

1,039,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chatham County

East Savannah Early Childhood Learning Center

GA

1,678,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Georgia College and State
University

GCSU Bobcat Business Incubator: Library Renovation

GA

360,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of LaGrange

Ladder Truck for LaGrange
Fire Department

GA

1,150,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity North
Central Georgia

Affordable Homes in the
City of Holly Springs

GA

830,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00122

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1049

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Butler Street Community
Development Corporation, Inc.

John Lewis Memorial Park

GA

2,000,000

Ossoff, Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Columbus Housing Initiative, Inc.

Newman’s Crossing

GA

1,800,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Savannah

Housing Acquisition Initiative

GA

1,500,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Club of Baldwin and Jones Counties,
Inc.

Facility Revitalization

GA

100,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Stephen Siller Tunnel to
Towers Foundation

Atlanta Veterans Village

GA

1,500,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

MicroLife Institute, Inc.

Lyons Affordable Workforce
Housing

GA

1,232,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chatham County

Chatham County Workforce
Housing

GA

1,120,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Valdosta-Lowndes County
Habitat for Humanity,
Inc.

Building Bridges to Affordable Housing

GA

1,500,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rainbow Village, Inc.

Rainbow Village Phase II

GA

1,100,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlanta Land Trust, Inc.

Expanding Affordable
Homeownership and Access to Economic Development

GA

1,000,000

Warnock

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Honolulu

Waikiki Vista Redevelopment Project—Shelter
and Housing Development and Construction

HI

1,000,000

Case

Schatz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Department of Land and
Natural Resources

Hawaii Nature Center Facility Upgrades and Expansion

HI

250,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kalihi Waena Elementary
School

Construction of a SingleSpan Bridge for the
Kalihi Elementary School
Project

HI

850,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Highlands Intermediate
School

Enhancement of Highlands
Intermediate School’s
Media Center Infrastructure

HI

300,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Honolulu

Safe Harbor Support for
Housing Survivors of Domestic Violence Project
Housing Acquisition

HI

850,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hawaii Broadband Office

Broadband Infrastructure
Development

HI

250,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hawaii Department of
Transportation

Aloha Tower Repair

HI

2,000,000

Case

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hawaii Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism

Tropical AgTech Center
Project—Facilities and
Equipment

HI

250,000

Tokuda

Hirono

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kauai County Housing
Agency

Lima Ola Affordable Housing Project

HI

3,150,000

Tokuda

Hirono, Schatz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Maui

Maluaka Affordable Rental
Housing Development
and Construction

HI

250,000

Tokuda

Hirono, Schatz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Kauai

Kilauea Town Expansion
Project

HI

2,000,000

Tokuda

Hirono, Schatz

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Maui

Lanai Affordable Housing
Project

HI

1,200,000

Tokuda

Schatz

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00123

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1050

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palama Settlement

Palama Settlement Revitalization Project

HI

3,000,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hawaii Foodbank, Inc.

Hawaii Foodbank Waipahu
Facility

HI

1,600,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Child and Family Service

Maui Family Strengthening
and Resilience Center

HI

5,000,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dynamic Community Solutions

Pu’uhonua O Wai’anae Village Infrastructure

HI

1,987,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Girl Scouts of Hawaii

Camp Pi’iholo Renovations

HI

1,120,000

Hirono, Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Statewide Office on Homelessness and Housing
Solutions

Expanding Crisis, Outreach,
Response and Engagement (CORE) Homeless
Services Program

HI

1,200,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Helping Hands Hawai’i

Facility Renovation

HI

2,088,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Parents And Children Together

PACT Community Hub Property Improvements

HI

2,011,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Hawaii

Kukuiola Supportive Housing

HI

1,892,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City and County of Honolulu

Honolulu Low-Income Housing Improvements

HI

2,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Food Basket, Inc.

Commercial Building for
Hilo Farmers

HI

2,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hope Services Hawaii

Mountain View Supportive
Housing

HI

1,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lanakila Pacific

Lanakila Pacific Air Conditioning Replacement

HI

1,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Young Women’s Christian
Association of Oahu

Kaneohe Transitional Housing

HI

1,000,000

Schatz

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kirkwood Community College

Swine Career and Technical
Education Barn

IA

3,716,000

Hinson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cerro Gordo County

North Iowa Corridor Workforce Housing Initiative

IA

3,000,000

Hinson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ely

Urban Renewal Initiative

IA

2,000,000

Hinson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Clinton

North River Drive Connector
Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tipton

Montgomery Drive Improvement Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southeast Iowa Regional
and Economic Port Authority

Lee County Career Center
Project

IA

1,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jefferson County

110th Street FDR and Asphalt Paving Project

IA

3,000,000

Miller-Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Iowa Western Community
College

Flexible Learning and Experiential Training Lab
Project

IA

900,000

Nunn

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00124

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1051

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Des Moines

Iowa Confluence Water
Trails (ICON)

IA

2,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mitchellville

Mitchellville-Center Ave
Streetscape Project

IA

640,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ottumwa Community School
District

Ottumwa Youth Hub

IA

500,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Des Moines Area Community College

Diesel, HVAC, Building
Trades, and Fire Science
Facility Support

IA

2,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Polk County

Des Moines Homeless Youth
Building

IA

1,000,000

Nunn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mountain Home School District #193

Stephensen Elementary
School Build

ID

6,409,000

Simpson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Idaho

Idaho Water Center

ID

3,853,000

Simpson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Muddy Township

Reconstruction of N 600th
Street

IL

540,000

Bost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Oblong

South Range Street Replacement Project

IL

2,236,000

Bost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carbondale

Poplar Street Restoration
Project

IL

900,000

Bost

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Piatt County

Piatt County Buildings
Capital Improvements

IL

250,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Brooklyn

Brooklyn Community Center
Development

IL

2,000,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Champaign Park District

Parkland Way Reconstruction

IL

850,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Illinois

Integrated Bioprocessing
Research Laboratory Expansion

IL

1,200,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Urbana Park District

Urbana Park District Prairie
and Weaver Park Site
Rehabilitation

IL

250,000

Budzinski

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Countryside

City of Countryside Public
Works Facility

IL

250,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Worth Park District

Worth Park District Park Infrastructure

IL

302,500

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Willowbrook

75th Street Water Main Improvements

IL

850,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DuPage Water Commission

DuPage Regional Source
Water Project: Electric
Supply and Grid Improvements

IL

500,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Westmont Park District

Ty Warner Park Permeable
Paver Parking Lot

IL

500,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Palos Hills

City of Palos Hills Reservoir
Rehabilitation

IL

1,200,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education of the
City of Chicago

Sutherland Elementary
School Outdoor Space

IL

1,000,000

Casten

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00125

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1052

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Palos Park

Main Pump Station Improvements

IL

500,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DuPage County Health Department

Residential Group Homes
Energy Efficiency Project

IL

600,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Salt Creek Sanitary District

Salt Creek Sanitary District
Wastewater Treatment
Plant

IL

850,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Lombard

Village of Lombard Underground Infrastructure

IL

250,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Crestwood

Carriage Lane Water Main
Replacement

IL

250,000

Casten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Ogden Park Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago

Franciscan Outreach Shelter Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago

Olive Branch Mission Shelter Infrastructure Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community College District
no. 508 DBA Malcolm X
College

West Side Learning Center—Facility Renovation
and Expansion

IL

1,000,000

Davis (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Aurora

Homelessness Prevention
Project for the City of
Aurora

IL

1,000,000

Foster

Durbin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DuPage County Division of
Transportation

91st Street Infrastructure
Improvement Project

IL

750,000

Foster

Durbin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Woodstock

Illinois Route 47 Expansion
and Water Main Relocation Project

IL

3,150,000

Foster

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hampshire Fire Protection
District

Hampshire Second Fire Station

IL

1,000,000

Foster

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Aurora Public Library District

Eola Road Branch Library
Renovation

IL

850,000

Foster

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Batavia

Batavia Fox River Bike Path

IL

1,200,000

Foster,
Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Summit Public Library District

Library Capital Improvements

IL

452,408

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Franklin Park

Downtown Streetscape Expansion

IL

250,000

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Richard J. Daley College—
City Colleges of Chicago

Richard J. Daley College Inclusive Classrooms Upgrades and Accessibility
Improvements

IL

446,250

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of North Riverside

North Riverside Public Infrastructure Flood Mitigation Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Garcı́a (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Cultural Center Upgrades
and Improvements,
Hamilton Park

IL

2,000,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago

Sustainable Updates to
CPS’ Outdoor Spaces

IL

250,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago, Department of Family and Support Services (DFSS)

Margaret’s Village Maria
Shelter Infrastructure
Improvements

IL

850,000

Jackson (IL)

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00126

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1053

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago Department
of Housing

Park Manor Senior Development and Construction

IL

250,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago, Department of Housing

Joyce Chapman Apts. Housing and Community Development and Construction

IL

250,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority

Site Infrastructure and Security Camera, Software,
and Lighting Upgrades

IL

750,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cook County Department of
Transportation and Highways

Pulaski Road Corridor Reconstruction and
Multimodal Improvements

IL

500,000

Jackson (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of South Holland

South Holland Neighborhood Revitalization
Project—South Holland,
IL

IL

500,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Jackson Park Safety and
Accessibility Improvements

IL

1,200,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Rantoul

Broadmeadow Road Extension Project—Rantoul, IL

IL

850,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paxton, Illinois

Paxton Downtown
Streetscape

IL

850,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Hazel Crest

Water/Sewer Repairs and
Upgrades

IL

850,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Prairie State College

Prairie State College Workforce Development Education Facility Expansion

IL

250,000

Kelly (IL)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Elgin Community College

Advanced Manufacturing
Workforce Pipeline:
Equipment for ECC’s
Manufacturing and
Technology Center

IL

2,000,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Mount Prospect

Elk Grove Rural Fire Protection District Enhancements

IL

850,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Itasca Park District

Itasca Community Recreation & Fitness Center
Expansion

IL

250,000

Krishnamoorthi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Peoria

Galena Road Industrial
Park

IL

600,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Illinois Regional
Airport Authority

Construct New Air Cargo
Road

IL

1,500,000

LaHood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Fire Department

Chicago Fire Department
Equipment

IL

2,959,800

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Public Schools,
Board of Education City
of Chicago

Sustainable Updates to
CPS Outdoor Spaces

IL

850,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Palatine Township

Palatine Township Center—Haven Project

IL

500,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Oak Street Underpass Improvements

IL

2,000,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Horner Park Field House
Renovation

IL

2,000,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago Department
of Housing

Belray Apartments (Mercy)

IL

850,000

Quigley

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00127

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1054

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Lincoln Park Rowing Lagoon

IL

250,000

Quigley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chicago, Department of Housing

Encuentro Square Phase II

IL

3,150,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DuPage Housing Authority

Affordable Homeownership
Infrastructure and Development

IL

2,000,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Technology Center of
DuPage

DuPage Regional Advanced
Manufacturing Hub Development, Construction
and Equipment

IL

500,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Von Steuben Metropolitan
Science Center High
School Facilities Upgrades and Expansion

IL

500,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Patrick Henry School Playground and Infrastructure Upgrades

IL

250,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Renovation of Goethe Elementary School’s Outdoor Playspace and
Equipment

IL

850,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Dever Elementary Outdoor
Space Upgrades

IL

850,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Camras Elementary School
Outdoor Space Upgrades

IL

250,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northeastern Illinois University Foundation

Simulation Equipment Acquisition and Training
Facility Development and
Construction

IL

1,200,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Park District

Bell Park Improvements,
Expansion and Facility
Development and Construction

IL

850,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education City of
Chicago

Hanson Park Stadium Renovations and Upgrades

IL

850,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wheaton

Turf, Countryside & Ranch
Floodprone Improvements

IL

250,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wayne Township Road District

Wayne Township Powis
Road Improvements

IL

250,000

Ramirez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Niles Township Government

Niles Township Respite
Center Renovation
Project

IL

1,250,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of McHenry

McHenry County Police Social Work Program Headquarters Project

IL

1,200,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chicago Fire Department

CFD Engine House 71 Ambulance Annex

IL

850,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McHenry County Conservation District

McHenry County Conservation District Fox Bluff
Conservation Area Public
Access Enhancement
Project

IL

850,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fremont Township Highway
Department

Fremont Township Critical
Road Resurfacing Project

IL

250,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Education of the
City of Chicago

Chicago Public Schools Mosaic School Improvements Project

IL

250,000

Schakowsky

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Evanston

Evanston Beck Park Expansion Project

IL

250,000

Schakowsky

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00128

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1055

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Antioch

Antioch Downtown Improvement—Lake and Main

IL

580,694

Schneider

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake County

Lakeside Tower Rehabilitation

IL

1,000,000

Schneider

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Waukegan Park District

Waukegan Park District
Adaptive Recreation Upgrades and Equipment
at Roosevelt Park

IL

250,000

Schneider

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rockford

Rockford Family Peace Center Reconstruction, Facility Upgrades and Equipment

IL

250,000

Sorensen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Waubonsee Community College

Center for Parenting Students

IL

450,000

Underwood

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lockport Township

Lockport Township Emergency Shelter and Training Facility

IL

1,950,000

Underwood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Illinois University

Education for Parents
Project

IL

850,000

Underwood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

White Oak Library District

Senior Outreach and Care

IL

850,000

Underwood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Plainfield Park District

Bentley Road Pathway Connection

IL

250,000

Underwood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

People for Community Recovery

Hazel Johnson Job Training
and Community Center

IL

900,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

BEDS Plus, Inc.

Triage Transitional Shelter

IL

650,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Lawndale Catalyst
Initiative, Inc.

North Lawndale Community
Revitalization with Economic Empowerment
Hub

IL

1,600,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of Chicago

True Value Boys & Girls
Club Accessibility Upgrades

IL

750,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carbondale

Homeless Center Facility
Development

IL

2,000,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Illinois Facilities Fund

Home First Housing

IL

1,000,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Volunteers of America Illinois

Hope Manor Village Joliet
Housing Expansion

IL

1,000,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Outlet Mentoring Program

Outlet Mentoring Program
Center

IL

1,000,000

Duckworth

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of Chicago

Capital Improvements

IL

500,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lincoln Presidential Foundation

Facility Improvements

IL

450,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of Illinois

Land Remediation

IL

3,000,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Illinois Institute of Technology

Construction of the National Institute for Advanced Manufacturing

IL

2,500,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Full Circle Communities

Supportive Housing Development

IL

750,000

Durbin

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00129

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Duckworth

H20JAPT1

H/S

H1056

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hamilton

Food Security Project

IL

2,500,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Carbondale Community
Arts, Inc. dba Artspace
304

Economic Hub Project

IL

693,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of North Chicago

Fire Truck

IL

861,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois University

Facilities Improvements
and Technology Upgrades

IL

500,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Navy Pier Inc.

Equipment Upgrades

IL

722,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Lawndale Employment Network

Workforce Accelerator Program

IL

1,000,000

Durbin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Indianapolis

Master Leasing Homelessness Housing

IN

850,000

Carson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ivy Tech Community College

Indianapolis Flex Lab—
Workforce Training Center Development, Construction and Equipment

IN

850,000

Carson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Indianapolis

City of Indianapolis Shepherd Community Center
Expansion, Equipment
and Furnishings

IN

250,000

Carson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Georgetown

Georgetown State Road 64
Sidewalks

IN

975,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Indiana University

10th Street Safety Improvements

IN

1,200,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mitchell

Monon South Trail—Orleans to Mitchell

IN

1,000,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Floyd County

Sam Peden Community
Park Improvements

IN

175,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlestown

Charlestown Blight Elimination Project

IN

4,000,000

Houchin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Michigan City

Michigan City Westside Opportunity Hub

IN

625,000

Mrvan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gary

West Side Community Stabilization—Demolition of
Former Ivanhoe Elementary School

IN

1,100,000

Mrvan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Unified Government of Wyandotte County and Kansas City, Kansas Public
Works

Kansas Avenue Bridge Design and Environmental
Clearance

KS

1,200,000

Davids

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Johnson County, Kansas

Johnson County Facility Security Panel Access Modernization

KS

850,000

Davids

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Unified Government of Wyandotte County and Kansas City

Mount Marty Park Refurbishment

KS

250,000

Davids

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kansas City Board of Public Utilities

BPU Electric Grid System
Improvements

KS

250,000

Davids

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Osawatomie

John Brown Park Infrastructure Refurbishment

KS

250,000

Davids

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Prairie Village

Public Facilities Improvements

KS

250,000

Davids

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00130

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Moran

H

H

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1057

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kansas Department of
Transportation

Route 92 Centennial Bridge
Replacement

KS

4,000,000

Schmidt

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Unified Government of Wyandotte County and Kansas City, Kansas

Union Pacific Bridge Underpass

KS

2,063,000

Schmidt

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mennonite Housing Rehabilitation Services, Inc.

Wichita Affordable Housing
Rehabilitation

KS

825,000

Moran

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cerebral Palsy Research
Foundation of Kansas
Inc

The Timbers Housing Renovation Project

KS

2,500,000

Moran

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Prairie Band Potawatomi
Nation

Head Start Facility

KS

4,968,000

Moran

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kansas State Historical Society

John Brown Memorial Park
& Visitors Center

KS

2,000,000

Moran

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McPherson Housing Coalition

McPherson Affordable
Housing Development

KS

2,000,000

Moran

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Scott County Fiscal Court

Triple Crown Business Park
Development

KY

2,000,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mercer County Fiscal Court

Wilkinson Farm Megasite—
Industrial Park Improvements

KY

2,000,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Versailles

Road and Utility Infrastructure Improvements

KY

1,400,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County Fiscal
Court

Industrial Park Improvements

KY

1,400,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Berea

Kenway Extension for Community Safety and Mobility

KY

1,000,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Estill County Fiscal Court

Water District 12 Water
System Improvements

KY

1,200,000

Barr

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Oak Grove

Oak Grove Water Infrastructure Project

KY

1,000,000

Comer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hickman County Industrial
Development Authority

Business Commerce Building

KY

4,050,000

Comer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Springfield Water and
Sewer Commission

Springfield Industrial Park
Waterline Improvements

KY

1,000,000

Comer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Edmonson County Water
District

Brownsville Water Intake
Tower Improvements

KY

14,000,000

Guthrie

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Green River Valley Water
District

Northwestern Hart County
Water System Improvements

KY

2,000,000

Guthrie

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisville-Jefferson County
Metro Government

Young Adult Shelter and
Transitional Housing

KY

1,000,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisville-Jefferson County
Metro Government

Vacant to Vibrant Program

KY

1,500,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisville-Jefferson County
Metro Government

St. Mary’s Church Renovation

KY

1,000,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jefferson Community &
Technical College

Jefferson Rising Parking Lot
Project

KY

850,000

McGarvey

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00131

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Davids

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Moran

H

H

H20JAPT1

H1058

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jeffersontown

Jeffersontown Garage Purchase and Rehabilitation

KY

850,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Simmons College of Kentucky

Simmons College Westover
Campus Expansion

KY

850,000

McGarvey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wolfe County Fiscal Court

Emergency Facility Construction

KY

5,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McCreary County Fiscal
Court

Firehouse Construction

KY

2,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pikeville

Industrial Building Construction

KY

6,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harlan County Fiscal Court

Water System Improvements

KY

4,000,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clay County Fiscal Court

Livestock Marketplace Construction

KY

1,030,000

Rogers (KY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Owensboro Family YMCA

Owensboro and Daviess
County Community
Childcare Center

KY

6,600,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McCreary County Heritage
Foundation

Historic Stearns Revitalization

KY

11,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Somerset-Pulaski Economic
Development Authority

Barnesburg Road Bridge
Construction

KY

1,450,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Barren County

Cave City Area Agriculture
Exposition Center

KY

20,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Covington

Riverfront Podium and
Land Bridge Infrastructure

KY

4,500,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisville-Jefferson County
Metro Government

Belvedere Transformation

KY

7,000,000

McConnell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

BioDistrict New Orleans

BioDistrict New Orleans—
Education Facility

LA

3,700,000

Carter (LA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

England Airpark

Aviation Career and Education (ACE) Initiative
Building Construction

LA

4,500,000

Fields

Kennedy

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lafayette Consolidated Government

Lafayette Emergency Operations Center

LA

5,000,000

Fields

Kennedy

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Natchitoches

Rue de Gabriel Extension
Project

LA

2,000,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Baker

Jefferson Avenue Youth
Ballpark and Sportsplex

LA

250,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Recreation and Park Commission for the Parish of
East Baton Rouge

Gardere Community Facility
for Youth—Development,
Construction and Equipment

LA

250,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Shreveport

Kings Highway Reconstruction, Parking Improvements and Street Corridor Upgrades

LA

850,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southern University A&M
College

Egress Development and
Infrastructure for Southern University Baton
Rouge Campus

LA

850,000

Fields

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louisiana Fire and Emergency Training Academy

Flood Rescue Training Facility

LA

3,500,000

Letlow

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00132

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1059

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of St. Francisville

Commerce Street
Multimodal Revitalization
Project

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Monroe

City-Wide Storm Drainage
& Sanitary Sewer Project

LA

2,200,000

Letlow

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Grand Isle Port Commission

Oak Lane Dock Facility and
Shrimp Dock Facility

LA

2,700,000

Scalise

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Baton Rouge-Parish
of East Baton Rouge

Canal Retrofit Project

LA

5,000,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of New Orleans

Shea Penland Coastal Research Educational Facility Upgrades

LA

1,500,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Monroe

Benoit Community Center
Improvements

LA

4,500,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nicholls State University

Engineering Workforce Development Center

LA

6,500,000

Cassidy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Abbeville

Riverfront Revitalization

LA

4,500,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lincoln Parish Police Jury

Rough Edge Road Interchange

LA

7,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Terrebonne Churches United
Food Bank

Food Bank Improvements

LA

2,500,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Second Harvest Food Bank
of Greater New Orleans
and Acadiana

Second Harvest Food Bank

LA

2,000,000

Kennedy

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fall River

Columbia Street
Streetscape and Parklet
Rehabilitation

MA

1,300,000

Auchincloss

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Attleboro Massachusetts

Attleboro Recreation Center
Improvements

MA

2,000,000

Auchincloss

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mansfield

Mansfield Council on Aging
Senior Center Development and Construction

MA

850,000

Auchincloss

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Attleboro

Attleboro Downtown
Streetscape Improvements

MA

850,000

Auchincloss

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Berkley

Berkley Town Common Pedestrian Infrastructure
and Safety Improvements

MA

850,000

Auchincloss

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Medford

Willis Avenue Community
Center Project

MA

250,000

Clark

Markey, Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Framingham

Framingham Community
Center

MA

3,150,000

Clark

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Malden, Massachusetts

Malden Roofs Project

MA

850,000

Clark

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stoneham

Stoneham High School Wetlands Restoration Project

MA

850,000

Clark

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Watertown

Walkable Watertown Square
Project

MA

500,000

Clark

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Winthrop

Winthrop Old Middle School
Redevelopment Project

MA

250,000

Clark

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00133

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Kennedy

H

H

H20JAPT1

H1060

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Melrose

Melrose Public Address
System Repairs and Improvements

MA

250,000

Clark

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Revere

Revere Community Boatyard
Remediation Project

MA

250,000

Clark

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth

Northeast Coastal Ocean
Forecast System Computer Upgrade Project

MA

850,000

Keating

Markey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Massachusetts Maritime
Academy

Training Equipment Acquisition

MA

250,000

Keating

Markey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe

Plaza Del Sol Transitional
Housing Project

MA

1,152,000

Keating

Markey, Warren

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Barnstable County

Children’s Cove Child Advocacy Center Project

MA

3,150,000

Keating

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Bridgewater

Bridgewater MBTA Platform
Relocation Project

MA

1,000,000

Keating

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boston Housing Authority

Redevelopment of the Mary
Ellen McCormack Community

MA

850,000

Lynch

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Massachusetts
Boston

Salt Water Pump House
Cooling Capacity Project

MA

1,000,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Weymouth

Weymouth Veterans Resource Center

MA

1,200,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hingham

Hingham Public Safety Facility

MA

850,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Braintree

Braintree Fire Headquarters
Renovation

MA

2,500,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stoughton

Historic Stoughton Train
Depot

MA

1,000,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hingham

Hingham Inner Harbor Resiliency

MA

250,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Walpole

Walpole High School Transportation Improvement
Plan

MA

850,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Weymouth

Weymouth Iron Hill Park
Redesign and Reconstruction

MA

250,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brockton

Salisbury Brook Box Culvert
Repair

MA

850,000

Lynch

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Ashfield

Ashfield Retaining Wall

MA

250,000

McGovern

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Amherst

Town of Amherst Shelter
and Supportive Housing

MA

1,000,000

McGovern

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Worcester

128 Providence Street
Housing Remediation
Project

MA

1,200,000

McGovern

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Northampton

Northampton Community
Resilience Hub Facility
Development and Construction

MA

500,000

McGovern

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Burlington

Burlington Multi-Use Pathway

MA

1,000,000

Moulton

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00134

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Markey

Markey, Warren

H20JAPT1

H

H

January 20, 2026

H1061

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Georgetown

Georgetown Middle-High
School Heating and
Cooling System

MA

850,000

Moulton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Salem State University

Salem State Science Labs

MA

500,000

Moulton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Reading

Reading Lower Downtown
Streetscape Enhancement

MA

250,000

Moulton

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Berkshire Community College

Berkshire Community College Trades Academy

MA

995,000

Neal

Markey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Springfield City Library

East Springfield City Library Renovation and
Expansion

MA

500,000

Neal

Markey, Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Springfield

Forest Park Horticultural
and Learning Center

MA

1,000,000

Neal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Holyoke

Holyoke Farr Alpaca Mill
Renovation

MA

250,000

Neal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Massachusetts College of
Liberal Arts

MCLA Early Education Center Facility Development
and Construction

MA

1,200,000

Neal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boston Housing Authority

Fairmount Modernization
Project

MA

1,000,000

Pressley

Markey, Warren

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Somerville

Union Square Plaza and
Streetscape Phase 1

MA

500,000

Pressley

Markey, Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chelsea

Former Forbes Lithograph
Manufacturing Company
Site Redevelopment in
Chelsea

MA

850,000

Pressley

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Everett

Gateway Park Boardwalk
Development and Construction, Everett

MA

850,000

Pressley

Warren

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chelsea

Renovation of Massachusetts Veterans Home at
Chelsea

MA

3,150,000

Pressley

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Massachusetts
Lowell

Property Acquisition in Support of the Lowell Innovation Network Corridor

MA

850,000

Trahan

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lowell, Massachusetts

Lowell Priority Intersections
Project

MA

2,000,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Haverhill, Massachusetts

Merrimack Downtown Redevelopment Project

MA

1,000,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fitchburg, Massachusetts

Water Street Gateway Corridor Sidewalk and
Lighting Replacement
Project

MA

850,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mount Wachusett Community College

North Central Massachusetts Auto Technician
Training Center Expansion Project

MA

850,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Methuen, Massachusetts

Methuen Intersections Safety Improvements

MA

850,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gardner, Massachusetts

Gardner Community Center
Upgrades and Improvements

MA

250,000

Trahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Marlborough, Massachusetts

Bolton Street (Route 85)
and Union Street Intersection Infrastructure
Improvements and
Streetscaping

MA

250,000

Trahan

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00135

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Markey, Warren

H20JAPT1

H

H1062

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Boxborough, Massachusetts

Sheltered Bus Stops for
Boxborough/Acton InterTown Bus System

MA

250,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Easterseals Massachusetts,
Inc.

The Bridge Center

MA

1,393,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Francis House

Shelter Renovations

MA

200,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cape & Islands Veterans
Outreach Center, Inc.

Veterans Affordable Housing—Pitchers Way
Hyannis

MA

853,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hope for Youth and Families Inc.

Youth Arts Center

MA

5,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

People Incorporated

Expansion of People Incorporated Early Education
Center

MA

2,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Peace Properties, Inc.

Ayer Commons Affordable
Housing Development

MA

4,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

UTEC, Inc.

UTEC Workforce Development Infrastructure

MA

773,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Louis D. Brown Peace Institute

Louis D. Brown Peace Institute Construction

MA

2,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Children’s Services of
Roxbury, Inc.

Center for Family Wellbeing

MA

2,909,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Victory Programs

Residential Facility

MA

2,600,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Centerboard

Young Parent Living Program

MA

373,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Waltham Boys & Girls Club,
Inc.

Kitchen Project for Childhood Food Insecurity

MA

1,524,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Revitalize Community Development Corporation

Healthy Homes for Low-Income Families

MA

250,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

La Colaborativa

Chelsea Apprenticeship Institute

MA

750,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lawrence CommunityWorks

Marriner Mill Community
Service Facility

MA

1,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Leominster

Leominster Senior Center
Renovation

MA

893,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

2Life Communities Development, Inc.

Treehouse at Olmsted Village Community Center

MA

1,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Breaktime United, Inc.

The Hub for Solving Young
Adult Homelessness

MA

2,107,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

CitySpace Inc.

Restoration of Easthampton
Old Town Hall

MA

3,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of Dorchester, Inc.

Marr-McLaughlin Campus
Revitalization Project

MA

1,500,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Mary’s Center for
Women and Children

Permanent Supportive
Housing for Families
Exiting Homelessness in
Dorchester

MA

2,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00136

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Trahan

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1063

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Shore Young Men’s
Christian Association

Germantown Food Pantry
Expansion

MA

1,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

FamilyAid Boston, Inc.

FamilyAid’s West Newton
Family Navigation Center

MA

1,000,000

Markey, Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YWCA of Western Massachusetts

Facilities Renovation, Infrastructure Upgrades, and
Equipment

MA

1,223,000

Warren

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Anne Arundel County

Crownsville Meyer Building
Rehabilitation

MD

3,150,000

Elfreth

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mount Airy

Infrastructure Improvements and Upgrades at
The Flat Iron Building,
Phase 2

MD

850,000

Elfreth

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Howard County Housing
Commission

Artists Flats Apartments

MD

2,000,000

Elfreth

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Howard County, Maryland

Facilities Upgrades and
Equipment for Public
Safety During Storms

MD

1,250,000

Elfreth

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Maryland Center for Environmental
Sciences

Facility Upgrades and Expansion in Annapolis

MD

800,000

Elfreth

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore County

Middle River Fire Company
Improvements and Upgrades

MD

9,000,000

Harris

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Mary’s County

YMCA Great Mills

MD

850,000

Hoyer

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Mary’s Housing Authority

St. Mary’s County Affordable Housing Acquisition
and Relocation

MD

850,000

Hoyer

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redevelopment Authority of
Prince George’s County

The Arc Prince George’s
County Affordable Housing Rehabilitation/Preservation

MD

1,840,909

Ivey

Alsobrooks

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Greenbelt, MD

Greenbelt Youth Center
Roof Replacement

MD

1,554,969

Ivey

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redevelopment Authority of
Prince George’s County

The Arc Prince George’s
County Full-Service Community Center

MD

850,000

Ivey

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Prince George’s County
Government

North Prince George’s
County Animal Shelter

MD

850,000

Ivey

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of College Park

Housing Authority of the
City of College Park MD
Renovation of Attick
Towers Apartments

MD

3,150,000

Ivey

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of District Heights

City of District Heights, MD
Police Station

MD

1,000,000

Ivey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hyattsville

David C. Driskell Community Park Expansion—
Acquisition, Development, and Preservation

MD

850,000

Ivey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Frederick, Maryland

Frederick Youth Center Furnishings, Equipment and
Security Enhancements

MD

3,000,000

McClain Delaney

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Frederick County

Taney Avenue Senior Center
and Senior Affordable
Housing

MD

1,000,000

McClain Delaney

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore County

Turner Station Resiliency
Improvements

MD

3,150,000

Mfume

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Maryland Economic Development Corporation

Baltimore Harbor Public Facility Improvements

MD

250,000

Mfume

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00137

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

H

H20JAPT1

H1064

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Carroll Community College

Carroll Community College
Applied Technology and
Trades Center Equipment
and Furnishings

MD

850,000

Olszewski

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore County Government

The Reisterstown Main
Street Lamppost Replacements

MD

250,000

Olszewski

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Workforce Development and
Technical Training Center Upgrades and Expansion

MD

2,000,000

Raskin

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County Department of Transportation

US 29 Critical Bike & Pedestrian Safety Improvements

MD

500,000

Raskin

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Low-Income Home Weatherization Project

MD

850,000

Raskin

Van Hollen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County Department of Transportation

Security Cameras for Parking Garages

MD

850,000

Raskin

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Greenbelt

Greenbelt Springhill Lake
Recreation Center Expansion

MD

250,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Latin American Youth Center

LAYC Prince George’s County Site Renovation

MD

1,500,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Arc Baltimore

Home and Building Renovations and Accessible
Vehicles

MD

644,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Maryland Deaf Community
Center

Community Center Renovations

MD

500,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Aberdeen

Aberdeen Activity Center
Outdoor Recreation Improvements

MD

300,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore Museum of Industry

Echoes from the Key Bridge
Facility

MD

730,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Meals on Wheels of Central
Maryland, Inc.

Capital Improvements

MD

1,500,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ivy Community Charities of
Prince George’s County,
Inc.

Ivy Village Incubator for
Nonprofit Excellence

MD

2,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sanctuary AP3 Co.

The Sanctuary Garden

MD

2,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Chimes Foundation,
Inc.

Chimes Home Safety and
Accessibility Renovation

MD

1,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery Housing Partnership, Inc.

Amherst Affordable Housing
Redevelopment

MD

1,000,000

Alsobrooks, Van
Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Parity Baltimore Incorporated

Parity Homes Strategic Acquisition Fund

MD

1,524,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cedar Lane Senior Living
Community III Inc.

Cedar Lane Senior Living
Community Development

MD

1,500,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Robert W. Johnson Community Center

Community Center Revitalization Project

MD

500,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

AfriThrive Inc.

Community Food Center
Renovation

MD

800,000

Van Hollen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Easterseals DC MD VA, Inc.

Easterseals Hagerstown
Child Development Center

MD

2,000,000

Van Hollen

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00138

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1065

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Baltimore County Public Library

Essex Branch Construction

MD

2,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stonington

Stonington Commercial Fish
Pier Improvement Project

ME

2,000,000

Golden

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Jay

Town of Jay Alden Hill Road
Economic Development
Enhancement Project

ME

565,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Swan’s Island

Town of Swan’s Island
Town Dock

ME

1,400,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Jonesport

Jonesport Working Waterfront Access at Henry
Point

ME

1,200,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Maine Community
College

Central Maine Community
College Public Service
Simulation Center Expansion

ME

500,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Fort Kent

Fort Kent Public Works Garage Expansion Project

ME

850,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mi’kmaq Nation

Mi’kmaq Environmental
Laboratory

ME

850,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Auburn

Auburn Tech Hub Infrastructure Expansion

ME

250,000

Golden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Damariscotta

Town of Damariscotta Community and Pedestrian
Connector

ME

850,000

Pingree

King

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Waterville

Waterville Downtown Development

ME

850,000

Pingree

King

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Millinocket Historical Society

ADA Compliance Upgrades

ME

580,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sanford

Public Safety Facilities

ME

5,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Easton

Fire Station

ME

3,600,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Patriarchs Club

Harmony Facility Construction

ME

230,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Down East Community Hospital

Down East Community Hospital Workforce Housing

ME

2,190,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Eagle Lake

Fire Department Substation

ME

150,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Auburn

Auburn Area Infrastructure
for Workforce Housing

ME

8,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sanford Housing Authority
Development Corporation

York County Workforce and
Senior Housing

ME

2,500,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Passamaquoddy Tribe at
Indian Township

Indian Township Passamaquoddy Housing Initiative

ME

2,985,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Island Falls

Fire and Ambulance Department

ME

1,603,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brooks Historical Society

Pilley House Restoration

ME

100,000

Collins

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00139

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Van Hollen

S

King

H

H20JAPT1

H1066

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Amount
($)

Requesters
Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Kenduskeag

Kenduskeag Fire Station

ME

3,500,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Aroostook Agency on Aging

Aroostook Agency on Aging
Facility Renovation

ME

1,370,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Dixmont

Fire and Rescue Station

ME

2,332,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rumford Center Village Improvement Society

Meeting House Restoration

ME

232,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Forest Center Inc

Maine Woods Housing Initiative

ME

2,500,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Brownville

Brownville Fire Station

ME

2,770,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winter Harbor Historical Society

Facility Restoration

ME

1,150,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lincoln Memorial Public Library

Lincoln Memorial Library
Expansion

ME

2,400,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Rumford

Childcare and Community
Center

ME

3,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of North Berwick

Fire and Rescue Station

ME

3,400,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Stacyville

Fire Station

ME

2,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mars Hill

Community Center Renovation

ME

2,000,000

Collins

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Kittery

Community Center Renovation

ME

1,500,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Monson

Fire Station

ME

3,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Van Buren

Small Business Incubator
and Community Hub

ME

1,737,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Care

Shaw House Youth Shelter
Renovation

ME

848,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of East Millinocket

Paper Mill Cleanup and Rehabilitation

ME

5,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Lincoln

Lincoln Technology Park

ME

4,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wesley Volunteer Fire Department, Inc.

Volunteer Fire Station

ME

2,520,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Clubs of
Southern Maine

Boys & Girls Club Expansion

ME

3,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

York County Community
College

Workforce and Student
Housing

ME

6,500,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Maine MILL

Maine MILL Renovation

ME

3,000,000

Collins, King

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00140

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1067

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Maine at Fort
Kent

Computer Training Facility

ME

885,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Quoddy Tides Foundation

Masonic Hall Rehabilitation

ME

2,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SeniorsPlus

Older Adult Education and
Nutrition Facility

ME

1,000,000

Collins, King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Chapman House

Affordable Housing

ME

1,317,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Youth and Family Outreach

Childcare Facility Expansion

ME

500,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YWCA Central Maine

Childcare Facility Expansion

ME

1,689,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Avesta Housing Development Corporation

Affordable Housing Property
Acquisition and Remediation

ME

2,000,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dignity First

Homeful Village Infrastructure

ME

2,000,000

King

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brighton

Water Treatment Plant Generator Replacement

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

Slotkin

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Eaton Rapids

Horner Mill Demolition &
Redevelopment

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Maple Rapids

Bridge Replacement

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clinton County Road Commission

Chandler Road—Coleman
Road to Stoll Road

MI

2,500,000

Barrett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oakland County Road Commission

Drain Culvert Replacement

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shiawassee County Road
Commission

New Lothrop Road Bridge
Replacement

MI

1,000,000

Barrett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Menominee

Circle Lane 3 Subdivision
Infrastructure Improvements

MI

1,178,000

Bergman

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saline

Saline Community Center
Rehabilitation Project

MI

2,700,000

Dingell

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pittsfield Charter Township

Pittsfield Township Public
Safety Facility Improvement Project

MI

2,000,000

Dingell

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ann Arbor

Ann Arbor Fire Station #3
Demolition, Development
and Construction

MI

250,000

Dingell

Slotkin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plymouth

Plymouth Cultural Center
Improvements

MI

850,000

Dingell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Northville

City of Northville High
Street Bridge Project

MI

850,000

Dingell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Novi

Novi Public Safety Facility
Construction

MI

250,000

Dingell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Macomb County

Reconstruction of Mound
Road from 8 Mile Road
to I–696

MI

8,000,000

James

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00141

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1068

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

House

Origination
Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Saginaw Valley State University

Cardinal Square
Streetscaping

MI

250,000

McDonald Rivet

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Genesee County Land Bank
Authority

Removing Blight and Restoring Land in Genesee
County (MI)

MI

850,000

McDonald Rivet

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Flint Community Schools

Flint Community Schools’
Workforce and Career
Campus Development
and Construction

MI

1,200,000

McDonald Rivet

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fruitland Township

North Scenic Drive Non-Motorized Pathway

MI

9,074,000

Moolenaar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shelby Township

Shelby Acres

MI

1,200,000

Moolenaar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Grand Rapids—Kent County Convention and Arena
Authority

Grand River Neighborhood
Enhancement and Accessibility Bridge

MI

250,000

Scholten

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Fruitport

Village of Fruitport Shoreline Access and Trails—
Infrastructure Upgrades,
Expansion and Revitalization

MI

464,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Muskegon County

Learn. Transform. Thrive:
Building a Home for Literacy

MI

500,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Interurban Transit Partnership

Central Station Early Childhood Education Development and Construction

MI

1,000,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Muskegon Heights

Broadway Avenue Reconstruction &
Streetscape—Phase II

MI

2,000,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Michigan State Housing
Development Authority

Pleasant Hills Phase 3

MI

250,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Muskegon Area Intermediate School District

Advanced Manufacturing
Training Equipment Acquisition

MI

750,000

Scholten

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Farmington Hills

Farmington Hills Senior
Center

MI

850,000

Stevens

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pontiac

City of Pontiac Youth
Recreation Center Project

MI

2,000,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Birmingham, Michigan

Birmingham Senior/Recreation Center

MI

1,200,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Royal Oak

Royal Oak Community
Wellness Hub: Multi-Purpose Indoor Field Facility

MI

850,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Madison Heights

Roadway asphalt overlay on
Avis Drive from East 14
Mile to Dequindre

MI

520,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oakland County

Oakland County Critical Infrastructure Improvements at the Detroit Zoo

MI

500,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Troy

Troy Community Center—
Building Generator

MI

250,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Charter Township of Commerce

Commerce Township/Wixom
community connection

MI

250,000

Stevens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ecorse

City of Ecorse Fire Station
Renovation

MI

680,592

Thanedar

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00142

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Peters, Slotkin

Slotkin

H20JAPT1

H

H

January 20, 2026

H1069

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Michigan State Housing
Development Authority

Thome Rivertown Senior Affordable Housing

MI

250,000

Thanedar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southgate

Downriver Miracle Field and
Playground

MI

250,000

Thanedar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wayne State University

WDET Community Broadcast Center

MI

250,000

Thanedar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Livonia

Bike/Walk Livonia Stark
Road Widening and Active Transportation Infrastructure

MI

850,000

Tlaib

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southfield

Hope Apartments—Supportive Housing and Site
Development and Construction for Youth Aging
out of Foster Care

MI

850,000

Tlaib

Peters

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redford Charter Township

Redford Charter Township
Lead Service Lines Replacement

MI

2,000,000

Tlaib

Peters, Slotkin

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

School District of the City
of Dearborn

Michael Berry Career Center
and Green Schoolyards
Facilities and Site Improvements

MI

1,200,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southfield

City of Southfield Aging in
Place Critical Home Repairs

MI

3,150,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Westland

City of Westland New Fire
Station No. 4 Development and Construction
and New Fire Engine Acquisition

MI

2,000,000

Tlaib

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Detroit Public Schools Community District

Cooley High School Redevelopment and Construction

MI

1,000,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Charter County of Wayne

Wayne County Youth Facility Capital Improvements

MI

850,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Inkster

Harvest River Square Revitalization, City of Inkster

MI

500,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southfield

Mt. Vernon Street Reconstruction and
Streetscaping

MI

250,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Beverly Hills

Village of Beverly Hills Beverly Park Improvements

MI

250,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Franklin

Village of Franklin Irving
Apple Tree Lane Pathway
Development and Construction

MI

250,000

Tlaib

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Adrian Public Schools

Drager Early Education
Center Boiler Replacement

MI

2,200,000

Walberg

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Niles

Indiana-Michigan River
Valley Trail Project

MI

2,000,000

Walberg

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Detroit Housing and
Revitalization Department

Archdale Senior Affordable
Housing

MI

500,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Downriver Community Conference

Ecorse Creek Bridge and
Culvert Replacement

MI

2,500,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians

Housing Facility to Support
Substance Abuse Recovery

MI

574,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albion

Early Learning STEM Center

MI

500,000

Peters

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00143

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Slotkin

H20JAPT1

H

H1070

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Southfield

Garner Street Housing Development

MI

1,200,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Flint

Flint Eastside Market and
Residential Units Project

MI

2,000,000

Peters

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bay City

Fire Station Clean-Up

MI

959,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Flint

Berston Field House Expansion and Renovation
Project

MI

6,320,000

Peters, Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Housing Network

Lincoln Avenue Lofts

MI

500,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marquette County

Short Term Emergency Recuperative Care Shelter
and Long Term Housing
Initiative

MI

750,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ecorse

Ecorse Creek Connector
Trail and Revitalization
Project

MI

2,538,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Communities First, Inc.

Mixed Use Development

MI

2,000,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Oakland Shelter dba
Lighthouse MI

Lighthouse Campus Redevelopment and Expansion

MI

1,000,000

Slotkin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lakeville

Lakeville FiRST Center

MN

1,000,000

Craig

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dakota County

Dakota County Regional
Household Hazardous
Waste and Recycling Facility Acquisition, Development and Construction

MN

500,000

Craig

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carver

Levee Modernization

MN

4,000,000

Emmer

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saint Paul

Hayden Heights Library Reconstruction Phase II

MN

3,150,000

McCollum

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Maplewood

East Metro Public Safety
Training Center Expansion Project

MN

2,000,000

McCollum

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saint Paul

Burn Building Restoration
and Reconstruction

MN

1,250,000

McCollum

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Excelsior

WAFTA Site Cleanup

MN

1,200,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edina

Fire Training Tower Burner
Replacement

MN

600,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brooklyn Park

Brooklyn Park Trunk Highway Watermain Crossings

MN

850,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Deephaven

Deephaven Park Improvements

MN

250,000

Morrison

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Maple Grove

Animal Facility Expansion
and Reinvestment

MN

850,000

Morrison

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Independent School District
286, Brooklyn Center
Community Schools

Brooklyn Center STEAM Elementary Community
Schoolyard

MN

1,500,000

Omar

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00144

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Klobuchar, Smith

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1071

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hilltop

City of Hilltop Emergency
Tornado Shelter

MN

850,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hennepin County

Hennepin County Emergency Shelter System

MN

500,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Golden Valley

Golden Valley East Fire
Station Development and
Construction

MN

250,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Crystal

MAC Wildlife Area Phase 3
Trail and Boardwalk
Walking Loop—Crystal

MN

1,200,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Saint Anthony Village

Saint Anthony Village Public Safety Facility Expansion

MN

250,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Columbia Heights

Columbia Heights Municipal Vehicle Facility Reconstruction

MN

850,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Robbinsdale

Robbinsdale Public Works
Facility—Development
and Construction

MN

850,000

Omar

Klobuchar, Smith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Women’s Advocates

Expanding Capacity at the
Nation’s First Domestic
Violence Shelter

MN

3,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Accessible Space, Inc.

Rehabilitation for Affordable Housing Sites in
Greater Minnesota

MN

700,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Red Wing Housing and Redevelopment Authority

Haven of Hope Shelter
Project

MN

977,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YouthLink

YouthLink Building Roof
Replacement

MN

989,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greater Bemidji

Bemidji Rail Corridor Redevelopment

MN

2,500,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Morrison County

Partnership with Little Falls
School District

MN

234,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sandstone Economic
Development Authority

Sandstone School Workforce
Housing

MN

850,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Otter Tail County Housing
and Redevelopment Authority

New York Mills Affordable
Senior Housing Project

MN

600,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Minnesota Housing
Partnership, Inc.

Hilltop Square Apartments

MN

3,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albert Lea

Blazing Star Remediation

MN

2,600,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Family Freedom Center

Business Incubator in Central Hillside Duluth

MN

835,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing and Redevelopment Authority of Sleepy
Eye

Ross Park Apartments
Parking & Community
Home Project

MN

222,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Minnesota Habitat
for Humanity

Westwood Development

MN

450,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Alexandria Housing and Redevelopment Authority

Woodhill Townhomes

MN

966,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northwoods Battered Women’s Shelter

Shelter Expansion

MN

300,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00145

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1072

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Madison

Westview Housing Development

MN

2,370,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Little Earth Residents Association

Akiins Pejuta Hub

MN

2,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Minneapolis Public Housing
Authority

Missing Middle Construction Project

MN

2,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Saint Paul Public Housing
Agency

Seal Hi-Rise Modernization

MN

2,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

One Roof Community Housing

New Model—Reentry Housing

MN

1,000,000

Klobuchar, Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State Fair Community College

Workforce Training Center
for Agriculture Advancement

MO

6,000,000

Alford

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Parks and
Recreation District of St.
Louis

Metropolitan Parks and
Recreation Brickline
Greenway District of St.
Louis—Cortex Metrolink
Station to Forest Park

MO

850,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

South Riverfront Redevelopment

MO

250,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ferguson, Missouri

Plaza at 501 Development

MO

1,000,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Northwoods

Northwoods Community
Center Demolition, Development, and Construction

MO

850,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

City of St. Louis—Southside Senior Services
Center Development and
Construction

MO

850,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

City of St. Louis—
Northside Youth and
Senior Service Center
Construction Project

MO

850,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

Upgrades to the City’s
Emergency Management
Simulation Training Lab

MO

250,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Louis

Renovation/Upgrades to the
City’s Fire Training
Tower

MO

250,000

Bell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kansas City, Missouri

Brush Creek Greenway Improvements

MO

2,000,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Grandview, Missouri

Main Street Market

MO

850,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Community
College

Longview Automotive Institute

MO

850,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of North Kansas City,
Missouri

Town Square Renovation

MO

250,000

Cleaver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Missouri

North Missouri Weather
Monitoring Infrastructure

MO

5,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Liberty

Downtown Safety Improvements

MO

5,000,000

Graves

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Grand River Technical
School

Facilities Construction

MO

2,000,000

Graves

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00146

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1073

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jefferson

Police Headquarters Addition

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Charles

Senior Center Construction

MO

500,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Charles

Reconstruction of Harry S.
Truman Boulevard

MO

1,500,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jefferson

High Street Viaduct Replacement

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Centertown

Central Wastewater Collection and Treatment System

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Jefferson

Fire Command Center

MO

1,000,000

Onder

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pearl River Community College

Road Infrastructure Project

MS

2,000,000

Ezell

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jones County Junior College

Educational Building Construction

MS

1,000,000

Ezell

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Perry County

Perry County Street Rehabilitation

MS

1,000,000

Ezell

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pat Harrison Waterway District

Pat Harrison Waterway District Archusa Dam Repair and Rehabilitation

MS

4,000,000

Guest

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi State University

Raspet Flight Research
Laboratory Improvements

MS

4,000,000

Guest

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mathiston

Water System Improvements

MS

4,000,000

Kelly (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jackson Redevelopment Authority

Forward Together Initiative—Community Facilities Development, Construction, and Equipment

MS

850,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Delta Planning & Development District

Mississippi Student Facilities and Community Revitalization

MS

850,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Washington County Board
of Supervisors

Washington County Sacred
Homeless Shelter Facility
Improvements

MS

850,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tougaloo College

Natchez Community Facilities Rehabilitation

MS

850,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yazoo County Board of Supervisors

Yazoo Parks Improvements

MS

500,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Holmes County Consolidated School District

STEM POWER—STEM Facilities Improvements
and Equipment

MS

250,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Central Planning and
Development District

Miracle Village Development and Construction

MS

250,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Delta Planning and
Development District

Blight Elimination and
Neighborhood Revitalization

MS

250,000

Thompson (MS)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gulf Coast Center for Nonviolence, Inc.

Family Justice Center Expansion

MS

5,000,000

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00147

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

Hyde-Smith

H20JAPT1

H

S

H1074

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Monticello

Police Department Improvements

MS

121,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Cary

Fire Station Improvements

MS

600,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi’s Toughest Kids
Foundation

Facility Improvements

MS

775,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Forrest County Agricultural
High School

Career and Technical Education Expansion Project

MS

5,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi Food Network

Food Storage Facility Enhancements

MS

3,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Central Community
College

Veteran Center Building
Construction

MS

800,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greenwood-Leflore-Carroll
Economic Development
Foundation

Building Revitalization
Project

MS

2,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Leflore Water and
Sewer District

Water Storage Project

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vicksburg

Floodwall Closure System
Improvements

MS

3,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Mississippi
Medical Center

Site Preparation and Critical Infrastructure Support

MS

8,500,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Mississippi

Innovation and Entrepreneurial Fusion Center

MS

10,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mississippi Department of
Archives and History

Vicksburg National Military
Park Improvements

MS

3,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SR1 College Preparatory
and STEM Academy

Learning Center

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Forrest-Lamar Alliance

Infrastructure Improvements

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lee County Board of Supervisors

Learning Center

MS

1,000,000

Hyde-Smith,
Wicker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greenfields Irrigation District

Mary Taylor Main Canal Bifurcation and Hydropower Project

MT

4,000,000

Downing

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cascade County

Roadway Extension and Future Major Expansion of
Great Falls AgriTech
Park

MT

788,000

Downing

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rosebud County

Castle Rock Road Paving
Completion

MT

3,000,000

Downing

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Seeley Lake Missoula County Sewer District

Seeley Lake Wastewater
Treatment Plant Project

MT

10,000,000

Zinke

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ravalli County Economic
Development Authority

Ravalli County Water Treatment Plant

MT

2,500,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lincoln County

Rural Airport Reconstruction and Emergency
Services Expansion

MT

454,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sanders County

Repaving Marten Creek
Road

MT

1,150,000

Zinke

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00148

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Sheehy

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1075

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Flathead County

Flathead County North Fork
Road Guardrails

MT

1,000,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ravalli County

Groff Lane Bridge Replacement

MT

1,000,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ravalli County

Old Corvallis Road Repair

MT

1,000,000

Zinke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Schools

Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Schools Educator Community Housing

NC

1,500,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlotte

Housing Development Initiative

NC

1,200,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlotte

Three Sisters Market Food
Cooperative—Development and Equipment

NC

750,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlotte

Wheatley Seniors Apartments Development and
Construction

NC

850,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charlotte

United Neighborhoods Facilities Construction, Upgrades and Equipment

NC

250,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Charlotte-Mecklenburg Hospital Authority

The Pearl Underpass Infrastructure Improvements
and Roadway
Connectivity

NC

250,000

Adams

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Williamston, North
Carolina

Williamston Critical Infrastructure Road Repair

NC

250,000

Davis (NC)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Madison County

Madison County Public
Safety Center Construction

NC

3,000,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Swain County

Swain Middle School Water/
Sewer Improvements

NC

3,000,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Robbinsville

Water System Improvements

NC

1,500,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Buncombe County

Swannanoa EMS Base Construction

NC

3,000,000

Edwards

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Chapel Hill, North
Carolina

Legion Road Affordable
Housing Development

NC

2,000,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Durham, North
Carolina

Southside Revitalization
Phases III and IV

NC

2,000,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Pittsboro

Pittsboro Downtown Revitalization

NC

850,000

Foushee

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harnett Regional Water

Southwest Harnett Wastewater Pump Station and
Force Main

NC

1,000,000

Knott

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Johnston County

Water System Improvements

NC

1,000,000

Knott

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lexington

Joint Fire and Police Public
Safety Center

NC

3,500,000

McDowell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kannapolis

Turn Lane Construction

NC

1,500,000

McDowell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Cornelius

Emerald Necklace Greenway

NC

1,000,000

Moore (NC)

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00149

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1076

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Havelock

McCotter Canal Improvements

NC

6,000,000

Murphy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Holly Ridge

Expansion of the Holly
Ridge Community Center

NC

1,200,000

Murphy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Farmville

Fire Department Headquarters Construction

NC

1,000,000

Murphy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Winterville

Firefighter Training Facility

NC

750,000

Murphy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Winterville

Water Tower and Looping
Project

NC

1,000,000

Murphy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wake County

Wendell North Public Safety
Station

NC

750,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Morrisville

Town Center Economic Development Phase I

NC

250,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Raleigh

Rose Lane Area Flood Safe
and Resilient Access

NC

850,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Garner

Jones Sausage Road Safety
and Capacity Improvements

NC

850,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wake County

Second Street Homeless
Shelter Facility Renovation and Reconfiguration

NC

850,000

Ross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brunswick County

Longwood Road Water Line
Extensions

NC

5,483,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Elizabethtown

Curtis L. Brown, Jr. Field
Aerospace Workforce Incubator

NC

2,250,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The University of North
Carolina at Pembroke

Renovation and Restoration
of Old Main

NC

1,000,000

Rouzer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hickory

Fire Station Upgrades

NC

1,383,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Greater Charlotte

The Johnston Family YMCA
Infrastructure Project

NC

5,000,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winston-Salem Industries
for the Blind, Inc. dba
IFB Solutions

Infrastructure and Facility
Improvements

NC

3,200,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Servant Center, Inc.

Servant House Project

NC

247,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Henderson County

EMS Substations Expansion

NC

2,500,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Carolina Community College

EMS/Fire Training Facility

NC

5,779,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Canton

Fire Department

NC

5,799,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Southeastern
North Carolina, Inc.

Midtown YMCA Expansion
Project

NC

1,500,000

Tillis

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lenoir County Government

Water and Sewer Infrastructure Extension

NC

5,182,000

Tillis

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00150

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1077

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gaston County Family
YMCA

Stowe Family YMCA Expansion Project

NC

2,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Valley

Water Main Replacement

NE

1,280,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ralston

Burlington Economic Development Infrastructure
Project

NE

2,000,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Omaha

Bluestem Stream Improvement Project

NE

1,000,000

Bacon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Seward County

Paving 420th Road

NE

1,000,000

Flood

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Polk County

141st Road Paving

NE

1,800,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fremont

North Downtown
Streetscape Revitalization Project

NE

2,800,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Waverly

Oldfield Street Paving

NE

3,000,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lincoln

Center Terrace and Rental
Rehabilitation Public
Connectivity Improvements

NE

2,500,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lancaster County

North 162nd Street Surfacing

NE

5,348,000

Flood

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mid-Plains Community College

Regional CDL Training Facility

NE

2,000,000

Smith (NE)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Clatonia

Fire Hall

NE

1,310,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plattsmouth

Aerial Fire Truck

NE

1,800,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South Sioux City

Aerial Fire Truck and Fire
Equipment

NE

2,500,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Friend

Friend Volunteer Fire and
Rescue Department

NE

1,300,000

Fischer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nashua Community College

Early Childhood Education
Center for Teaching and
Learning at Nashua
Community College

NH

933,500

Goodlander

Shaheen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Claremont

Sugar River Revitalization
and Brownfields Redevelopment Project

NH

850,000

Goodlander

Shaheen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sullivan County

Regional Childcare Facility
Enhancement Project

NH

1,600,000

Goodlander

Shaheen

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Nashua Public
Health & Community
Services

Nashua Shelter and Resource Center

NH

1,200,000

Goodlander

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Nashua, NH

Nashua Commuter Rail Extension Project Development

NH

250,000

Goodlander

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Hooksett

Martins Ferry Roadway
Intersection Improvement
and Bridge Project

NH

2,000,000

Pappas

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Portsmouth Housing Authority

Urban Forest Workforce
Housing Project

NH

850,000

Pappas

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00151

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Tillis

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Fischer

Shaheen

S

H

H

H

H20JAPT1

H1078

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dover Housing Authority

Garrison Crossing Housing

NH

1,000,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Manchester

JFK Coliseum Chiller Plant
Replacement

NH

850,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Rye

Rye Fuel Island Replacement

NH

250,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Barrington

Barrington Commons

NH

250,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockingham Planning Commission

New Hampshire Rail Trail
User Counting Network

NH

250,000

Pappas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Laconia Housing Redevelopment Authority—Union
Avenue Limited Partnership

Laconia Affordable Housing
Expansion

NH

750,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Salem Housing Authority

Salem Area Housing Development

NH

3,000,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NeighborWorks Southern
New Hampshire

Pearl Street Apartments
Manchester

NH

2,212,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gather

Expanding Food Access
Across the Seacoast

NH

345,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

St. Joseph Community Services

Meals on Wheels of
Hillsborough County:
Community Nutrition
Center Project

NH

686,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Avesta Housing Development Corporation

Rural NH Affordable Housing Preservation Project

NH

335,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cross New Hampshire Adventure Trail

Twin State Rails-to-Trails
Project

NH

250,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marguerite’s Place

Nashua Transitional Housing, Child Care and
Family Resource Center

NH

2,500,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

School Administrative Unit
#18

Franklin High School Revitalization Project

NH

461,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Our Place, Inc.

Supportive Housing for
Adults with Disabilities

NH

1,950,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SNHS Management Corps

Community Action Partnership Hillsborough and
Rockingham Opportunity
Center

NH

688,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Families in Transition

Affordable Housing and
Shelter Security Improvement Plan

NH

1,060,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southwestern Community
Services, Inc.

Keene Eastside Housing

NH

198,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monadnock Affordable
Housing Corporation

Monadnock Affordable
Housing Project

NH

2,000,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mark Stebbins Community
Center

Mark Stebbins Community
Center Project

NH

2,000,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Affordable Housing, Education and Development
Inc.

North Country Main Street
Revitalization

NH

1,000,000

Shaheen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bridges: Domestic & Sexual
Violence Support Services, Inc.

Emergency Housing Program

NH

1,000,000

Shaheen

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00152

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1079

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Hamilton

Firehouse HVAC System Upgrades

NJ

1,325,000

Conaway

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Marlboro

Improvements to the Marlboro Township Free Public Library

NJ

500,000

Conaway

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lumberton Township

Lumberton Municipal
Recreation Field Lighting
Improvements

NJ

250,000

Conaway

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Burlington County

The Learning Commons:
Space for Learning,
Meeting and Collaboration Project

NJ

850,000

Conaway

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lawrence Township

Lawrence Township Community Center Improvements

NJ

500,000

Conaway

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Delran

Don Deutsch Soccer Field
Improvements

NJ

250,000

Conaway

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Hainesport

Creek Turn Park Improvements

NJ

850,000

Conaway

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Tenafly

Tenafly Natural Flood Control Improvements

NJ

850,000

Gottheimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Glen Rock

Glen Rock DPW Project

NJ

850,000

Gottheimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Warren County Community
College

Agricultural Educational
and Training Center Improvements

NJ

979,000

Kean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Washington

Police Department Building
Renovations

NJ

560,000

Kean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Summit

Glenside Avenue Sidewalk
Improvements

NJ

530,000

Kean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Phillipsburg

Riverfront Park Revitalization

NJ

2,400,000

Kean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hunterdon County

Senior Center Expansion
and Renovation

NJ

1,500,000

Kean

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newark

Upgrade and Rehabilitation
of the Newark YMCA

NJ

850,000

McIver

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Union

Morris Avenue Smart Traffic
Light Acquisition Installation

NJ

250,000

McIver

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Hillside

Hillside Ladder Truck Replacement

NJ

1,600,000

McIver

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newark

Lincoln Park Facade Restoration and Housing
Development and Construction

NJ

500,000

McIver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newark

Community Microenterprise
and Skilled Trades
Training Center Upgrades and Expansion

NJ

250,000

McIver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of East Orange

East Orange Fellowship
Civic Center Renovations

NJ

250,000

McIver

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hoboken

800 Monroe Resiliency Park
Project

NJ

850,000

Menendez

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Union City

Manhattan Avenue Pedestrian Bridge Demolition
and Replacement

NJ

2,000,000

Menendez

Booker, Kim

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00153

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1080

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of West New York

West New York Recreation
Center Development and
Construction

NJ

1,200,000

Menendez

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Harrison

Public Safety Building Construction Project

NJ

850,000

Menendez

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Hudson Regional Fire
& Rescue

Facilities Rehabilitation
and System Upgrades

NJ

1,410,000

Menendez

Booker, Kim

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Essex County Department
of Parks, Recreation,
and Cultural Affairs

Riverfront Parks Improvement

NJ

250,000

Menendez

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Washington Township

Washington Township Park
Safety and Security Upgrades

NJ

250,000

Norcross

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Camden County College

Electric Vehicle Education
Network

NJ

850,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Camden

Camden City Clean Up Initiative

NJ

850,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pennsauken Township

Pennsauken Public Works
Building/Repair Facility
Enhancement

NJ

850,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Wenonah

Cedar Field Site Improvements and Recreational
Facilities Development
and Construction Improvement Project

NJ

250,000

Norcross

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Edison

Minnie B. Veal Senior Services Expansion Project

NJ

2,915,000

Pallone

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Woodbridge

Woodbridge Township Recreational Infrastructure
Development and Construction

NJ

1,200,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Atlantic Highlands

Improvements to Upper
Prospect Road Retaining
Wall

NJ

850,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Neptune Township

Neptune Lake Alberta Improvements

NJ

1,250,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of South Amboy

South Amboy Park and
Playground Project

NJ

250,000

Pallone

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Secaucus

Secaucus—Recreation Center Renovations

NJ

250,000

Pou

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Clifton

City of Clifton—Holster
Park Rehabilitation

NJ

850,000

Pou

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Haledon

Haledon—Recycling Center
Rehabilitation

NJ

250,000

Pou

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Passaic

River Street Storm Water
Management

NJ

1,200,000

Pou

Booker, Kim

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Passaic

City of Passaic—Infrastructure Improvements

NJ

3,150,000

Pou

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Ridgefield

Ridgefield Community Center Renovation and Efficiency Upgrades

NJ

600,000

Pou

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paterson

Recreation Center Development and Construction
in Paterson, NJ

NJ

250,000

Pou

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00154

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Kim

Booker, Kim

H20JAPT1

H

H/S

January 20, 2026

H1081

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Little Ferry

Street Safety Improvements

NJ

250,000

Pou

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Orange Village

South Orange Downtown &
Train Station Streetscape
Improvements

NJ

2,000,000

Sherrill

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Borough of Woodland
Park

Woodland Park Community
Center Improvement
Project

NJ

850,000

Sherrill

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Morris

Morris Township Community
Senior and Recreation
Center Redevelopment

NJ

850,000

Sherrill

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Berkeley Township

Historic Manitou Park
School House Rehabilitation

NJ

1,490,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Eatontown

Community Flood Mitigation
Project Part II

NJ

1,000,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Lakewood

Cross Street Safety and
Streetscape Improvements

NJ

2,000,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Middletown

Shadow Lake Stormwater
Management, Conservation and Economic Development Project

NJ

2,000,000

Smith (NJ)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlantic County

Aviation Maintenance
Training Academy

NJ

1,000,000

Van Drew

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Atlantic Cape Community
College

Capital Asset Fund

NJ

3,000,000

Van Drew

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Vineland

Emergency Shelter Water
Supply

NJ

1,624,000

Van Drew

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Trenton

Assunpink Greenway

NJ

2,000,000

Watson Coleman

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bound Brook Borough

Bound Brook Memorial Library Renovations

NJ

850,000

Watson Coleman

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of North Brunswick

North Brunswick Community Resilience Hubs—
Development, Construction and Equipment

NJ

1,000,000

Watson Coleman

Booker

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Union County

Cedar Brook Park Road and
Pedestrian Bridge Improvements

NJ

1,200,000

Watson Coleman

Booker, Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Old Bridge

Old Bridge Food Bank Facility Improvements and
Expansion

NJ

500,000

Watson Coleman

Booker, Kim

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plainfield

Plainfield Center of Excellence Project

NJ

3,150,000

Watson Coleman

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Middlesex

Route 28 Streetscape
Phase 2

NJ

850,000

Watson Coleman

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery Township

Otto Kaufman Community
Center HVAC Replacement and Infrastructure
Improvements

NJ

850,000

Watson Coleman

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hillsborough Township

Hillsborough Recreation
Center Renovations

NJ

1,000,000

Watson Coleman

Kim

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kean University

Coalport Neighborhood Revitalization and Facility
Redevelopment

NJ

2,000,000

Watson Coleman

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Advocacy Group, Inc.

Nonprofit Innovation Corridor

NJ

800,000

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00155

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Booker

H20JAPT1

S

H1082

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Amount
($)

Requesters
Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Revive South Jersey

Operation HOPE

NJ

500,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Newark Community Street
Team

Trauma Recovery Center

NJ

359,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Warren County Habitat for
Humanity

Affordable Housing Construction and Critical
Home Repair

NJ

500,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Veterans of Foreign Wars
Department of New Jersey

Veteran Outreach Initiative

NJ

267,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Trust for Public Land

Sowing Seeds for Change

NJ

287,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Piscataway

Electric Bus for Senior Center

NJ

256,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

HABcore, Inc.

Ocean County Homeless
Shelter Vans

NJ

150,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

HomeWorks Trenton, Inc.

Facilities Upgrades

NJ

150,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hunterdon County

Senior Center Expansion &
ADA Upgrades

NJ

2,000,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Plainfield

Milt Campbell Field Detention Basin Improvements
and Flood Reduction
Project

NJ

2,000,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Food Bank of
New Jersey Inc.

Renovation of Warehouse

NJ

2,000,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Covenant House New Jersey

Redevelopment and Affordable Housing Project

NJ

1,000,000

Booker

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lunch Break

Family Promise Apartments

NJ

300,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Woodbridge

Supportive Housing Facility

NJ

800,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Paterson

Paterson Homeless Hub
Project

NJ

3,200,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Bergen

Conklin Youth Improvements Project

NJ

500,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of West Milford

West Milford Senior Bus

NJ

100,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Perth Amboy

Second Street Park Rehabilitation Project

NJ

3,000,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Winslow Township

Senior Bus Improvement
Project

NJ

250,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gloucester County Habitat
for Humanity

Home Builds for Habitat

NJ

400,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sussex County

Transportation Enhancement Project

NJ

185,000

Booker, Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Bergen

Bergen HEARTS Facility Improvements

NJ

116,000

Booker, Kim

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00156

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1083

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Newark Housing Authority

Cottage Place

NJ

900,000

Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wildwood

ADA Access and Security
Improvements

NJ

2,185,000

Kim

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pueblo of Jemez

Hazard Remediation and
Pueblo Revitalization

NM

1,512,000

Leger Fernandez

Heinrich, Luján

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Portales

Portales, NM Waste Transfer Facility Expansion

NM

1,200,000

Leger Fernandez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jicarilla Apache Nation

Jicarilla Apache Nation
Public Safety Housing
Project

NM

2,000,000

Leger Fernandez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lovington

City of Lovington, NM Senior Center Infrastructure
Improvement Project

NM

369,750

Leger Fernandez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pueblo of Sandia

Middle Rio Grande Pueblos
Irrigation and Acequia
Infrastructure Improvements

NM

1,000,000

Stansbury

Heinrich, Luján

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albuquerque

Senior Stability Site

NM

2,000,000

Stansbury

Heinrich, Luján

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority

Transitional Housing for
Women and Children

NM

250,000

Stansbury

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bernalillo County

Bernalillo County Affordable
Housing

NM

250,000

Stansbury

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Anthony Water and Sanitation District

Wastewater Treatment
Plant Improvements

NM

2,500,000

Vasquez

Heinrich

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pueblo of Acoma Senior
Center

Senior Home Improvements

NM

2,900,000

Vasquez

Heinrich, Luján

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albuquerque

Modernization of Gateway
West

NM

2,000,000

Vasquez

Heinrich, Luján

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Carlsbad

Carlsbad Police Department
Renovation

NM

250,000

Vasquez

Luján

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Cruces

Las Cruces Innovation &
Industrial Park Expansion and Improvements

NM

850,000

Vasquez

Luján

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Cruces

Creation of the Community
of Hope De-Escalation
Office

NM

660,000

Vasquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albuquerque Economic Development Department

South Valley Commercial
Corridor Revitalization

NM

500,000

Vasquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Deming Silver Linings

Emergency Housing and
Support

NM

440,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Socorro

Waterline Replacement

NM

2,300,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys & Girls Club of San
Juan County

Aztec Club Capital Improvements

NM

1,500,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mesilla Valley Community
of Hope

Amador Crossing Apartments

NM

200,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

DreamTree Project, Inc.

Taos (NEST) Navigating
Emergency Support Together Renovations

NM

1,500,000

Heinrich

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00157

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1084

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Albuquerque Housing Authority

Albuquerque Public Housing
Upgrades

NM

850,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Homewise, Inc.

New Homes for New Mexico

NM

4,000,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Rio Grande National Heritage Area

Affordable Housing Pilot
Project

NM

692,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Serenity Mesa Youth Recovery Center

Facility Expansion

NM

1,000,000

Heinrich

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Youth Development, Inc.

Early Childhood Development Center

NM

3,000,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

La Cosecha Community
Supported Agriculture

Raı́ces Sagradas EcoWellness and Food Hub

NM

3,000,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Santa Fe County

Trauma-Informed Housing
Project

NM

2,500,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tierra Del Sol Housing Corporation

Vado New Horizons Development

NM

1,500,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mountainair

Downtown Mountainair
Roadway Improvements

NM

1,800,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cuidando Los Niños

Facility Expansion

NM

700,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pueblo of Acoma Housing
Authority

Cedar Hills Affordable
Housing

NM

1,000,000

Heinrich, Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Bernalillo

Affordable Housing Development

NM

1,500,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Joaquin del Rio de
Chama Land Grant

Community Center Renovations and Upgrades

NM

605,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lordsburg

Special Events Center Refurbish

NM

500,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Espanola Valley & Los
Alamos

Affordable Home Construction

NM

300,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Mosquero

Housing Project

NM

620,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McKinley County

Red Rock Facility Improvements

NM

500,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Region 9 Education Cooperative

Early Childhood Center

NM

1,000,000

Luján

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Regional Transportation
Commission of Washoe
County

Roadway and pedestrian
walkway improvements

NV

6,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Carson City

Public Works Department’s
5th Street Roundabout
Project

NV

3,000,000

Amodei

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clark County, Nevada

Clark County Lighting and
Safety Improvements

NV

250,000

Horsford

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Vegas

Opportunity Village Northwest Campus Development and Construction

NV

850,000

Lee (NV)

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00158

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1085

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nevada System of Higher
Education

Boulder City Community
and Science Center

NV

850,000

Titus

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Regional Transportation
Commission of Southern
Nevada

Bike Share Equipment Expansion

NV

775,000

Titus

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clark County

Clark County Energy Resilience and Safety Upgrades

NV

250,000

Titus

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lyon County

Mound House Community
Center

NV

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of North Las Vegas

Library Expansion

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Wendover

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

H

600,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

NV

2,500,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Community Center

NV

7,796,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Lander County

Assisted Living Center

NV

250,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Community Development
Fund

Elko County

Specialty Court Housing
Program

NV

635,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Vegas

Historic Westside Community Land Trust Affordable Housing

NV

1,850,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Reno

Community Center Wellness
Project

NV

3,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Las Vegas

Homelessness Prevention
and Diversion Program

NV

1,000,000

Cortez Masto,
Rosen

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

P.S. 12—The Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis Elementary School

Playground and Outdoor
Seating Area Renovations

NY

200,000

Clarke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

P.S. 139—The Alexine
Fenty School

Renovation and Expansion
of School Cafeteria

NY

850,000

Clarke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

PS 92—Adrian Hegeman
Elementary School

Pre-K Playground Renovations

NY

150,000

Clarke

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

Dominican Studies Institute
Facility Renovation and
Expansion

NY

3,150,000

Espaillat

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

Bronx Community College
Auto Technology AAS
Building Restoration
Phase 2

NY

1,200,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Patrick Henry Preparatory

Restroom Facilities Renovation Upgrade

NY

500,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

The City College of New
York Skills-Based Workforce Development Training Facilities

NY

2,000,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education (George
Washington Educational
Campus)

George Washington Campus
Auditorium Upgrade

NY

850,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

P.S./I.S. 187 Hudson Cliffs
(06M187)

P.S./I.S. 187 Energy Efficiency Project

NY

850,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Alexander Humboldt
School PS 115

P.S. 115 School Yard Upgrade and Playground
Project

NY

250,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York State Homes and
Community Renewal

Amalgamated Housing Corporation Floor Renovation

NY

250,000

Espaillat

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00159

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schumer

H20JAPT1

H

H1086

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Thomas Jefferson Recreation Center Security
Updates

NY

850,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

Lehman College Field Upgrades

NY

820,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York State Homes and
Community Renewal

Inwood Heights Affordable
Housing Renovations

NY

250,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Transportation

Greater Harlem
Streetscapes

NY

250,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Small Business Services

Small Business Energy Efficient Upgrades

NY

850,000

Espaillat

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Babylon

Downtown Deer Park Revitalization Project

NY

4,000,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Brookhaven

Municipal Landfill Capping
Project

NY

5,000,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Suffolk County Community
College

Advanced Manufacturing
Training Construction

NY

1,500,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Lindenhurst

Road Improvements

NY

750,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Bellport

Road Improvements

NY

500,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Oyster Bay

Salt Shed Construction

NY

1,000,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Islip

Road Improvements

NY

500,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Massapequa Park

Road Improvements

NY

1,500,000

Garbarino

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Incorporated Village of
Hempstead

Village of Hempstead
Mirschel Park Community Center Rehabilitation, Infrastructure Improvements and Equipment

NY

2,000,000

Gillen

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Franklin Square Public Library

Franklin Square Public Library Roof and HVAC
Replacement

NY

250,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lakeview Public Library

Lakeview Library Renovations

NY

850,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Long Beach

Tower Ladder Truck Acquisition for the Long
Beach Fire Department

NY

850,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Rockville Centre

Hickey Park Accessibility
Upgrades

NY

2,000,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Valley Stream Central High
School District

Valley Stream Creek Upgrades and Repairs

NY

850,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Incorporated Village of Floral Park

Floral Park Hook and Ladder Fire Truck Acquisition

NY

250,000

Gillen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lynbrook Police Department

Lynbrook All Weather Roof
Cover and Related
Equipment Acquisition
and Installation

NY

850,000

Gillen

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00160

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schumer

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1087

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Incorporated Village of Garden City

Edgemere Fire Station 2
Renovations and Structural Repairs

NY

500,000

Gillen

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Building Line Initiative—Red Hook East
Houses

NY

5,000,000

Goldman

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Red Hook East
Community Center Elevator Replacement

NY

1,100,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Lower East Side
Rehab (Group 5) Building Window Replacement

NY

850,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Gowanus Fire Alarm
System Upgrades

NY

850,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Baruch Houses Fire
Alarm System Upgrades

NY

850,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
for the Aging

Older Adult Mobile Vans
Acquisition

NY

500,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Fire Department

FDNY Generator Acquisition
for Engine Company 228

NY

250,000

Goldman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Canarsie Educational Campus Library Renovation

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Critical Facility Upgrades
and Improvements

NY

250,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Athletic Facilities Rehabilitation

NY

2,000,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Playground Rehabilitation

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

PS 345 Capital Improvements

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

South Shore Educational
Complex Athletic Facilities Rehabilitation

NY

1,200,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Van Dyke II Older
Adult Center Roof

NY

500,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Kingsborough Extension security cameras

NY

250,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

Marine Park Nature Trail
Bridge

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Woodson Safety and
Security Project

NY

250,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Fire Department

Renovation and equipment
for Engine 318/Ladder
166

NY

850,000

Jeffries

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tonawanda, New
York

Tonawanda’s Kohler Youth
Center Facility Upgrades
Phase 4

NY

850,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Niagara

Back Up Power at the Trott
Access Building in Niagara Falls

NY

250,000

Kennedy (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Suffolk County

Riverhead Brownfield Remediation

NY

350,000

LaLota

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00161

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Gillibrand, Schumer

H20JAPT1

H/S

H1088

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Huntington

Townwide Repavement
Project

NY

3,500,000

LaLota

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of New York

Office of Parks, Recreation
and Historic Preservation’s York Hall Historical Preservation

NY

1,500,000

LaLota

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Smithtown

Pavement Rehabilitation
and Infrastructure Renewal

NY

5,000,000

LaLota

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Brookhaven

Harbor Road/Town of
Brookhaven Resurfacing
Project

NY

5,000,000

LaLota

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Newstead

Community Center Construction

NY

5,000,000

Langworthy

Schumer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mamaroneck

Mamaroneck Town Safety
and Economic Renaissance Roundabout
Project

NY

500,000

Latimer

Schumer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Greenburgh

Greenburgh East Rumbrook
Park Expansion

NY

250,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mount Vernon

Mount Vernon Armory Preservation and Rehabilitation Project

NY

3,000,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New Rochelle

New Rochelle Housing Authority Accessibility Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Port Chester

Port Chester Village Hall
Gymnasium Remodeling
Project

NY

2,000,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Tarrytown

Tarrytown Benedict Avenue
Sidewalk

NY

850,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Tuckahoe

Tuckahoe Depot Square and
Main Street Sign Improvements

NY

850,000

Latimer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Ramapo

Pedestrian safety improvements

NY

5,000,000

Lawler

Gillibrand

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of New Square

Road Infrastructure Improvements

NY

4,000,000

Lawler

Schumer

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rockland County Sheriff’s
Department

Law Enforcement RealityBased Training Facility

NY

2,600,000

Lawler

Schumer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Orangetown

Town of Orangetown Revitalization Project

NY

1,300,000

Lawler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Suffern

Memorial Drive Reconstruction

NY

1,000,000

Lawler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Clarkstown

Transit-Oriented Development

NY

5,000,000

Lawler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Berry Houses CCTV Camera
Project

NY

1,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New York

FDNY Engine 284/Ladder
149/Satellite 3 Improvements

NY

1,230,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New York

FDNY Engine 155/Ladder
78 Generator Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New York

New York City EMS Training
Center Project

NY

5,000,000

Malliotakis

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00162

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1089

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

College of Staten Island,
City University of New
York

Public Safety Center

NY

2,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

New Lane Area CCTV Cameras

NY

1,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of New York

FDNY Squad 8 Firehouse
Renovations

NY

2,000,000

Malliotakis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oneida County

St. Luke’s Campus Redevelopment for Affordable
Housing

NY

2,000,000

Mannion

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Syracuse Housing Authority

East Adams Neighborhood
Transformation Development

NY

850,000

Mannion

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Conlon LIHFE Tower
Safety And Security
Project

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA International Tower
Safety and Security
Project

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Shelton House Safety and Security Project

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA International Tower
Fire Alarm System
Project

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Carleton Manor Roof
Tank Replacement

NY

850,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Transportation

Bayswater Pedestrian Improvements

NY

250,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Transportation

Jamaica Ave Safety &
Streetscape Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NYS Housing Trust Fund
(HTFC)

Power Plant Chiller Replacements

NY

2,000,000

Meeks

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The New York City Department of Transportation

Woodhaven Blvd SBS
Project to Improve Bus
and Pedestrian Mobility

NY

850,000

Meeks, Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Research Foundation of
CUNY

Queensborough Community
College Childcare Center

NY

3,150,000

Meng

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Fire Department

Apparatus & Multi-Component Renovation of
Squad 288

NY

2,000,000

Meng

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Fire Department

Multi-Component Renovation of Engine 305/Ladder 151

NY

2,000,000

Meng

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rochester

Rochester Public Market
Upgrades and Expansion

NY

2,000,000

Morelle

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Perinton

Perinton Community Center
& Playground Access Improvement Initiative

NY

2,100,000

Morelle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town/Village of East Rochester

Acquisition & Development
of Linden Park

NY

1,750,000

Morelle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monroe Community College

Monroe Community College
Precision Optics Finishing Lab

NY

850,000

Morelle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

The Central Park Footpath
Restoration

NY

850,000

Nadler

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00163

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schumer

Gillibrand

Gillibrand, Schumer

H20JAPT1

H

H/S

H

H1090

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks & Recreation

Swedish Cottage Historic
Preservation and Facility
Upgrades

NY

3,150,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

High Line 16th Street Accessibility Improvements

NY

850,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks & Recreation

Ralph Bunche Park Renovations

NY

2,000,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Thomas Apartments Safety
Upgrades

NY

2,000,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Harborview Terrace Elevator
Replacement

NY

1,200,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City School Construction Authority

Joan of Arc Educational
Complex School and
Playground Revitalization

NY

500,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hudson River Park Trust

Hudson River Park’s Public
Restroom Rehabilitation

NY

850,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

Seabury Playground Infrastructure and Play Area
Revitalization

NY

850,000

Nadler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Small Business Services

Food Bank Warehouse Upgrades

NY

2,998,000

Ocasio-Cortez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

School Food Forest Hub at
Adlai Stevenson High
School

NY

850,000

Ocasio-Cortez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

District 12 Literacy Hub

NY

720,000

Ocasio-Cortez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Transportation

Southern Boulevard Bus
Stops and Pedestrian
Safety Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Ocasio-Cortez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Research Foundation
for the State University
of New York—Binghamton University

Koffman Southern Tier Incubator Expansion and
Renovation for Manufacturing

NY

1,000,000

Riley

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Greenbush Police Department

East Greenbush Public
Safety Facility Improvements

NY

850,000

Riley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Endicott

Village of Endicott
Streetscape Improvements

NY

500,000

Riley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Shandaken

Pine Hill Wellington Hotel
Renovations

NY

250,000

Riley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hudson

Hudson Public Square Renovations

NY

250,000

Riley

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arlington Fire District

Arlington Fire Station 4
Functional Upgrades

NY

1,000,000

Ryan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Poughkeepsie

Hooker Ave. Fire Station
Structural Improvements

NY

850,000

Ryan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kingston

Rondout Riverport Shoreline
Stabilization

NY

250,000

Ryan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of South Blooming
Grove

South Blooming Grove Sidewalk Installation

NY

2,000,000

Ryan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake Champlain—Lake
George Regional Planning Board

North Country Housing Initiative

NY

5,000,000

Stefanik

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00164

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Schumer

H20JAPT1

H/S

January 20, 2026

H1091

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Business Development Center Construction

NY

4,000,000

Stefanik

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Cobleskill

Grandview Drive Project

NY

3,000,000

Stefanik

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Huntington

Southgate Affordable Rental Housing Redevelopment

NY

850,000

Suozzi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Incorporated Village of
Lattingtown

East Beach Drive Drainage
Project

NY

2,500,000

Suozzi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SUNY Old Westbury

Welwyn Preserve Revitalization

NY

2,000,000

Suozzi

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Lyons

Canal Street District Improvements

NY

2,000,000

Tenney

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lockport

Erie Canal Flight of Five
Locks Rehabilitation—
Phase III

NY

1,000,000

Tenney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wyoming County

Silver Lake Dredging
Project

NY

1,000,000

Tenney

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hudson Valley Community
College

Hudson Valley Community
College Applied Technology Education Center
(ATEC)

NY

850,000

Tonko

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Troy Public Library

Troy Public Main Library Indoor Air Quality Systems

NY

2,000,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Glenville Hill Fire District
No. 8

Glenville Hill Fire District
No. 8 Essential Building
Repair and Update

NY

1,000,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Albany

Lincoln Park Southwest
Gateway Improvements

NY

850,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Scotia

Village of Scotia Community Park Improvements

NY

500,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Ballston Spa

Village of Ballston Spa ADA
Transition Plan Sidewalk
Improvement Implementation

NY

250,000

Tonko

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Housing Preservation
& Development

NYC Neighborhood
Connectivity Expansion
and Equipment

NY

2,000,000

Torres (NY)

Gillibrand

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Building Line Initiative—Patterson Houses

NY

5,000,000

Torres (NY)

Gillibrand, Schumer

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York State Housing Finance Agency—NYS
Homes and Community
Renewal

Concourse Village Domestic
Pipes Replacement

NY

3,150,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA)

NYCHA Gun Hill Fire Alarm
System Upgrades

NY

850,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA)

NYCHA Parkside Fire Alarm
System Upgrades

NY

850,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hostos Community College,
City University of New
York

CUNY Hostos Library Renovations

NY

700,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
For The Aging (DFTA)

DFTA Transportation Vans
Acquisition

NY

660,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

Drew Playground Restroom
Renovations

NY

500,000

Torres (NY)

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00165

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Gillibrand

Gillibrand, Schumer

H20JAPT1

H

H

H1092

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation

Shoelace Park Resilience—
Infrastructure and Facility Upgrades

NY

1,200,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Education

Leaders of Tomorrow Middle
School Hydroponic
Science Lab Development, Construction, and
Equipment

NY

250,000

Torres (NY)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Bushwick Houses
Roof Tank Replacement

NY

1,200,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Borinquen Plaza II
Exterior Lighting

NY

2,000,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Department
of Small Business Services

GMDC 1155–1205 Manhattan Avenue Bulkhead
Replacement, Brooklyn,
NY

NY

850,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

Ravenswood Exterior Lighting

NY

3,150,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Cooper Park Houses
Exterior Lighting

NY

1,000,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Whitman Houses
Local Law 11 Brick Work
(Building 14)

NY

2,000,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Whitman Houses
Local Law 11 Brick Work
(Building 15)

NY

850,000

Velázquez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mosholu-Montefiore Community Center, Inc.

Facility Renovations

NY

1,371,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Way of Long Island

Training Academy Construction

NY

750,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Long Island

Patchogue Renovation and
Expansion

NY

3,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Asian Americans for Equality

Affordable Housing Development

NY

1,166,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity New
York City and Westchester

Affordable Housing Project

NY

3,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Catholic Charities of Staten
Island, Inc.

Community Center Renovation

NY

2,500,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York Public Library

K–12 Learning Center

NY

3,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York School for the
Deaf

Career and Technical Education Facility

NY

5,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Multi-Craft Apprenticeship
Preparation Program

Workforce Development Facility

NY

2,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

BronxWorks, Inc.

McLaughlin Center Capital
Renovations Project

NY

2,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Uptown Grand Central
Corp.

125th Street Community
Plaza

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Viscardi Center, Inc.

Community Program Hub

NY

400,000

Gillibrand

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00166

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1093

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Amount
($)

Requesters
Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

India Home, Inc.

Jamaica Affordable Housing
Project

NY

5,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York City Housing Authority

NYCHA Building Line Initiative—Douglass I & II
Houses

NY

1,663,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Food Bank For New York
City

Warehouse Renovations

NY

6,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake Champlain—Lake
George Regional Planning Board

Adirondack Workforce Housing Modular Facility Plan

NY

750,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

FeedMore Western New
York, Inc.

Consolidated Facility

NY

500,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brooklyn Chinese-American
Association

BCA Complex

NY

2,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Variety Boys & Girls Club
of Queens

Creation of Community
Center

NY

2,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York Historical Society

Classroom Space Additions

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Regional Food Bank of
Northeastern New York,
Inc.

Facilities Expansion

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Roundabout Theatre Company, Inc.

ADA Accessibility Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Babylon

Blighted Property Acquisition and Demolition for
Visionary Renewal of
Downtown Copiague

NY

1,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

RiseBoro Community Partnership Inc.

Affordable Housing Rehabilitation

NY

5,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fifth Avenue Committee,
Inc.

Community Facility Enhancements

NY

3,000,000

Gillibrand, Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Metropolitan Museum
of Art

83rd Street ADA Accessible
Entrance

NY

1,500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Harlem El Barrio Community Land Trust

Building Rehabilitation

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

UnionDocs, Inc.

Elevator and HVAC for
UnionDocs Headquarters

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Machne Gila

Dining Hall at Camp Gila

NY

1,500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

National Comedy Center
Operator Inc.

Comedy Center Capital Improvements

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ridgewood Nepalese Society
Inc.

Community and Cultural
Center Renovation and
Expansion

NY

900,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Joyce Theater Foundation, Inc.

New York Center for Creativity & Dance

NY

650,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Opera Association, Inc.

Elevator Modernization for
ADA Accessibility

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Center for New Jewish Culture Inc.

Community Center Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00167

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1094

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greater Allen Development
Corporation

Affordable Mixed-Use Housing

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bukharian Heritage Society,
Inc.

Bukharian Jewish Museum
and Community Facility
Expansion

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brooklyn Queens Conservatory of Music

BKCM Campus Expansion &
Renovation

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Camp HASC, Inc.

Dining Facility Renovation

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brooklyn Institute of Arts
and Sciences

Fire Alarm System

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of North Hempstead

Town Dock Revitalization
Project

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fordham University

Fordham Road Community
Center

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New York Shakespeare Festival dba The Public
Theater

ADA Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rochester Broadway Theatre League

West Herr Performing Arts
Center ADA Improvements

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

National Federation of Filipino American Associations

Community Center Expansion

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fund for Public Housing,
Inc. dba Public Housing
Community Fund

Active Living at NYCHA:
Creating Vibrant Intergenerational Spaces for
Health and Wellness

NY

1,000,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New Immigrant Community
Empowerment

NICE Station—Community
& Training Center

NY

500,000

Schumer

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Albany

Industrial Park Access
Road Project

OH

1,500,000

Balderson

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Reynoldsburg

Brice Road Corridor Redevelopment & Multimodal
Enhancements Project

OH

2,000,000

Beatty

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Columbus Metropolitan
Housing Authority

Reynoldsburg Mixed-Income
Housing

OH

1,000,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Minerva Park

Minerva Park Lake Watershed Rehabilitation—
Reservoir and Path System

OH

850,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gahanna

Creekside Garage Flood
Mitigation & Trail Improvements

OH

250,000

Beatty

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Euclid

Shore Cultural Centre Historic Preservation Project

OH

850,000

Brown

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cuyahoga County

The Beulah Park-Euclid
Beach Lakefront Connector

OH

850,000

Brown

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cleveland City Council
Ward 10

Ward 10 (NORA) Economic
Revitalization Recovery
Development

OH

1,000,000

Brown

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cuyahoga Community College District

Center for Entrepreneurs
Equipment and Retrofitting Project

OH

500,000

Brown

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Piqua

Downtown Piqua
Streetscape Improvements

OH

1,000,000

Carey

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00168

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Moreno

Moreno

H20JAPT1

H/S

H

January 20, 2026

H1095

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Franklin Township

Westland Mall Redevelopment Project

OH

2,500,000

Carey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Troy

Great Miami River Recreation Connectivity
Project

OH

1,000,000

Carey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sidney

Sidney/Shelby Water Sewer
Expansion

OH

800,000

Carey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hamilton County

Metropolitan Sewer District
of Greater Cincinnati—
SS 937 Dry Weather
Channel Improvements

OH

800,000

Davidson

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Niles

Sanitary Detention Pump
Station Improvements—
Phase 3

OH

600,000

Joyce (OH)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chester Township

Building and Infrastructure
Improvements

OH

3,938,000

Joyce (OH)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Toledo

New SAFE–T City Headquarters

OH

1,250,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Toledo

New Fire Station 16 on Dorr
Street

OH

850,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Metropolitan Park District
of the Toledo Area

Metroparks Toledo
Riverwalk Construction
and Glass City Enrichment Center Building
Upgrades

OH

2,000,000

Kaptur

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Toledo Public School District

Scott Park Campus Revitalization

OH

3,061,099

Kaptur

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cincinnati, Ohio

Northside Affordable Housing Renovation and Construction Project

OH

2,000,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Mariemont, Ohio

Mariemont Parks Improvement Project

OH

936,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hamilton County, Ohio

Walnut Hills Housing and
Workforce Development
Hub Project

OH

850,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Greater Cincinnati
Development Authority

Crosley Building Revitalization Project

OH

850,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Greater Cincinnati
Development Authority

West End Mixed-Use Renovation Project

OH

850,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cincinnati Metropolitan
Housing Authority

Winton Terrace Affordable
Housing Renovation
Project

OH

850,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norwood, Ohio

Dorl Field Improvement
Project

OH

500,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Greater Cincinnati
Development Authority

Urban League Community
Resource Hub Renovation and Expansion

OH

250,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Montgomery, Ohio

Montgomery Quarter Connector Boulevard Improvement Project

OH

250,000

Landsman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sheffield Lake

Field House Construction

OH

500,000

Latta

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Parma Heights

Parma Heights Street Rehabilitation Project

OH

1,000,000

Miller (OH)

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00169

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1096

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Steubenville

Wastewater Building Repair

OH

700,000

Rulli

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Akron

Downtown Akron Main
Street Project

OH

1,200,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Monroe Falls

Guise Park Lodge Renovation Project

OH

450,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Twinsburg

Glen Chamberlin Park Improvement Study

OH

850,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Akron

East Copley District Safe
and Vibrant Streets
Study

OH

250,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Stark County Park District

Ohio & Erie Canal National
Heritage Area Restoration

OH

1,500,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Boston Heights

Village of Boston Heights
Safety Center

OH

850,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Canton

Cleveland Ave. NW
Streetscape

OH

850,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Massillon

Reservoir Park Restoration

OH

250,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fairlawn

Rosemont Preserve Restoration Project

OH

1,200,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tallmadge

Tallmadge Circle Pedestrian
Tunnel Development and
Construction

OH

1,000,000

Sykes

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pickaway County Port Authority

State Route 762/Rickenbacker Parkway Roundabout

OH

4,000,000

Taylor

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ironton

Riverfront Improvements

OH

1,000,000

Taylor

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dayton

Edwin C. Moses Boulevard
Revitalization Project

OH

3,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dayton

Wright-Dunbar Development
Project

OH

2,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fairborn

Wright-Patterson Council of
Governments Land Acquisition

OH

1,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dayton-Montgomery County
Port Authority

Project Plymouth

OH

1,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wright State University

Facilities expansion, upgrades, and improvements

OH

1,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Wildenhaus Place

OH

1,000,000

Turner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Stark State College

CDL Instruction Center

OH

875,000

Husted

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chillicothe

Mary Lou Patton Park Infrastructure Revitalization

OH

1,500,000

Husted

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Franklin Township &
Conesville Village Joint
Recreation Board

Muskingum River Access
Project

OH

247,000

Husted

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00170

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Moreno

Moreno

H20JAPT1

H

H

January 20, 2026

H1097

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vinton County Visitors Center

Capital Improvements

OH

5,000,000

Husted

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Portsmouth

Chillicothe Street Housing
Project

OH

1,500,000

Husted

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Columbus State Community
College

Ohio Center for Advanced
Technology

OH

9,500,000

Husted, Moreno

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Downtown Toledo Development Corporation

ConnecToledo Farmer’s
Market Renovation and
Relocation

OH

2,000,000

Moreno

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edmond

East Edmond Electric Substation Expansions for
Critical Infrastructure

OK

4,000,000

Bice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oklahoma City Redevelopment Authority

Facility and Lab Construction

OK

7,000,000

Bice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Ardmore

Ardmore Storm Water and
Street Improvements

OK

7,500,000

Cole

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newcastle

Newcastle Wastewater
Treatment Facility

OK

12,000,000

Cole

Mullin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pauls Valley

Pauls Valley Lake Emergency Overflow Spillway
Project

OK

6,286,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fires Innovation Science
and Technology Accelerator

Fires Innovation Science
and Technology Accelerator’s Science and
Technology Convergence
Institute

OK

11,500,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lindsay

City of Lindsay’s New Electrical Substation

OK

3,957,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Walters Public Works Authority

Walters Substation Rebuild
and Capacity Enhancement Project

OK

4,340,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chickasaw Nation of Oklahoma

Chickasaw Nation Water
Quality and Hazardous
Substance Testing Center

OK

8,438,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Goldsby

Goldsby Municipal Water
Improvements

OK

7,000,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lawton

Lawton Alternate Water
Supply

OK

5,000,000

Cole

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oklahoma State University

Facility Construction and
Improvements

OK

5,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Weatherford

Weatherford Community
Center

OK

5,000,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kingfisher

Kingfisher Firehouse

OK

2,500,000

Lucas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Inola Public Schools

Inola Early Childhood Development and Preschool
Facility

OK

4,000,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of St. Helens

St. Helens Reservoir Replacement Project

OR

1,000,000

Bonamici

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Beaverton

Beaverton Senior Housing
and Community Space
Construction Project

OR

3,150,000

Bonamici

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00171

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Mullin

S

Merkley, Wyden

H

H20JAPT1

H

H1098

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cornelius

Cornelius Community and
Recreation Center

OR

850,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tualatin Hills Park and
Recreation District

Americans with Disabilities
Act Facility Upgrades

OR

250,000

Bonamici

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Redmond

Cinder Hollow Affordable
Housing Project

OR

2,000,000

Bynum

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gladstone

Gladstone Early Childhood
Center Development and
Construction

OR

1,500,000

Bynum

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Happy Valley

Happy Valley Community
Center

OR

1,200,000

Bynum

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Portland

The Ellington Apartments
Redevelopment

OR

2,000,000

Dexter

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Gresham

Main City Park Revitalization Project

OR

850,000

Dexter

Merkley, Wyden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Home Forward

Peaceful Villa Housing Construction, Equipment
and Furnishings

OR

1,975,000

Dexter

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Centennial School District

Centennial Transition Center Permanent Location

OR

500,000

Dexter

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Umpqua Community College

Affordable Housing for Students

OR

3,150,000

Hoyle

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lincoln City

Fernwood Village Housing
Development and Construction

OR

2,000,000

Hoyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Florence

Siuslaw River Slope Stabilization Project

OR

250,000

Hoyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sheridan School District
48J

Barbara Roberts Career
Technical Education
Center

OR

850,000

Salinas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Salem

Emergency Power Generation for Low-Income Senior Housing

OR

500,000

Salinas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Western Oregon University

Western Oregon University
Data Center

OR

250,000

Salinas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Woodburn

Woodburn’s Historic
Settlemier Park Improvements

OR

250,000

Salinas

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Klamath Tribes

Tribal Housing

OR

2,820,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Linn-Benton Community
College Foundation

Periwinkle Child Development Center

OR

105,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Portand

Mass Timber and Housing
Innovation Campus Infrastructure Project

OR

3,200,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Medford

Santos Center Discovery
Preschool Expansion

OR

500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Oregon Center for Creative
Learning

Early Childhood and Interactive Learning Center

OR

1,200,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Warehouse

Furniture Bank Expansion

OR

2,200,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00172

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Merkley, Wyden

Merkley, Wyden

H20JAPT1

H/S

H/S

January 20, 2026

H1099

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Amount
($)

Requesters
Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Albina Vision Trust, Inc.

Affordable Housing Land
Acquisition

OR

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Network for Oregon Affordable Housing

Affordable Homeownership
Loan Program

OR

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Corvallis Neighborhood
Housing Services, Inc.
dba DevNW

Affordable Housing Construction in Linn County

OR

752,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Everyone Village

Affordable Housing Construction in Lane County

OR

2,465,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Sumpter

Sumpter Community Center
Safety Improvements

OR

173,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Columbia Gorge Education
Service District

The Dalles Early Learning
Center

OR

1,500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Farmworker Housing Development Corporation

Affordable Housing

OR

536,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Confederated Tribes of
Coos, Lower Umpqua,
and Siuslaw Indians

Low-Income Multifamily
Housing Project

OR

1,914,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

John Day School District #3

Grant Early Learning Center

OR

1,450,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

McKenzie Community Land
Trust

Affordable Housing in Blue
River

OR

1,700,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wallowa Resources

Affordable Workforce Housing in Wallowa County

OR

500,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bridge Meadows

Intergenerational Housing
Project

OR

750,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Meals on Wheels People

Eastside Resource Center

OR

3,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marion Polk Food Share

Food Bank Warehouse and
Meals on Wheels Kitchen

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Corvallis Daytime Drop-in
Center

Homeless Services Navigation Center

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Big River Community Land
Trust

Hood River Affordable
Housing Project

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Confederated Tribes of
Grand Ronde

tumwata village Project

OR

2,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Portland

Clara Vista Redevelopment

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bend-Redmond Habitat for
Humanity

Supporting Affordable
Homeownership in Central Oregon

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northwest Community
Housing Foundation

Zig Zag Workforce Housing

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Yamhill County Affordable
Housing Corporation

McMinnville Housing Rehabilitation

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity Portland Metro East dba
Habitat for Humanity
Portland Region

Affordable Housing Construction in Multnomah
County

OR

1,000,000

Merkley, Wyden

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00173

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1100

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Philadelphia Water Department, City of Philadelphia, PA

PWD Kensington Lead Service Line Replacement

PA

2,000,000

Boyle

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia—Department of Parks and
Recreation

Pleasant Hill Park Community Center Development
and Construction

PA

250,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia—Department of Parks and
Recreation

Pennypack on the Delaware
Ranger Building Development and Construction

PA

250,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia’s Department of Fleet Services

Shop 134 EV Charging
Equipment Acquisition

PA

250,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia Office
of Transportation and
Infrastructure Systems

Castor Avenue Safety and
Streetscape Improvements

PA

850,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia Office
of Transportation and
Infrastructure Systems

Lehigh Avenue Traffic Safety Improvements

PA

850,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia

McPherson Library Renovations

PA

850,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia Office
of Transportation and
Infrastructure Systems

Market Street Headhouses
Replacements

PA

1,200,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Center City District

Viaduct Greenway Development and Revitalization

PA

2,000,000

Boyle

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Philadelphia

Demolition and Redevelopment of Holmesburg
Prison Site

PA

850,000

Boyle, Evans (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pike County

Wayne & Pike County Career and Technical Center

PA

3,000,000

Bresnahan

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lackawanna County

Veterans Permanent Supportive Housing

PA

1,500,000

Bresnahan

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Collegeville

Collegeville Main St & 9th
Avenue Transportation
Safety & Revitalization
Improvements

PA

750,000

Dean

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kutztown University of
Pennsylvania

Sharadin Farmstead Restoration

PA

250,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County Housing Authority

The Montgomery County
Housing Authority
(MCHA)’s Affordable
Housing Preservation

PA

500,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lower Providence Township

Public Facility Rebuild

PA

750,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cheltenham Township

Rowland Community Center
Revitalization

PA

500,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redevelopment Authority of
the County of Montgomery

Pottstown Anti-Poverty and
Workforce Development
Initiative: TRec District
Phase 1 Completion
Project

PA

800,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Upper Moreland Township
School District

Living Science Laboratory
for Agriculture and
Workforce Development
Facility Development &
Construction

PA

250,000

Dean

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Allegheny County

Panhandle Trail Extension
Acquisition

PA

850,000

Deluzio

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Borough of Sewickley

The Sewickley Road Safety
Improvement Plan

PA

250,000

Deluzio

Fetterman, McCormick

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00174

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Fetterman

Fetterman, McCormick

H

H

H

Fetterman

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1101

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mt. Lebanon

Mt. Lebanon Community
Recreation Center Accessibility Upgrades and
Facility Expansion

PA

850,000

Deluzio

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Churchill Borough

Churchill Borough Community Park Development
and Construction

PA

500,000

Deluzio

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ben Avon Borough

Ben Avon Rooftop Solar
Panels

PA

250,000

Deluzio

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The School District of
Philadelphia

Anna Blakiston Day
School’s Schoolyard Improvements and Equipment Upgrades

PA

717,593

Evans (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The School District of
Philadelphia

James G. Blaine School’s
Schoolyard Improvements

PA

850,000

Evans (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The School District of
Philadelphia

Richard R. Wright Elementary School’s Schoolyard
Improvements, Infrastructure Upgrades, and
Equipment

PA

850,000

Evans (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Temple University

Temple University’s Community Kitchen

PA

1,500,000

Evans (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community College of
Philadelphia

Community College of
Philadelphia Housing
Development and Renovations

PA

850,000

Evans (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bensalem Township

Fire Station Construction

PA

4,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bristol Township

Homeless Shelter Renovation and Expansion

PA

2,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Middletown Township

Public Works Complex Reconstruction

PA

2,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bucks County

Boone Farm Community
Center

PA

2,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Quakertown Borough

Streetscape Improvements

PA

1,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bristol Borough

Bristol Borough Consolidated Fire Station

PA

2,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bristol Township

HELP Center Construction

PA

1,250,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bristol Township

Edgely Bridge Project

PA

5,000,000

Fitzpatrick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Reading Area Community
College

Schmidt Training and Technology Center Expansion
for Workforce Development

PA

2,000,000

Houlahan

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Goshen Fire Company, West
Chester PA

Goshen Fire Company/ EMS
Station Demolition, Development and Construction

PA

850,000

Houlahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Reading

11th and Pike Recreation
Center Expansion

PA

850,000

Houlahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Grove Borough

West Grove Memorial Park
Expansion

PA

850,000

Houlahan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Johnstown

Johnstown Public Safety
Center

PA

2,850,000

Joyce (PA)

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00175

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

McCormick

H20JAPT1

H

H1102

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Alexandria

Alexandria Borough Revitalization Project

PA

1,500,000

Joyce (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Pittsburgh

Pitt-Johnstown Future
Ready

PA

1,000,000

Joyce (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bedford Borough

Fort Bedford Park Improvements

PA

1,250,000

Joyce (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Western Pennsylvania Port
Authority

Erie Coke Demolition
Project

PA

2,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Erie

Erie County Industrial Park

PA

3,000,000

Kelly (PA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Allegheny County

Increasing Affordable Housing Options for People
Exiting Homelessness in
Allegheny County

PA

3,000,000

Lee (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pittsburgh

City of Pittsburgh—Recreating Community at
Thaddeus Stevens Center

PA

250,000

Lee (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Urban Redevelopment Authority of Pittsburgh

Downtown Pittsburgh Office-to-Housing Conversion Construction

PA

1,000,000

Lee (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Allegheny County

Allegheny County Economic
Development—Mon Valley Strategic Blight Removal

PA

1,200,000

Lee (PA)

Fetterman, McCormick

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Westmoreland County

Westmoreland County—
Biddle Property Access &
Irwin Discharge Elimination

PA

1,075,000

Lee (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Board of Public Education
of the School District of
Pittsburgh

Greenfield Elementary
School Community
Schoolyard

PA

400,000

Lee (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Mifflin Borough

West Mifflin Borough—
Community & Recreation
Center

PA

850,000

Lee (PA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Catasauqua Borough

Catasauqua Iron Works Redevelopment

PA

3,683,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wind Gap Borough

Male Rd Bridge Replacement & Pedestrian Improvements

PA

431,000

Mackenzie

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dallas School District

Community Center Improvements

PA

3,500,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lebanon

Downtown Improvements

PA

1,000,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shamokin Coal Township
Joint Sewer Authority

Wastewater Treatment Facility Upgrades

PA

1,400,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pennsylvania College of
Technology

Forest Products Training
Center

PA

250,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Luzerne County

Old Airport Road Improvement Project

PA

700,000

Meuser

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Redevelopment Authority of
the County of Fayette

Thompson’s Crossing Business Park

PA

7,000,000

Reschenthaler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Indiana

Windy Ridge Business &
Technology Park—Phase
3 Roadway Construction

PA

1,500,000

Reschenthaler

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Delaware County Community College

Delaware County Community College Workforce
Success Center

PA

2,000,000

Scanlon

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00176

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Fetterman

H

H

Fetterman

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1103

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sharon Hill Borough

Sharon Hill Library and
Recreation Center

PA

1,200,000

Scanlon

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Township of Chester

Chester Township Fire
Company Health and
Safety Renovations

PA

500,000

Scanlon

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Delaware County District
Attorney’s Office

Four Seasons Park Revitalization

PA

1,000,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The School District of
Philadelphia

Schoolyard Improvements
at Penrose Elementary

PA

860,400

Scanlon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Norristown Public Library
Renovation

PA

850,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nether Providence Township

Providence Road Sidewalk
Improvement Project

PA

500,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Folcroft Borough

Improvements to Montgomery Park

PA

250,000

Scanlon

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Buffalo Township

West Market Street Pedestrian and Traffic Safety
Improvements

PA

1,800,000

Thompson (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of State College

Calder Way Transportation
Improvements

PA

2,449,000

Thompson (PA)

Fetterman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Borough of Bellefonte

Bellefonte Waterfront—
Dunlop Street Construction

PA

1,555,000

Thompson (PA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Steel Rivers Council of
Governments

Blight Remediation in the
Mon Valley

PA

750,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Nueva Esperanza, Inc.

Esperanza Stable Affordable Rental Housing
Trust Project

PA

750,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Berks County

Blight Remediation in
Reading

PA

1,610,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lancaster Area Habitat for
Humanity

Affordable Housing Construction

PA

750,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Erie County Community
Land Bank

Erie County Cornerstone
Community Land Trust
Affordable Housing Program

PA

1,100,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Common Roots

Revitalizing Upper Water
Street in Meadville

PA

750,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Broad Street Ministry

Kitchen Renovations

PA

970,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Launch of Philadelphia,
Inc.

Improvements for Launch
Community Education
Facility

PA

450,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dauphin County Redevelopment Authority

Low-Income Housing Development Initiative

PA

650,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

ACTION–Housing, Inc.

Affordable Housing Conversion in Downtown Pittsburgh

PA

500,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Scranton Neighborhood
Housing Services Inc.,
dba NeighborWorks
Northeastern Pennsylvania

Whole Home Repair Initiative for Seniors—Lackawanna, Luzerne, Wayne,
Pike, Monroe Counties

PA

522,000

Fetterman

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00177

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

H1104

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Warren

Community Park Improvement Project

PA

250,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Women’s Community Revitalization Project

Linda Lockman-King Apartments in West Philadelphia

PA

950,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State College Community
Land Trust, Inc.

Expansion of Forever Affordable Homes in State
College

PA

1,500,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Garden of Health Inc.

Improvements to Garden of
Health’s Hatfield Farm

PA

350,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Young Women’s Christian Association of York

Enhancing Victims and
Survivors Facilities

PA

958,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Amani Christian Community
Development Corporation

Blight Remediation and
Site Preparation in the
Carrick Neighborhood of
Pittsburgh

PA

954,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The Caring Cupboard, Inc.

Community Center Construction in Lebanon
County

PA

1,000,000

Fetterman

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez

Research Center at
UPRM—Phase I

PR

2,000,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of Ponce

YMCA Community Facility
Improvements

PR

2,000,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of Isabela

Facility Redevelopment for
Agri-Business Innovation
Center of Isabela

PR

1,200,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of Barceloneta

Seniors Community and
Housing Development
and Construction in
Barceloneta

PR

1,000,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of San Sebastian

Small Business Advancement in Next-generation
Skills and Entrepreneurship (SANSE) Hub Development and Construction

PR

850,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Municipality of Manatı́

Manatı́ Affordable Housing
Revitalization

PR

850,000

Hernández

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Cumberland

Cumberland Public Library
Exterior Renovations

RI

850,000

Amo

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of North Kingstown

North Kingstown Community Center Revitalization
Project

RI

620,000

Magaziner

Reed, Whitehouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Providence

Conley Stadium Infrastructure, Safety, and Accessibility Improvements

RI

250,000

Magaziner

Reed, Whitehouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Johnston

Johnston Flood Mitigation
and Development of
Woodland Park Project

RI

850,000

Magaziner

Reed, Whitehouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Providence

Igliozzi Resilience Hub

RI

1,000,000

Magaziner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
Town of South Kingstown

Affordable Housing and
Community Center Development

RI

850,000

Magaziner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of South Kingstown

Enhancing South Kingstown
Town Beach: Resilience
and Accessibility Upgrades

RI

250,000

Magaziner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Burrillville

Burrillville Field House

RI

500,000

Magaziner

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00178

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1105

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Coventry

Municipal Collection Facility
Project

RI

750,000

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of South Kingstown

Affordable Housing Initiative

RI

5,000,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Elmwood Housing Development Corporation

Affordable Housing

RI

500,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Action Partnership of Providence County

CAPP Housing Improvements

RI

441,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Warwick Public Library

West Warwick Public Library Facility

RI

300,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Meals on Wheels of RI, Inc.

Facility Renovation

RI

600,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Central Falls Foundation

Food Access

RI

150,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YWCA Rhode Island

Veterans Community Center

RI

600,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

NeighborWorks Blackstone
River Valley

Affordable Housing

RI

975,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Aldersbridge Communities

Aldersbridge at East Point

RI

500,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Care Alliance

Facilities and Equipment

RI

200,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newport

Senior Center Modernization
Project

RI

1,000,000

Reed

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fuerza Laboral

Building Upgrades for Child
Care Center and Incubator

RI

500,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pawtucket

Veterans Memorial Park
Pool Renovations

RI

2,500,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Way of Rhode Island, Inc.

United Way Facility Renovation

RI

3,400,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tower Street Center, Inc.

Tower Street Community
Center

RI

4,475,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Trinity Repertory Company

Access for All

RI

525,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sojourner House

Woonsocket Office and
Drop-In Center
Acquistion and Renovation

RI

1,275,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Olneyville Housing Corporation dba ONE Neighborhood Builders

ONB Cumberland Affordable
Housing

RI

2,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Crossroads Rhode Island

Crossroads—Warwick
Housing

RI

2,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Olneyville Housing Corporation dba ONE Neighborhood Builders

Affordable Housing Development

RI

2,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Providence

West End Community Center Project

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00179

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

Magaziner

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

H20JAPT1

H1106

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Providence

Federal Hill House Improvements

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Central Falls

Jenks Park and Cogswell
Tower Restoration

RI

1,000,000

Reed, Whitehouse

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South Carolina State University

SCSU Military Science Center of Excellence

SC

15,000,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Claflin University

Boulevard Street Economic
Renewal

SC

3,000,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bamberg County, SC

Bamberg County Downtown
Renaissance

SC

1,500,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Summerton

Blight Removal, Capital
Improvements and Community Development

SC

1,500,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Morris College

Small Business Entrepreneur Incubator Center
Acquisition, Development, and Construction

SC

1,250,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clarendon County

Intergenerational Wellness
Complex Facilities Upgrades

SC

1,000,000

Clyburn

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of South Carolina

Office of Resilience’s
Crooked Creek Channel
Improvements Project

SC

1,500,000

Fry

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

State of South Carolina

Office of Resilience’s City
of Dillon Stormwater Improvements—Dargan
Street to Washington
Street

SC

1,500,000

Fry

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of South Carolina

Facility Improvements

SC

12,611,000

Graham

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Pageland

Public Safety Facility

SC

5,512,000

Graham

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of South Carolina

Veterans and Military Center of Excellence

SC

10,000,000

Graham

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Magdalene Dakota

Women’s Rehabilitation Facility

SD

829,000

Rounds

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Douglas School District
#51–1

Douglas Elementary School

SD

42,000,000

Rounds

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Crow Creek Housing Authority

Crow Creek Housing Development

SD

3,000,000

Rounds

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Knox County

Veterans Housing

TN

2,000,000

Burchett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shelby County, TN

Historic Clayborn Temple
Restoration Project,
Memphis TN

TN

3,150,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Historic Mason Temple
Renovation Project

TN

1,200,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Covenant Gardens Senior
Apartments Construction
Project

TN

1,000,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Downtown Memphis Commission

Historic Sterick Building
Renovation and Restoration Project

TN

1,200,000

Cohen

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00180

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1107

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Monroe Plaza and Extended
Pedestrian Infrastructure
Improvements Project

TN

850,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Memphis Housing Authority

Electrical Infrastructure Upgrades at Montgomery
Plaza, Memphis, TN

TN

850,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Memphis Homeless Veterans Housing Facility
Renovation

TN

250,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Memphis

Youth and Families Facilities Renovations

TN

850,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Memphis

Park Avenue Campus Water
and Sewer Line Replacement and Street Improvements

TN

850,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southwest Tennessee Community College

Reimagining Southwest
Tennessee Community
College Facilities Renovations

TN

250,000

Cohen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Middle Tennessee State
University

Transportation Infrastructure Project

TN

1,500,000

DesJarlais

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bledsoe County

Rigsby Elementary School
Upgrades

TN

1,500,000

DesJarlais

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chattanooga

21st Century Waterfront
Revitalization

TN

7,000,000

Fleischmann

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chattanooga

James A. Henry Building

TN

5,000,000

Fleischmann

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cocke County

Fowlers Grove Road Safety
Improvements

TN

650,000

Harshbarger

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Cocke County

Safety Improvements for
Joe Reed Road

TN

450,000

Harshbarger

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Memphis

University of Memphis at
Jackson Upgrades

TN

1,250,000

Kustoff

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Houston

Houston Airports’ Enterprise
Shuttle Boulevard Extension Project at Ellington

TX

2,200,000

Babin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chambers County

Double Bayou Dredging
Project

TX

3,000,000

Babin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Jacinto Community
College District

Biomanufacturing Workforce
& Industry Growth Initiative

TX

3,000,000

Babin

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Coryell County

Straws Mill Road Bridge
Project

TX

3,900,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bell County

Road and Bridge Infrastructure Improvements

TX

15,740,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Temple

Henderson Parkway and
Trail Project

TX

19,000,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Clifton

Waterline Loop

TX

840,000

Carter (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Austin

Santa Rita Courts
Childcare Facility Redevelopment

TX

850,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

VFW Post 76 Renovation

TX

2,000,000

Casar

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00181

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1108

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

Palacio Del Sol Senior Living Facility Rehabilitation

TX

250,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

Investing in Community Infrastructure Through
NALCAB’s New Headquarters in San Antonio’s Historic Market
Square—Acquisition,
Renovation, and Equipment

TX

1,000,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Travis County

The Sasha—Affordable
Housing Development
and Construction

TX

1,000,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of San Antonio, TX

Morris C. Beldon Apartments Site and Building
Improvements

TX

850,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

Ella Austin Community
Center Campus Renovation

TX

500,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Persimmon Point Housing
Development and Construction

TX

250,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Esperanza Community Shelter and Facility Development and Construction

TX

850,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Sir Swante Palm Park Revitalization

TX

850,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hays County

Hays County Sportsplex Improvements

TX

2,000,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Onion Creek Metropolitan
Park All Abilities Playground Development,
Construction and Equipment

TX

3,150,000

Casar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio
Westside Development
Corporation

Community Economic Opportunity Initiative

TX

250,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Balcones Heights

Balcones Heights Senior
Center Renovations

TX

250,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of San Antonio

San Pedro Springs Park
Upgrades and Equipment

TX

250,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of San Antonio,
Texas

Critical Needs—Multifamily
Roof Replacement

TX

1,124,400

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

San Antonio Water System

Laterals to People

TX

2,000,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City Public Service Board of
San Antonio

Community Resiliency Initiative

TX

850,000

Castro

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Conroe

Crighton Road Lift Station
and Force Main Upgrade
Project

TX

1,000,000

Crenshaw

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Gene Campbell Road Corridor Drainage and Mobility Improvements

TX

2,000,000

Crenshaw

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas Water Commons Eco Park Project

TX

500,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, TX

City of Dallas Santos
Rodriguez Recreation
Center Project

TX

850,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas Fair Park
and Facilities Improvements

TX

850,000

Crockett

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00182

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1109

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lancaster, Texas

City of Lancaster Roy
Crawford Park Walking
Trail Project

TX

1,000,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of DeSoto, Texas

Public Safety Complex Development and Construction

TX

3,000,000

Crockett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Seguin

Community Center Improvements

TX

2,300,000

De La Cruz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mission

Military Parkway Expansion
Project

TX

2,000,000

De La Cruz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hidalgo County

West Main Drain Project

TX

5,500,000

De La Cruz

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Austin Independent School
District

Career and Technical Education Equipment and
Facility Improvements at
Austin ISD

TX

1,500,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Travis County

SAFE Rathgeber Village
Safety and Security Infrastructure Upgrade

TX

2,000,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Cool Corridors: Tree Planting and Equipment to
Reduce Extreme Heat in
Austin’s Hottest Corridors

TX

500,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Sunken Garden Springs
Historic Rehabilitation
and Restoration Project

TX

625,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Austin

Mary Lee Campus—Lamar
Square

TX

625,000

Doggett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glenn Heights

Water Infrastructure Improvements

TX

6,300,000

Ellzey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Irving

Domestic Violence Shelter
Construction

TX

5,000,000

Ellzey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Glenn Heights

Water System Improvements

TX

8,455,000

Ellzey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

El Paso County

Animal Welfare Shelter
Equipment Acquisition

TX

250,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of El Paso

Innovation Factory Phase II

TX

250,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

El Paso County

Transforming Juvenile Justice through Education
Facility Expansion

TX

1,000,000

Escobar

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montrose Redevelopment
Authority

Northeast Montrose Sidewalk Improvements

TX

850,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Houston Parks and Recreation Department

City of Houston Metropolitan Multi Service Center
(MMSC) for People with
Disabilities Renovation
Project

TX

3,150,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fort Bend County Precinct
4

Mission Bend Senior Center

TX

2,000,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Southwest Houston Redevelopment Authority
(SHRA)

Southwest Civic Core Phase
II

TX

2,000,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City Park Redevelopment
Authority (TIRZ12)

12th Street Drainage Upgrades

TX

1,000,000

Fletcher

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00183

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1110

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West University
Place

West University Roadway
Reconstruction

TX

850,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County Public Library

Tiny Branches

TX

850,000

Fletcher

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Houston

Mason Park Community
Center Repairs and Improvements

TX

1,200,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The University of Texas at
Houston

Strengthening Houston
Housing, Houston, Harris
County, Texas

TX

2,000,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County Precinct 2

Veterans Memorial Park Improvements and Facility
Development and Construction

TX

1,200,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

East Aldine Management
District

Worsham Elementary Safe
Routes to Schools Infrastructure Improvements

TX

850,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Houston Land Bank

Yellow Cab Site Redevelopment—Mixed-Income
Housing and Community
Revitalization

TX

2,000,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pasadena Parks &
Recreation

City of Pasadena Strawberry Park Improvements

TX

850,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Houston Arte
Publico Press

Humanities Facility Infrastructure Development
and Construction

TX

850,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Houston
Downtown

East End Innovation Incubator Facility Development

TX

250,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County Precinct 2

Facility for Addressing
Community Food Security
Needs in Gulfgate—
Demolition, Development
and Construction

TX

250,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harrisburg Redevelopment
Authority (TIRZ 23)

Harrisburg Trail Improvements

TX

250,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

UTHealth Houston, School
of Dentistry

University of Texas Kitchen
Construction and Equipment Acquisition

TX

250,000

Garcia (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Texas at San
Antonio

UTSA Veterans Center

TX

7,500,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hudspeth County

Hudspeth County Community Center

TX

2,000,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The City of San Elizario

San Elizario Community
Center

TX

2,000,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Pecos City

Pecos Housing Project

TX

2,000,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The University of Texas at
El Paso

UAS Drone Workforce Development Center

TX

2,000,000

Gonzales

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Donna

Donna Multi-purpose Sports
Complex

TX

2,000,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mercedes

City of Mercedes Expansion
of Storm Sewer System

TX

850,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Harlingen, Texas

City of Harlingen New Animal Shelter

TX

1,000,000

Gonzalez

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00184

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1111

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of La Feria

La Bonita Pump Station &
Drainage Improvements

TX

1,000,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley (UTRGV)

Cold Storage Facility Training and Logistics Hub

TX

250,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kleberg County

Baffin Bay Education, Safety and Ecotourism Boat
Ramp and Fishing Pier

TX

850,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

The City of Brownsville

Project Phoenix

TX

250,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Combes

City of Combes—Lift Stations Reconstruction,
Upgrades, and Repairs

TX

850,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Brownsville Fire Department

City of Brownsville Fire Department—Training
Field Upgrades

TX

250,000

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Raymondville

Raymondville City Wide
Park Improvement Plan

TX

965,467

Gonzalez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Sunnyvale

Sunnyvale Collins Road
Widening Project (Phase
2)

TX

1,000,000

Gooden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Mineola Independent School
District

The Wood County Special
Education Co-Op MultiDistrict Building

TX

1,000,000

Gooden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jarvis Christian University

Facilities Improvements

TX

3,000,000

Gooden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fort Bend County Precinct
2

City of Arcola Wastewater
Treatment Plant Expansion

TX

250,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Five Corners Improvement
District Harris County
Improvement District
10A

Houston Stand Down Career
Gear Houston Facility Expansion and Upgrades
and Equipment Acquisition

TX

500,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Texas Woman’s University

Equipment Acquisition to
Promote Houston Workforce Development

TX

850,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Pearland

City of Pearland Fire Suppression Apparatus

TX

2,000,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Houston Land Bank

Houston Land Bank Land
and Housing Acquisition,
Development, and Construction

TX

1,200,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greater Southeast Management District

The Hermann Park Northeast Connectivity and
Mobility Improvements

TX

850,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Houston—Houston
Public Works

Almeda Genoa Rd. at
Furman Rd. Intersection
Improvements

TX

250,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Gulfgate Redevelopment
Authority

Sterling High School Community Improvement
Project

TX

250,000

Green (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County

Precinct 3’s Memorial Drive
Street and Drainage Reconstruction

TX

6,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County

Precinct 3’s HufsmithKohrville Road Widening
and Bridge Reconstruction

TX

1,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County

Precinct 4’s Voss Rd. Safety Improvements

TX

1,000,000

Hunt

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00185

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1112

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hedwig Village

West Side Infrastructure
Construction

TX

1,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County Improvement
District 4

Interstate 10 Gateway
Lighting

TX

1,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tomball

Phase 2: Road, Utility, and
Drainage Improvements
and Extension of South
Persimmon and Timkin
Street

TX

5,000,000

Hunt

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Denton

Masch Branch Road Wastewater Improvements

TX

2,000,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Donley County

Donley County Emergency
Operations Center

TX

1,600,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wichita Falls

Wichita Falls Airport Industrial Park Access Road
Project

TX

1,000,000

Jackson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas

International District Park
Development and Infrastructure

TX

2,000,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Dallas College

Dallas College Aviation
Maintenance Technology
Program

TX

1,500,000

Johnson (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Polk County

Commercial Driver License
Training & Examination
Center

TX

3,108,000

Luttrell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Precinct 4’s Willis-Waukegan Mobility Improvements—Nicholson Road
to FM 1485

TX

1,000,000

Luttrell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery County

Precinct 4’s Off-System
Bridge Replacements

TX

2,000,000

Luttrell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harris County

Precinct 3’s Westgreen
Road Bridge

TX

2,000,000

Luttrell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Texas A&M University System

Energy Proving Grounds
Workforce Deployment
Accelerator

TX

4,000,000

McCaul

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Texas A&M University System

RELLIS Utilities Infrastructure Improvements

TX

4,000,000

McCaul

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Midland

5 Points Highway Safety
and Efficiency Improvements

TX

4,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bell County

Chaparral Road Infrastructure Improvement

TX

1,000,000

Pfluger

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Woodway

Old McGregor Road and
Ritchie Road Improvement Project

TX

1,000,000

Sessions

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas—West
Branch Library Upgrades
and Equipment Acquisition

TX

250,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Grand Prairie

Grand Prairie, TX—Main
Street Revitalization

TX

250,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Forest Hill, Texas

City of Forest Hill Smart
City Community Development Program

TX

850,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Grand Prairie

Grand Prairie, TX—I–30
Frontage Rd, Water Lines

TX

850,000

Veasey

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00186

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

H1113

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Fort Worth, Fort
Worth Housing Authority
dba Fort Worth Housing
Solutions

Former Cavile Public Housing Site—Hughes House
II & III

TX

3,150,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Trinity Park Conservancy

West Dallas Pedestrian/Bike
Land Bridge, Dallas,
Texas

TX

1,000,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Irving

Domestic Violence Center

TX

850,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas—Five Mile
Creek Trail

TX

2,000,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Dallas, Texas

City of Dallas—Martin
Weiss Recreation Center
Enhancements

TX

1,200,000

Veasey

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lamar State College Port
Arthur

Advanced Terminal Workforce Development Center

TX

2,000,000

Weber

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of West Columbia

Street Reconstruction—
Phase I

TX

1,000,000

Weber

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Angleton

Rehab for Lexington Square

TX

730,000

Weber

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tarleton State University

Stephenville Innovation and
Incubation Hub

TX

3,575,000

Williams (TX)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Utah Lake Authority

Utah Lake Research Center

UT

4,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Orem

Regional Safety and Emergency Training Center

UT

3,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Utah County

Murdock Canal Trail Bridge
Crossing Construction

UT

1,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Park City Municipal Corporation

Electrical Transmission Line
Relocation

UT

1,000,000

Kennedy (UT)

Curtis

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Torrey Town

Sand Creek Bridge Replacement

UT

1,200,000

Maloy

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Rich County

Laketown Roadway

UT

1,500,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Weber County

Storm Drain Infrastructure

UT

1,033,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

North Ogden City

Community Detention Pond

UT

1,000,000

Moore (UT)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Greater Salt Lake Municipal
Services District

Copperton Township
Stormwater Drain Replacement Project

UT

3,000,000

Owens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Utah Lake Authority

Utah Lake Access Points
Project

UT

2,500,000

Owens

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Falls Church

City of Falls Church Affordable Housing Acquisition
Strike Fund

VA

925,000

Beyer

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Alexandria

The Square at 511—Preservation

VA

500,000

Beyer

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00187

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Kaine, Warner

H

H

H20JAPT1

H1114

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairfax County Government

Opportunity Youth Re-Engagement Center within
the historic Original
Mount Vernon High
School

VA

850,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arlington County

Douglas Park, Phase 2 Improvements

VA

1,800,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Arlington County

Doctor’s Run Park Improvements

VA

250,000

Beyer

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairfax County Government

Fairfax County Street Tree
Planting and Heat Island
Reduction

VA

750,000

Beyer, Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fairfax

Strategic Addition and Special Enhancement to the
City of Fairfax’s Public
Safety Facility

VA

1,000,000

Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Virginia Community College

Northern Virginia Community College Annandale
Critical Pipeline Infrastructure Modernization

VA

500,000

Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Vienna

W&OD Trail Redevelopment
& Town of Vienna Trail
Facility

VA

2,000,000

Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Fairfax County Government

Fairfax County Emergency
Vehicle Preemption (EVP)
Program

VA

850,000

Connolly

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of Tazewell

Mitigating Against & Preventing Wastewater Bypass

VA

500,000

Griffith

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chesapeake

Career Academies of
Chesapeake

VA

1,000,000

Kiggans

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Virginia Beach

Pungo Ferry Road Improvements

VA

1,000,000

Kiggans

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Richmond

Stormwater Management
within the Shockoe Valley & Shockoe Project

VA

850,000

McClellan

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chesapeake

Schooner Trail Park

VA

500,000

Scott (VA)

Kaine, Warner

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Chesapeake

Myers Road Sidewalk Extension

VA

1,150,000

Scott (VA)

Kaine, Warner

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hampton

Hampton Recreation Facility
Accessibility Upgrades
and Expansion

VA

850,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norfolk

Norfolk Homeless Housing
Center Improvements

VA

850,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newport News

Safe Haven Empowerment
Center (Facility Improvements)

VA

2,000,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Virginia Peninsula Community College

Virginia Peninsula Community College’s Facilities
Upgrades

VA

500,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Newport News

Peninsula Digital Infrastructure Expansion

VA

2,000,000

Scott (VA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Manassas Park, Virginia

Park Central Complete
Streets Improvements

VA

1,613,968

Subramanyam

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Loudoun County, Virginia

AvonLea Apartments

VA

250,000

Subramanyam

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00188

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Kaine, Warner

H20JAPT1

H

H

January 20, 2026

H1115

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Virginia Community College

Northern Virginia Community College Manassas
Center for Building and
Construction Trades

VA

1,200,000

Subramanyam

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Dumfries

Quantico Creek Flood Mitigation Upgrades

VA

1,200,000

Vindman

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Culpeper County

Simms Drive Extension
Project

VA

850,000

Vindman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Orange County Public
Schools

Gordon-Barbour Elementary
School Improvements

VA

850,000

Vindman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northern Virginia Community College

Northern Virginia Community College HVAC Program

VA

250,000

Vindman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

County of York

Bethel Manor Elementary
School Expansion Project

VA

3,254,000

Wittman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Middle Peninsula Chesapeake Bay Public Access
Authority

Securing Upland Dredge
Material Sites

VA

810,000

Wittman

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hampton Roads Ecumenical
Lodgings & Provisions,
Inc

Affordable Housing

VA

700,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Foodbank of Southeastern
Virginia and Eastern
Shore

New Facility

VA

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Affordable Homes & Communities

Affordable Housing and
Community Center

VA

1,175,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Danville

Cunningham and Hughes
Neighborhood Development Center

VA

1,742,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Economic Development Authority of Floyd County

Utilities to Support Affordable Workforce Housing

VA

1,520,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Feed More

Project Nourish

VA

1,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hopkins House—A Center
for Children and their
Families

Samuel Madden Homes
Success Center

VA

2,500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Micah Ecumenical Ministries

Jeremiah Community

VA

2,915,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Clifton Forge

Town of Clifton Forge All
Abilities Park

VA

2,912,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Young Men’s Christian Association of Central Virginia

Transform the Downtown
YMCA

VA

1,423,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Action in Community
Through Service

Rebuilding Westend Domestic Violence Shelter

VA

1,780,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

James City County

Moses Lane Comprehensive
Community Development
Project

VA

925,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity Powhatan

Ballsville Road Neighborhood

VA

500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

SupportWorks Housing

Rady Street Apartments

VA

500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Staunton Redevelopment
and Housing Authority

Affordable Housing in
Staunton

VA

500,000

Kaine, Warner

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00189

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Kaine, Warner

H20JAPT1

H

H1116

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Alexandria Redevelopment
Housing Authority

Ladrey Apartments

VA

2,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Harrisonburg Redevelopment & Housing Authority

Lineweaver Annex Renovation of Permanent Supportive Housing Project

VA

2,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

People Incorporated of Virginia

Manassas Veterans Housing and Post Center

VA

2,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Norfolk

Affordable Housing Development

VA

1,000,000

Kaine, Warner

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Virgin Islands Housing Authority

Donoe Estates Resiliency
Upgrades

VI

2,000,000

Plaskett

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brattleboro Housing Authority d/b/a Brattleboro
Housing Partnerships

Melrose Terrace Redevelopment

VT

1,750,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Springfield Housing Authority

Southridge Cottage Court
Workforce Housing Redevelopment

VT

1,200,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vermont Housing & Conservation Board

Hinesburg Windy Ridge
Neighborhood and Housing Development

VT

850,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Burlington Housing Authority

Burlington Housing Authority Elevator Modernization

VT

500,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Fairlee

Bridge and Main Housing
Project—Rehabilitation
and Construction

VT

1,000,000

Balint

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Downstreet Housing &
Community Development

Preserving Affordable Housing and Creating Homeownership Opportunities

VT

1,500,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Windham & Windsor Housing Trust

The Chalet Redevelopment

VT

3,000,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Barre

The Prospect Heights Development Project

VT

3,316,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Good Samaritan Haven

Complex Care Shelter at
the Welcome Center

VT

1,155,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vermont Housing & Conservation Board

Shared Equity Homeownership Expansion

VT

550,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Champlain Housing Trust

Affordable Housing for
Winooski

VT

1,000,000

Sanders

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vermont Housing & Conservation Board

Affordable Housing for
Vermont

VT

12,000,000

Sanders, Welch

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Brattleboro Development
Credit Corporation

Brattleboro Technology and
Industrial Park

VT

3,250,000

Welch

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ascend Housing Allies Incorporated

Housing at Stonecrop
Meadows

VT

5,250,000

Welch

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Vermont Office of Economic
Opportunity

Home Repair and Remediation

VT

2,000,000

Welch

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Stevens County

Fire District #2’s Fruitland
Fire Station Project

WA

1,000,000

Baumgartner

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Mountlake Terrace

Mountlake Terrace Community Center Expansion
and Resiliency Improvements

WA

850,000

DelBene

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00190

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H

Cantwell

H20JAPT1

H

January 20, 2026

H1117

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Snohomish

Snohomish Public Safety &
City Services Campus

WA

3,150,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Lake Washington Institute
of Technology

The Early Learning Center
Childcare Construction
and Renovations

WA

250,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kenmore

Kenmore Public Works Operations Center

WA

2,000,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Snohomish Conservation
District

Snohomish Conservation
District’s Natural Resources Center

WA

1,200,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Sno-Isle Intercounty Rural
Library District

Lake Stevens Early Learning Library Renovations

WA

250,000

DelBene

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Lake Forest Park

Lakefront Park Community
Center Project, Lake Forest Park

WA

2,000,000

Jayapal

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Washington

Campus Building Accessibility Upgrades

WA

500,000

Jayapal

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Department of Transportation, City of Seattle

Third Avenue Revitalization

WA

250,000

Jayapal

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Seattle

Fort Lawton Redevelopment

WA

3,150,000

Jayapal

Murray

H/S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Seattle

Lake City Community Center and Affordable Housing Redevelopment

WA

2,000,000

Jayapal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Burien, WA

City of Burien Public Market Upgrades and Expansion

WA

850,000

Jayapal

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edmonds

Edmonds Food Bank and
Community Engagement
Space

WA

850,000

Larsen

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Everett

South Marina Terminal Replacement

WA

250,000

Larsen

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Anacortes

Anacortes Community Event
Center Development and
Construction

WA

250,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Edmonds College

LETI Incubator for Family
Success

WA

2,000,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Edmonds

North Portwalk and Seawall
Reconstruction Project

WA

1,200,000

Larsen

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Whatcom County Health
and Community Services

Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault Services of
Whatcom County Douglas Building Preservation

WA

1,510,295

Larsen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Bellingham

Bellingham Central Library
Renovation

WA

850,000

Larsen

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Confederated Tribes and
Bands of the Yakama
Nation

Village of Hope

WA

4,265,000

Newhouse

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Moses Lake

Infrastructure Development

WA

600,000

Newhouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tonasket

Reconstruction of US 97—
Phase 2

WA

948,000

Newhouse

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Benton County

Three Rivers Recovery
Housing Project

WA

3,000,000

Newhouse

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00191

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Cantwell

Cantwell

Cantwell

H20JAPT1

H

H

H

H1118

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Chinook

Port of Chinook Capital
Dredging

WA

2,700,000

Perez

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wahkiakum County

Upper Grays River Community Forest Acquisition

WA

500,000

Perez

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tenino

Regional Meat Processing
Facility Infrastructure

WA

850,000

Perez, Strickland

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Hoh Indian Tribe

Hoh Tribe Resiliency Center
Development and Construction

WA

3,150,000

Randall

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Makah Indian Tribe

Makah Housing Resilience—Acquisition, Development, and Construction

WA

1,200,000

Randall

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Port Angeles

ixwı́cn (Tse-whit-zen)
Protection Area Restoration

WA

850,000

Randall

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Kitsap County Department
of Human Services

Community Respite Center
Acquisition, Development, Construction, and
Equipment

WA

1,736,255

Randall

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chelan County, Department
of Economic Services

Chelan County Chelan River
Heights Housing—Chelan County, WA

WA

1,200,000

Schrier

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Darrington

Darrington Drinking Water
Infrastructure Expansion—Darrington, WA

WA

850,000

Schrier

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Cle Elum

City of Cle Elum Second
Street Pathway—Cle
Elum, WA

WA

250,000

Schrier

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Federal Way

Day Center Relocation, Reconstruction, and Equipment

WA

250,000

Smith (WA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Des Moines

Midway Park Reconstruction

WA

850,000

Smith (WA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tukwila

Tukwila Community Center
Facility Upgrades

WA

850,000

Smith (WA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Green River College

Building the Electric Automotive Center of Higher
Education Today

WA

250,000

Smith (WA)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

South King Fire

Firefighter PPE CO2 Decontamination Unit

WA

850,000

Smith (WA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Highline College

Highline College Community
Soccer and Sports Complex

WA

1,200,000

Smith (WA)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Puyallup

Meeker Street Improvements

WA

850,000

Strickland

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Tacoma

City of Tacoma Fire Engine
Acquisition

WA

1,000,000

Strickland

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Tacoma Housing Authority

Salishan Hillside Phase I
Renovations

WA

850,000

Strickland

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Pierce County Public Transportation Benefit Area
Corporation (DBA Pierce
Transit)

Pierce Transit System-Wide
ADA Signage Improvements

WA

250,000

Strickland

Cantwell

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fircrest

Alameda Ave East—44th
Street to Emerson Street
Pedestrian and Bicyclist
Improvements

WA

850,000

Strickland

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of University Place

Chambers Bay Access to
Opportunity—Road and
Sidewalk Safety Improvements

WA

300,000

Strickland

H

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00192

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Cantwell

Cantwell

Cantwell

H20JAPT1

H

H

H

January 20, 2026

H1119

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Olympia

City of Olympia Armory Redevelopment

WA

250,000

Strickland

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edgewood

Interurban Trail Phase III
(Jovita Canyon)

WA

250,000

Strickland

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Port of Skagit County

Agricultural Innovation
Center

WA

1,750,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YWCA Yakima

Domestic Violence Shelter

WA

1,500,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Roots Housing

The Jefferson Affordable
Housing Preservation
Project

WA

350,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Jefferson County

Workforce Housing

WA

1,500,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Northeast Public Development Authority

Childcare and Workforce
Housing Project

WA

2,000,000

Cantwell

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kelso

Catlin and Main Community Development Project

WA

3,250,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Council for the Homeless

Housing Solutions Center
Expansion

WA

2,500,000

Cantwell, Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Bellwether Housing

Thunderbird Nest Affordable
Housing Project

WA

1,800,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Seattle Indian Services
Commission

Native Village & Gateway
Project

WA

1,500,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Friends of Youth

Griffin Campus Affordable
Housing

WA

2,500,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Low Income Housing Institute

University District Transit
Oriented Development

WA

3,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

OPAL Community Land
Trust

Pea Patch Community
Campus

WA

4,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

United Way of King County

Food Access and Distribution

WA

800,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Children’s Home Society of
Washington dba Akin

Vancouver Family Resource
Center Development

WA

3,400,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Partners Inland Northwest

Resource Center

WA

3,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Pierce and Kitsap
Counties

Bremerton Early Learning
Center

WA

6,200,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Roots Housing

The Helen V Affordable
Housing Project

WA

512,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Spokane Neighborhood Action Partners

Broadway Senior Housing

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Shelton Family Center dba
The Youth Connection

Housing Project

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Whatcom Transportation
Authority

Lynden Transit Station Affordable Housing

WA

2,000,000

Murray

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00193

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1120

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Milwaukee Metropolitan
Sewerage District

Milwaukee Schoolyards Improvements and Water
Workforce Development
Project

WI

250,000

Moore (WI)

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Bayside

North Shore Library

WI

850,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Housing Authority of the
City of Milwaukee

Safety and Security Upgrades and Equipment

WI

500,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

University of Wisconsin Milwaukee

Improving Health and Living Environment
Project—Facility Renovation, Expansion, and
Equipment

WI

850,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Milwaukee Health
Department

Addressing Lead Based
Hazards in Public Facilities

WI

750,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Milwaukee Port Milwaukee

City of Milwaukee Dock Improvement Program

WI

250,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Milwaukee County

Kosciuszko Community Center

WI

250,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wauwatosa

Fire Training Ground Facility Replacement

WI

250,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Milwaukee

Priority Needs Supportive
Housing

WI

2,000,000

Moore (WI)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Edgerton, Wisconsin

City of Edgerton Veterans
Park Site Improvement
Project

WI

400,000

Pocan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Loganville, WI

Village of Loganville Street
and Utility Improvements

WI

250,000

Pocan

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Mount Ida

Roadway Improvements

WI

175,000

Van Orden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Chippewa County

Chippewa County Mortuary

WI

600,000

Van Orden

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Green Bay Metro Fire Department

New Fire Station

WI

5,000,000

Wied

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Village of Suamico

Water Infrastructure Improvements

WI

1,000,000

Wied

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kaukauna

Water Treatment System
Improvements

WI

1,000,000

Wied

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Ozaukee Food Alliance

Mobile Pantry

WI

246,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Kenosha

Affordable Housing Development

WI

3,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

YMCA of Metropolitan Milwaukee Inc.

Health Commons

WI

4,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Veterans 1st of NEW, Inc.

Affordable Housing

WI

480,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Habitat for Humanity of
Waukesha, Inc.

College Park Workforce
Housing Development

WI

500,000

Baldwin

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00194

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

Baldwin

Baldwin

H20JAPT1

H

H/S

January 20, 2026

H1121

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Agency

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Account

Recipient

Project

State

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Janesville

Removal of Blight

WI

5,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Communities of Crocus

Affordable Housing

WI

1,500,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wild Rivers Habitat for Humanity, Inc.

Affordable Housing Construction

WI

500,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Acts Community Development Corporation, Inc.

Acquisition Fund

WI

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Boys and Girls Clubs of the
Northwoods, Inc.

Facility Expansion

WI

1,000,000

Baldwin

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Monroe County Board of
Education

Peterstown School Athletic
Facility

WV

3,250,000

Miller (WV)

Capito, Justice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Wheeling

Gateway Center and Trail
Connection

WV

2,000,000

Moore (WV)

Capito

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Parkersburg

Municipal Parking Improvements

WV

1,000,000

Moore (WV)

Capito, Justice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Fairmont

Watson Fire Station Renovation

WV

1,000,000

Moore (WV)

Capito, Justice

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wood County Development
Authority

Spencer’s & Landing Development

WV

1,000,000

Moore (WV)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Marshall University

Marshall University Aviation
Martinsburg Expansion

WV

900,000

Moore (WV)

H

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Logan

White Coat Housing Community in Rural Appalachia

WV

1,200,000

Capito

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Wheeling Park Commission

Historic Community Building Renovations

WV

5,642,000

Capito

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Hinton

New River Center Project

WV

1,919,000

Capito

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Community Impact Network

Childcare and Economic
Opportunities in Ohio
County

WV

250,000

Capito

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Town of Marlinton

Downtown Trailhead

WV

2,059,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Elkins

Downtown Improvements

WV

503,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Montgomery General
Healthcare Systems, Inc.

Montgomery General Hospital Revitalization

WV

7,690,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Clay County Commission

911 Center Relocation

WV

4,600,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Appalachia Service Project

Home Repair for Flooding
Victims

WV

500,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

West Virginia Statewide
Independent Living
Council

The WV Freedom and Independence Project

WV

1,980,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Craik Patton Inc.

Craik-Patton House Site Accessibility Project

WV

250,000

Capito, Justice

S

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00195

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

H1122

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING/CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED SPENDING—Continued
Agency

Account

Recipient

Requesters

Amount
($)

Origination
House

Senate

Community Development
Fund

City of Ronceverte

Fred Workman Bridge

WV

5,460,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Charleston

Charleston Capital Sports
Center

WV

7,000,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Capitol Market Inc.

Capitol Market Safety and
Security

WV

750,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Region 4 Planning and Development Council

Fruits of Labor Expansion

WV

966,000

Capito, Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

Facing Hunger Food Bank

Warehouse Distribution
Center Renovation

WV

1,103,000

Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

New River Gorge Regional
Development Authority

Meadow River Corridor Improvements

WV

3,200,000

Justice

S

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

Community Development
Fund

City of Rock Springs

Bitter Creek Restoration—
Phase 2

WY

2,000,000

f

DELETIONS OF SPONSORS FROM
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were deleted from public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H.R. 5116: Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania.
f

AMENDMENTS
Under clause 8 of rule XVIII, proposed amendments were submitted as
follows:
H.R. 6039
OFFERED BY: MR. MORELLE
AMENDMENT NO. 1: Strike all after the enacting clause and insert the following:
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Restore
Trust in Government Act’’.
SEC. 2. RESTRICTIONS ON TRADE AND OWNERSHIP OF COVERED INVESTMENTS.
(a) TABLE OF CONTENTS.—The table of con-

tents for chapter 131 of title 5, United States
Code, is amended by adding at the end the
following:
SUBCHAPTER IV. RESTRICTIONS ON TRADE AND
DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

State

Department of
Housing and
Urban Development

OFFERED BY MR. ARRINGTON
The provisions that warranted a referral to
the Committee on the Budget in H.R. 7148,
the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026, do
not contain any congressional earmarks,
limited tax benefits, or limited tariff benefits as defined in clause 9 of rule XXI.
OFFERED BY MR. SMITH
The provisions that warranted a referral to
the Committee on Ways and Means in H.R.
7148 do not contain any congressional earmarks, limited tax benefits, or limited tariff
benefits as defined in clause 9 of rule XXI.

OWNERSHIP OF COVERED INVESTMENTS

13151. Definitions.
13152. Trade and ownership of covered investments.
13153. Penalties.
(b) RESTRICTIONS.—Chapter 131 of title 5,
United States Code, is amended by adding at
the end a new subchapter:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Project

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘SUBCHAPTER IV—RESTRICTIONS ON
TRADE AND OWNERSHIP OF COVERED
INVESTMENTS
‘‘§ 13151. Definitions
‘‘In this subchapter:
‘‘(1) COMMODITY.—The term ‘commodity’—
‘‘(A) has the meaning given the term in
section 1a of the Commodity Exchange Act (7
U.S.C. 1a); and
‘‘(B) does not include a precious metal (as
defined in section 1027.100 of title 31, Code of
Federal Regulations).
‘‘(2) COVERED INDIVIDUAL.—The term ‘covered individual’ means any of the following:
‘‘(A) A Member of Congress, as defined in
section 13101.
‘‘(B) A dependent child (as defined in section 13101) or a spouse of a Member of Congress.
‘‘(C) A trustee of a trust in which an individual described in subparagraph (A) or (B)
has a beneficial interest in the principal or
income of the trust as described in section
1403(b)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986.
‘‘(D) The President, or the spouse or a dependent child (as defined in section 13101) of
the President.
‘‘(E) The Vice President, or the spouse or a
dependent child (as defined in section 13101)
of the Vice President.
‘‘(3) COVERED INVESTMENT.—The term ‘covered investment’—
‘‘(A) means an investment in a security, a
commodity, a future, or any comparable economic interest acquired through synthetic
means, such as the use of a derivative, including an option, warrant, or other similar
means; and
‘‘(B) does not include—
‘‘(i) a widely held investment fund described in section 13104(f)(8) that is diversified and publicly traded on a national or regional stock exchange;
‘‘(ii) a United States Treasury bill, note, or
bond;
‘‘(iii) a State or municipal government
bill, note, or bond;
‘‘(iv) any compensation received by a
spouse or a dependent child described in
paragraph (2) from an employer of the spouse
or dependent child;
‘‘(v) an interest in a small business concern
and, in the case of an investment in a family
farm or ranch that qualifies as an interest in

PO 00000

Frm 00196

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Hageman

H

a small business concern, a future or commodity directly related to the farming activities and products of the farm or ranch;
‘‘(vi) an interest in a limited liability company created for the sole purpose of purchasing or holding real estate that serves as
the personal residences of the Member of
Congress;
‘‘(vii) any share of Settlement Common
Stock issued under section 7(g)(1)(A) of the
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43
U.S.C. 1606(g)(1)(A)); or
‘‘(viii) any share of Settlement Common
Stock, as defined in section 3 of the Alaska
Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C.
1602).
‘‘(4) DIVERSIFIED.—The term ‘diversified’,
with respect to an investment fund, means
such fund does not have a stated policy of
concentrating its investments in any industry, business, single country other than the
United States, or bonds of a single State
within the United States except for the
State in which the Member of Congress resides.
‘‘(5) FUTURE.—The term ‘future’ means a financial contract obligating the buyer to purchase an asset or the seller to sell an asset,
such as a physical commodity or a financial
investment, at a predetermined future date
and price.
‘‘(6) SECURITY.—The term ‘security’ has the
meaning given the term in section 3(a) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C.
78c(a)).
‘‘(7) SMALL BUSINESS CONCERN.—The term
‘small business concern’ has the meaning
given that term under section 3 of the Small
Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632).
‘‘(8) SUPERVISING ETHICS OFFICE.—The term
‘supervising ethics office’ has the meaning
given the term in section 13101.
‘‘§ 13152. Trade and ownership of covered investments
‘‘(a) CONDUCT DURING FEDERAL SERVICE.—
Except as described in subsection (b)(1)(B)
and subsections (e) through (g), no covered
individual may, directly or indirectly, own
or trade a covered investment.
‘‘(b) COMPLIANCE.—
‘‘(1) REQUIREMENT.—To comply with subsection (a)—
‘‘(A) a covered individual may not purchase a covered investment; and

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.031

H20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

‘‘(B) a covered individual shall divest of
any covered investment by the effective date
established in paragraph (2) at fair market
value.
‘‘(2) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The effective date is
established as follows:
‘‘(A) 180 days for an individual who is a
covered individual on the date of enactment
of the Restore Trust in Government Act.
‘‘(B) 90 days within the date on which an
individual becomes a covered individual if
such date occurs after the date of enactment
of the Restore Trust in Government Act.
‘‘(c) CERTIFICATES OF DIVESTITURE.—
‘‘(1) APPLICATION OF CERTIFICATE OF DIVESTITURE PROGRAM.—For purposes of section
1043 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986—
‘‘(A) this section shall be treated as a Federal conflict of interest statute;
‘‘(B) any covered individual described in
section 13151(2)(A) shall be treated as an eligible person described in section 1043(b)(1)(A)
of such Code; and
‘‘(C) any spouse or dependent child described in section 13151(2)(B) shall be treated
as an eligible person described in section
1043(b)(1)(B) of such Code.
‘‘(2) ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF DIVESTITURE.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Each supervising ethics
office shall issue a certificate of divestiture
to each covered individual required to divest
under this subchapter upon submission of
proof of compliance by such individual with
the requirements to divest or any extensions
granted by the supervising ethics office.
‘‘(B) ELIGIBILITY.—Such certificate shall
include an identification of each specific
property eligible for the application of the
certificate of divestiture program as determined by the supervising ethics office.
‘‘(d) INCOME TAX.—A loss from a transaction or holding involving a covered financial instrument that is conducted in violation of this section may not be deducted
from the amount of income tax owed by the
covered individual.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:23 Jan 21, 2026

H1123

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

‘‘(e) OCCUPATIONAL EXCEPTION.—A spouse
or dependent child of a covered individual as
described in section 13151(2)(B) may trade
any covered investment if such covered investment is not owned by a covered individual and if such trade is performed as a
function of the primary occupation of the
spouse or dependent child.
‘‘(f) TRUSTS.—
‘‘(1) QUALIFIED BLIND TRUST.—Any covered
investment held in a qualified blind trust as
defined in section 13104(f)(3) shall be divested
in accordance with subsection (b)(1)(B) by
the effective date established in subsection
(b)(2).
‘‘(2) FAMILY TRUST.—A supervising ethics
office may grant an exemption for covered
investments held in a family trust only if—
‘‘(A) no covered individual—
‘‘(i) is a grantor of the family trust;
‘‘(ii) contributed any covered investment
to the family trust; or
‘‘(iii) has any authority over a trustee of
the family trust, including the authority to
appoint, replace, or direct the actions of
such a trustee; and
‘‘(B) the grantor of the family trust is or
was a family member of the covered individual.
‘‘(3) REQUESTS.—A covered individual seeking an exemption under paragraph (2) shall
submit to the applicable supervising ethics
office a request for the exemption, in writing, certifying that the conditions described
in that paragraph are met.
‘‘(g) ASSETS ACQUIRED IN SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES.—In the event that a covered individual acquires a covered investment after
the date of enactment of the Restore Trust
in Government Act other than by purchase
(such as by marriage, inheritance, divorce
settlement, or other circumstance), the covered individual shall have 90 days from the
date on which such investment was acquired
to divest such covered investment at fair
market value.
‘‘(h) EXTENSION.—A supervising ethics office may grant a covered individual an ex-

PO 00000

Frm 00197

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tension of time to comply with a divestment
deadline under this subchapter if a covered
investment cannot be divested by such deadline due to low liquidity, vesting schedules,
or contractual restrictions.
‘‘(i) INTERPRETATIVE GUIDANCE.—The supervising ethics office shall issue interpretive
guidance on any relevant term not defined in
this subchapter.
‘‘§ 13153. Penalties
‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—
‘‘(1) PENALTIES.—Any covered individual
who violates the restrictions on trading or
ownership of covered investments in section
13152 shall, at the direction of the supervising ethics office—
‘‘(A) pay a fee equal to ten percent of the
value of the covered investment; and
‘‘(B) disgorge the profits of any transaction
that violates the provisions of this subchapter.
‘‘(2) PAYMENT OF PENALTY TO TREASURY.—A
penalty imposed under paragraph (1)(B) shall
be payable into the Treasury of the United
States.
‘‘(b) PAYMENT RESTRICTIONS.—A Member of
Congress may not pay any of the penalties
under this section by using amounts from
the following sources:
‘‘(1) The Members’ Representational Allowance.
‘‘(2) The Senators’ Official Personnel and
Office Expense Account.
‘‘(3) Any contribution (as defined in section
301(8) of the Federal Election Campaign Act
of 1971 (52 U.S.C. 30101(8))) accepted as a candidate, and any other donation received as
support for activities of the individual as a
holder of Federal office.
‘‘(c) PUBLICATION.—Each supervising ethics
office shall publish on a publicly available
website a description of—
‘‘(1) each fine assessed by the supervising
ethics office pursuant to this section;
‘‘(2) the reason why each such fine was assessed; and
‘‘(3) the result of each assessment.’’.

E:\CR\FM\A20JA7.035

H20JAPT1

UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, TUESDAY, JANUARY 20, 2026

No. 13

Senate
(Legislative day of Thursday, January 15, 2026)
The Senate met at 10 and 1 second
a.m., on the expiration of the recess,
and was called to order by the Honorable JOHN BARRASSO, a Senator from
the State of Wyoming.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

APPOINTMENT OF ACTING
PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will please read a communication
to the Senate from the President pro
tempore (Mr. GRASSLEY).

The senior assistant legislative clerk
read the following letter:
U.S. SENATE,
PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE,
Washington, DC, January 20, 2026.
To the Senate:
Under the provisions of rule 1, paragraph 3,
of the Standing Rules of the Senate, I hereby
appoint the Honorable JOHN BARRASSO, a
Senator from the State of Wyoming, to perform the duties of the Chair.
CHUCK GRASSLEY,
President pro tempore.

Mr. BARRASSO thereupon assumed
the Chair as Acting President pro tempore.
f

RECESS UNTIL THURSDAY, January
22, 2026, AT 11 A.M.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Under the previous order, the
Senate stands in recess until Thursday,
January 22, 2026, at 11 a.m.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 10 and 24
seconds a.m., recessed until Thursday,
January 22, 2026, at 11 a.m.

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S273

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:50 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA6.000

S20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

E53

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS
RECOGNIZING RONALD FRANK
MOORE

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th District of Texas. The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby
presented to Corporal Ronald Frank Moore,
United States Marine Corps, of Coppell,
Texas, for his honorable service in the Armed
Forces of the United States of America and for
his continued service to his community.
Corporal Moore enlisted in the United States
Marine Corps in 1973 and was assigned to
the 3rd Marine Division Headquarters Company during the Vietnam era. While serving,
he demonstrated outstanding leadership, character, and dedication to his fellow Marines,
earning the Good Conduct Medal for exemplary service. During his time in uniform, he
was frequently invited to organize and lead
morale-building events for his unit, including
speaking engagements and community programs across Okinawa and the Pacific.
Following his military service, Corporal
Moore dedicated his life to communication,
mentorship, and community service. For more
than five decades, he has worked as a national broadcaster, speaker, and community
leader hosting programs such as Higher Life
and Morning Cup of Motivation, and serving
as a voice for K–LOVE Radio. Through these
platforms, he has inspired thousands with
messages of resilience, leadership, and hope.
He is the Founder of Fields of Grace
Church, an outreach-focused organization that
provides encouragement and service to others, and continues to lead programs across
Texas and beyond that uplift and strengthen
communities.
Corporal Moore’s lifelong commitment to
service, both in uniform and as a civilian leader, reflects the highest traditions of the United
States Marine Corps and brings great credit
upon himself, the State of Texas, and the
United States of America.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF KAI KHAN
ZAFAR

HON. PAT FALLON
OF TEXAS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. FALLON. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor the short but beautiful life of Kai Khan
Zafar, of Durango, Colorado.
On August 30, 2025, Kai was born to Dani
and Kamran Zafar. Though his time in this
world was brief, his life was filled with love
from the very first moment, leaving a lasting
imprint on all who knew him. Kai entered the
world surrounded by hope, tenderness, and

the unwavering love of his parents and family.
In his short time, he was held by many, cherished, and known. His presence will forever
change the lives of those who welcomed him
and will continue to shape their hearts in the
years to come.
While Kai did not have the opportunity to
grow and leave behind accomplishments
measured by years or titles, his legacy is no
less meaningful. His life serves as a powerful
reminder of the precious value of every child,
the depth of parental love, and the profound
impact a single life can have. In honor of that
legacy, Dani and Kamran have chosen
today—Kai’s original due date—as the day of
‘‘Kai’s Kindness.’’ Through this day, they hope
that at least one person will be inspired to
show compassion, extend grace, or perform
an act of kindness in Kai’s memory. They
hope that Kai’s life will continue to bring people together in support, spread love, and inspire healing.
Today, we not only honor the life of Kai, but
also recognize the remarkable strength, grace,
and resilience of his family as they carry his
memory forward. Their love for him did not
end with his passing, and his place in their
family remains permanent and unshakable.
Through everything, Dani and Kamran have
exemplified steadfast love and unity in the way
they support one another, continue to nurture
a loving home for their son, Zeke, and move
forward with hope, purpose, and love.
It is my honor to recognize and remember
the life of Kai Khan Zafar, and to ensure that
his memory—along with the love that surrounds it—is carried forward and preserved in
the permanent record of this chamber.
f

TRIBUTE TO THE SOUTH CAROLINA STATE UNIVERSITY, 2025
HBCU
NATIONAL
CHAMPION
FOOTBALL TEAM

HON. JAMES E. CLYBURN
OF SOUTH CAROLINA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
pay tribute to the recent accomplishments of
the South Carolina State University (SCSU)
Bulldogs Football Program. Last month,
SCSU—my alma mater—was victorious in the
Cricket Celebration Bowl in Atlanta, Georgia,
making them the 2025 HBCU (Historically
Black College and University) National Champions. This accomplishment was history-making for the school, a great honor for the city
and county of Orangeburg and the State of
South Carolina, and it brought great pride to a
plethora of us ‘‘loyal sons and daughters’’ of
that storied institution.
This was the second consecutive year the
Bulldogs have appeared in the Celebration
Bowl, which features the winners of the MidEastern Athletic Conference and the Southwest Athletic Conference and is considered
the HBCU National Championship game.

SCSU completed the 2025 season with an impressive 10–3 record and was undefeated in
their conference. The Bulldogs have appeared
in three of the last five Celebration Bowls and
were victorious in two of them. They have
captured the Nation’s attention and reaffirmed
their place among the elite programs in HBCU
football.
Located in the heart of the City of Orangeburg, SCSU stands as a beacon of academic
excellence and a molder of civic awareness
and leadership. This proud legacy of tenaciousness was powerfully reinforced during the
2025 football season, as the Bulldog Football
Program delivered one of the most memorable
and inspiring campaigns in the school’s storied
history. Facing adversity on HBCU football’s
biggest stage, the Bulldogs mounted a remarkable comeback after trailing 21–0 at halftime. They tied the score in the third quarter
and ultimately prevailed 40–38 in an unforgettable four-overtime thriller. That victory was
more than a win—it was a testament to the resilience and unbreakable spirit of the team.
This historic achievement stands as a powerful reflection of the leadership of Head
Coach Chennis Berry, who—in just his second
season at the helm—guided the Bulldogs to a
national championship. Coach Berry and his
entire coaching staff are to be commended for
their vision, discipline, and unwavering commitment to developing young men while building a championship-caliber program.
While this season was defined by collective
effort and solid teamwork, special recognition
is due to several outstanding student-athletes
whose performances rose to the moment.
Quarterback Ryan Stubblefield was named the
2025 Celebration Bowl Offensive MVP and led
the second-half comeback with poise, determination, and leadership under pressure. Anchoring a unit that delivered when it mattered
most was defensive back Brenyen Scott, who
earned the Celebration Bowl Defensive MVP
honor.
The success of the Bulldog Football Program elevated civic pride, strengthened community bonds, and contributed to the cultural
and economic vitality of the community. The
partnership between the city and county of
Orangeburg and South Carolina State University reflects a shared commitment to excellence, opportunity, and the development of future generations.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in honoring the South Carolina State University Bulldogs for their exceptional season and victory in the 2025 HBCU
National Championship. This championship
will be remembered not only for the trophies
earned, but also for the legendary ‘‘Bulldog tenacity’’ the team displayed. This achievement
inspired Bulldogs everywhere and will be a
memorable event in the proud legacy of South
Carolina State University.

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:26 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A20JA8.001

E20JAPT1

E54

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

HONORING ANTHONY ‘‘TONY’’ R.
PITTMAN, SR.

HON. DONALD NORCROSS
OF NEW JERSEY

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. NORCROSS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor Anthony ‘‘Tony’’ R. Pittman, Sr., who
was born on May 8, 1948, in Rocky Mount,
North Carolina. He was raised in Cranford,
New Jersey, where he attended school and
formed long lasting friendships, including the
love of his life Brenda Brown. After graduating
from high school, he answered the call to
serve his country enlisting in the United States
Air Force, where he was stationed in Korea.
Following his deployment, Anthony R. Pittman, Sr. married Brenda Brown and together
built a life centered on love and family. Together, they welcomed three children while living in Landover, Maryland where he worked
for NASA. Ultimately, the family relocated and
settled in Willingboro, New Jersey, where Anthony worked for Lockheed Martin and retired
after dedicating himself to the company for 36
years.
Anthony R. Pittman, Sr. will be remembered
for his dedication to his family, his quiet
strength, and his unwavering love for those
closest to him. His legacy will continue
through the generations he so deeply cherished.
Today, Anthony R. Pittman, Sr. is survived
by his brothers, Cary Pittman, III and Charles
Pittman, with whom he shared a life-long
bond; his three adoring children, Anthony Pittman, Jr. (Tess), Leslie Pittman, and Michael
Pittman (Meredith); and was a proud and loving grandfather to Nicole (Anthony), Ian
(Alyssa), Cameron (Jesse), Julian, and Patrick; a cherished great-grandfather to Hayes
and was predeceased by his beloved wife,
Brenda Brown; his parents, Cary and Margaret
Pittman; and his sisters, Gloria Brown and
Gwendolyn ‘‘Mickey’’ Pittman.
Mr. Speaker, I ask you to join me in honoring and commending Anthony R. Pittman,
Sr., a man dedicated to both his family and
country and who has thoroughly served them
both to the best of his ability. I extend sincerest condolences for a life well lived.
f

RECOGNIZING JOHN DELGADO

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th District of Texas. The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby
presented to Specialist Fifth Class John
Delgado, United States Army, of Euless,
Texas, for his honorable service in the Armed
Forces of the United States of America and for
his continued service to his community.
Specialist Delgado served honorably in the
United States Army from 1968 to 1974 during
the Vietnam War. As a combat medic, he provided lifesaving care to his fellow soldiers
under some of the most difficult and dangerous conditions of the conflict. His courage,
professionalism, and compassion on the bat-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:26 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

tlefield earned him the Army Commendation
Medal, the Vietnam Service Medal, the Vietnam Campaign Medal, and the National Defense Service Medal.
Following his military service, Specialist
Delgado devoted his life to service and improving the lives of others. He served as Director of The Glory House, a home for juvenile
boys who had been abused, abandoned, or
neglected offering stability, mentorship, and
guidance to young men in crisis. Under his
leadership, The Glory House became a model
of compassion and transformation, and he
was honored by the Alabama Department of
Youth Services with the ‘‘Child’s Best Friend
Award’’ for his extraordinary impact on youth
and families.
After relocating to Texas, Specialist Delgado
continued his lifelong mission to serve others
through his ministry at Calvary Temple Church
in Irving, where he has served for more than
thirty years. He later co-founded Texas University of Theology in Hurst, which recently
celebrated its 30th anniversary. Through this
institution, he established a comprehensive
chaplain training program that has certified
more than 900 chaplains serving in hospitals,
hospices, schools, prisons, and veteran programs nationwide including the Dallas VA hospital.
Specialist Delgado’s legacy of service, compassion, and leadership has touched countless lives and continues to inspire others to
live with purpose and faith. His devotion to his
country and his community reflects the highest
traditions of the United States Army and
brings great credit upon himself, the State of
Texas, and the United States of America.
f

CONGRATULATING LARRY KELLER
ON HIS SERVICE AS MAYOR OF
NEW HOPE, PENNSYLVANIA

HON. BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK
OF PENNSYLVANIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. FITZPATRICK. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize an outstanding constituent of my
district, Larry Keller. Larry has faithfully served
the residents of New Hope Borough, Pennsylvania, including as Mayor of New Hope, during his many years of dedication to public
service.
Mayor Keller has long been a committed
civic leader in New Hope, a historic river town
known for its vibrant small businesses, tourism, and strong sense of community. Throughout his time in public service, Mayor Keller has
worked diligently to preserve the character of
the borough while supporting responsible
growth, public safety, and economic vitality.
As Mayor, Larry Keller placed a strong emphasis on collaboration between borough
council, local businesses, residents, and public
safety officials. His leadership reflected a practical, community-first approach, focused on
maintaining New Hope’s unique identity while
addressing the everyday needs of its residents
and visitors alike.
Under his leadership, New Hope continued
to strengthen its position as one of Bucks
County’s most recognizable destinations, balancing tourism with quality of life for those
who call the borough home. Mayor Keller’s
service exemplified integrity, approachability,

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 20, 2026

and a deep respect for local government’s role
in serving the public.
After years of dedicated service, Mayor Keller leaves a lasting impact on the borough and
the people he served. His commitment to
community engagement and civic responsibility stands as an example of how local leadership plays a vital role in strengthening our
Commonwealth.
I wish to congratulate Larry Keller on his
service to the citizens of New Hope Borough
and thank him for his dedication to public
service and to the community he proudly represented.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF MRS.
DORIS GRIFFIN

HON. JOAQUIN CASTRO
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. CASTRO of Texas. Mr. Speaker, today
I rise to honor the life of Mrs. Doris Griffin,
who passed away on December 25, 2025. A
tireless advocate, she dedicated herself to
serving San Antonio’s and Texas’ senior communities. She is survived by her three children, Joy Martinez, Jim Griffin, and John Griffin, her siblings June Harr and Ralph Money,
and her grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
As a child in Gobbler’s Knob, Ohio, her parents Clyde and Beulah Money, instilled in
Doris and her siblings the importance of caring
for and serving those in need. As a teenager,
she worked at the WLWT radio station in Cincinnati and performed with a band going by
the stage name of Dixie West.
In 1949, she married George Griffin, a
World War II veteran and retiree from the U.S.
Air Force. George’s career took Doris across
the world, where at each duty station she volunteered with numerous community organizations. Following George’s retirement, the family made San Antonio their home.
In 1991, Doris began a 27-year stint as the
executive director of Jefferson Outreach for
Seniors. Under her leadership, the organization, located in the neighborhood of my alma
mater Thomas Jefferson High School, served
mobile meals to seniors and offered transportation, grocery delivery, and home visits. Doris
served as executive director until 2018.
During the 1990s, she co-hosted ‘‘Live
Longer and Love it,’’ a television show on
Catholic Television of San Antonio. In this
show, she brought attention to the concerns of
San Antonio’s senior community.
In 2000, Doris began the first of nine terms
on the Texas Silver-Haired Legislature, an advocacy group that addresses senior issues in
the state legislative process. In 2002, she
joined a joint city-county commission on elderly affairs. In this commission, Doris advocated
for the building of senior centers across the
city. These centers have been a tremendous
addition to the San Antonio community as they
offer meals, access to medical services, recreational activities and exercise classes to
seniors. And for her leadership and impact on
the community, a center was named after
her—the Doris Griffin Senior One Stop Center.
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to celebrate the life
and legacy of Mrs. Doris Griffin. She was a
source of hope whose impact will continue to

E:\CR\FM\A20JA8.004

E20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

shape San Antonio. She will be greatly
missed.

I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
f

f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

INTRODUCTION OF A BILL TO PERMIT COMMERCIAL FILMMAKING
AND
PHOTOGRAPHY
ON
THE
GROUNDS OF THE U.S. CAPITOL

HON. ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON
OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Ms. NORTON. Mr. Speaker, today, I introduce a bill that would permit commercial
filmmaking and photography throughout the
grounds of the U.S. Capitol Complex. Currently, such filmmaking and photography is
only authorized in Union Square. Film and television productions that involve the Capitol
should not have to go to other cities or use a
fake building.
This bill would allow commercial filmmaking
and photography outside of the Capitol and
congressional office buildings by permit, as
long as neither chamber is in session. The
policy allowing commercial filmmaking and
photography in Union Square shows that the
Capitol Police can handle commercial
filmmaking and photography at the Capitol
Complex, especially when Congress is not in
session. However, the Union Square vantage
point captures the least familiar view of the
Capitol. Preventing commercial filmmakers
and photographers from shooting throughout
the Capitol Complex is neither business-friendly nor true to the Nation’s democratic traditions. Encouraging commercial filmmaking and
photography at the Capitol would help spread
the story of democracy around the world.
This bill would give the Capitol Police complete discretion to issue a permit for commercial filmmaking and photography throughout
the Capitol Complex under the same terms
and conditions as those for commercial
filmmaking and photography in Union Square.
No policy or security reasons exist to justify
limiting commercial filmmaking and photography at the Capitol Complex to Union
Square, especially considering that permits
are necessary. Visitors are regularly seen taking videos and pictures around the Capitol
Complex, demonstrating the arbitrary nature of
limiting commercial filmmaking and photography to Union Square.
This bill would provide the Capitol Police authority to charge fees to cover any costs incurred by the Architect of the Capitol (AOC)
for permit approval. The fees would be deposited into the Capitol Trust Account, which was
established to accept fees collected from commercial filmmaking and photography permits
for Union Square. Amounts in the Capitol
Trust Account would be available without fiscal
year limitation for maintenance, improvements,
and projects the AOC considers appropriate,
subject to the approval of the Appropriations
Committees.
Views of the Capitol are among America’s
most iconic. Limiting commercial filmmaking
and photography of the Capitol, an important
vehicle for telling the Nation’s story, does not
serve the American people. Commercial films
and photographs of the Capitol, the seat of
our democracy, are perhaps the best modern
vehicles for telling the Nation’s story and
showcasing its democratic system of government.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:26 Jan 21, 2026

E55

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN
OF COLORADO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I missed
one vote on January 13, 2026. Had I been
present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call
No. 23, final passage of H.R. 4593, SHOWER
Act.
f

RECOGNIZING CYNTHIA TRICKETT

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

healthcare providers through compassion and
excellence.
Lieutenant Colonel Trickett also remains
dedicated to honoring fellow veterans through
her volunteer work with Wreaths Across America, ensuring that the service and sacrifice of
those interred at the Dallas-Fort Worth National Cemetery are never forgotten. Her service in uniform, in medicine, and in the community exemplifies the highest ideals of leadership, integrity, and compassion.
Lieutenant Colonel Trickett’s distinguished
career and enduring commitment to others reflect the finest traditions of the United States
Air Force and bring great credit upon herself,
the State of Texas, and the United States of
America.
f

COMMEMORATING 36TH ANNIVERSARY OF BLACK JANUARY

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th District of Texas. The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby
presented to Lieutenant Colonel Cynthia Jean
Trickett, United States Air Force, of Dallas,
Texas, for her honorable service in the Armed
Forces of the United States of America and for
her continued service to her community.
Lieutenant Colonel Trickett served with distinction in the United States Air Force, Air
Force Reserves, and Texas Air National
Guard for thirty three years. As a Physician
Associate and Medical Officer assigned to the
149th Medical Group at Joint Base San Antonio, she provided exemplary clinical leadership
and care in both peacetime and crisis operations. Her career included four major activations in support of disaster relief and public
health emergencies including Hurricane
Katrina in 2005, Hurricane Rita in 2005, Hurricane Harvey in 2017, and the Texas COVID–
19 pandemic response from 2020 to 2021.
She also deployed along the Rio Grande in
2002 and 2005 to deliver medical, dental, and
humanitarian services to underserved communities. Her military decorations include the
Meritorious Service Medal with oak leaf cluster, Air Force Commendation Medal, Air Force
Achievement Medal, Air Force Outstanding
Unit Award with two oak leaf clusters, Air Reserve Forces Meritorious Service Medal, National Defense Service Medal with service
star, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal,
Humanitarian Service Medal with service star,
Nuclear Deterrence Operations Service Medal,
and Air Force Longevity Service Award with
four oak leaf clusters.
Following her distinguished military career,
Lieutenant Colonel Trickett has continued her
lifelong mission of service through medicine,
mentorship, and education. A nationally recognized Physician Associate in dermatology, she
lectures and teaches across the country, advancing patient care and professional standards in her field. She was honored with the
2022 Society of Dermatology Physician Associates Service Award for her leadership,
mentorship, and advocacy. In North Texas,
she serves as a clinical instructor and preceptor for students from West Coast University, the University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, and the University of North
Texas, shaping the next generation of

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

HON. STEVE COHEN
OF TENNESSEE

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. COHEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
commemorate the 36th anniversary of the
‘‘Black January’’ killings, one of the most tragic
events in Azerbaijan’s history.
On the night of January 20, 1990, nearly
26,000 Soviet troops stormed the capital city
of Baku, deploying tanks and armored vehicles against the civilian population. Soviet
forces crushed innocent Azerbaijanis under
heavy machinery and fired without restraint at
peaceful demonstrators, including women and
children. These brutal actions resulted in the
deaths of 147 individuals, injuries to approximately 800 others, the arrest of 841 people,
and the disappearance of five.
The Human Rights Watch report ‘‘Black
January in Azerbaijan’’ states that ‘‘among the
most heinous violations of human rights during
the Baku incursion were the numerous attacks
on medical personnel, ambulances, and even
hospitals.’’ I offer my thoughts and prayers to
the families of the victims and to those who
gave their lives to help their fellow citizens.
The United States was one of the first countries to recognize independence and fully established diplomatic relations on February 28,
1992. Today, the United States and Azerbaijan are still strategic allies and share common interests in the region and globally.
As the Co-Chairman of the Congressional
Azerbaijan Caucus, I urge my colleagues to
recognize the sacrifices of the Azerbaijani
people in their steps towards independence
and encourage a recommitment to the democratic values for which many Azerbaijanis sacrificed their lives.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF THOMAS
O. HICKS

HON. PAT FALLON
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. FALLON. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor the life and legacy of Thomas O. Hicks
of Dallas, Texas, who passed away on December 6, 2025.
Thomas O. Hicks was born in Houston,
Texas, and raised between Dallas and Port

E:\CR\FM\A20JA8.007

E20JAPT1

E56

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Arthur. He graduated from Thomas Jefferson
High School and earned a bachelor’s degree
in finance from the University of Texas, followed by an MBA from the University of
Southern California. A proud Texan, Mr. Hicks
lived a life defined by service, leadership, and
commitment to his community. He served his
country as a paratrooper in the Army Reserves and later as a presidentially appointed
Commissioner of the American Battle Monuments Commission.
Mr. Hicks began his professional career in
banking with JPMorgan before returning to
Texas, where he became a pioneer in private
equity. In 1984, he co-founded Hicks & Haas
and helped advance the leveraged buyout
model through his ‘‘buy and build’’ strategy,
most notably with the merger of Dr Pepper
and 7UP. He later co-founded Hicks, Muse,
Tate & Furst and served as chairman until
2004. Under his leadership, the firm became
one of the most influential private equity organizations in the world, raising more than $12
billion and completing over $50 billion in acquisitions. In recognition of his contributions to
business, Mr. Hicks was inducted into the
Texas Business Hall of Fame in 2022.
A lifelong sports enthusiast, Mr. Hicks purchased the Dallas Stars in 1996, leading the
franchise to its 1999 Stanley Cup championship. He later acquired the Texas Rangers,
who won consecutive American League West
titles, and held ownership in Liverpool Football
Club.
Mr. Hicks was deeply committed to the Dallas-Fort Worth region. He played a key role in
the development of the American Airlines Center, contributed to the Margaret Hunt Hill
Bridge, and supported education initiatives
across North Texas, including the land donation that became Thomas O. Hicks Elementary
School. His dedication to the University of
Texas included service on the Board of Regents and helping establish UTIMCO, now the
largest public university endowment in the Nation.
I am honored to recognize Thomas O. Hicks
for a life of service, leadership, and lasting impact on the State of Texas and our Nation.
f

HONORING THE 45TH ANNIVERSARY OF ARROYO VISTA FAMILY
HEALTH CENTER

HON. JIMMY GOMEZ
OF CALIFORNIA

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. GOMEZ. Mr. Speaker, today I rise to
honor the 45th Anniversary of Arroyo Vista
Family Health Center located in Northeast Los
Angeles.
In February of 1981, Arroyo Vista Family
Health Center was established to ensure access to health services ‘‘for the community, by
the community.’’ Over the last 45 years, the
non-profit community health center has become a trusted service provider, with a mobile
clinic and four locations across Northeast Los
Angeles. Every year, the center serves roughly 18,000 patients with a wide range of services such as family medicine, behavioral
health, prenatal care, dental services, and
pharmacy.
For more than four decades, Arroyo Vista
Family Health Center has cemented its status

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:26 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

as a pillar for accessible, high-quality health
care services for all. As our Northeast Los Angeles communities continue to grow and transform, Arroyo Vista Family Health Center remains committed to addressing the current
and future health needs of residents through
access to comprehensive health services. The
impact of their efforts can be felt in every corner of Northeast Los Angeles, where residents
no longer have to travel long distances for
care and instead receive affordable, quality
services from trusted providers.
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me
in honoring Arroyo Vista Family Health Center
on their 45th Anniversary.
f

HONORING
THE
41ST
ANNUAL
MARTIN
LUTHER
KING,
JR.
YOUTH ORATORICAL

HON. EUGENE SIMON VINDMAN
OF VIRGINIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. VINDMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor the 41st Annual Martin Luther King, Jr.
Youth Oratorical Contest, hosted by the Prince
William County Alumnae Chapter of Delta
Sigma Theta Sorority, Incorporated.
For more than four decades, the members
of the Prince William County Alumnae Chapter
of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc. have
hosted this community event in honor of Martin Luther King, Jr. Day. This year marks the
41st anniversary of this distinguished program,
one of the oldest and largest celebrations of
Dr. King’s legacy in the greater Washington,
D.C. metropolitan area.
The event brings together students in
grades six through twelve from Prince William
County Public Schools and surrounding areas,
offering them a unique opportunity to research, write, and deliver original orations
honoring the life, leadership, and vision of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr.
This year’s speech topic: ‘‘Awakening the
Dream: Breaking Barriers in the Fight for Justice and Unity, ‘‘is inspired by the enduring
legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., whose
calls for justice, unity, and an equitable future
continue to resonate today.’’
I want to personally congratulate the following contestants in the 41st ‘‘Annual Martin
Luther King, Jr. Youth Oratorical Contest: Middle School Contestants: Brianna McGlawn—
Manassas Park Middle School; Daniella
Odom—Rippon Middle School; Jasraj Saini—
Benton Middle School; Salima LankfordDiallo—Manassas Park High School; Beulah
Sarsah—C.D. Hylton High School; and Ryqah
Shaikh—Gainesville High School.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that my colleagues join
me in commending the Prince William County
Alumnae Chapter of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc. for its unwavering commitment to uplifting our youth and preserving Dr. King’s legacy.
I also congratulate these talented students
for using their voices to advance the ideals of
justice, unity, and equality. Let us learn from
this next generation and consider how we may
honor Dr. King’s legacy by continuously seeking justice and leading with light in our own
communities.

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 20, 2026

RECOGNIZING MARK JOHNSON

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th District of Texas. The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby
presented to Specialist Mark Alan Johnson,
United States Army, of North Richland Hills,
Texas, for his honorable service in the Armed
Forces of the United States of America and for
his continued service to his community.
Specialist Johnson served honorably in the
United States Army from 1974 to 1976 with
Company C, 122nd Signal Corps, 2nd Infantry
Division, stationed at Camp Casey, South
Korea. As a Radio, Teletype, and Morse Code
Operator, he was recognized as one of the
most skilled and dependable communications
specialists in his unit. During the heightened
alert that followed the 1976 ‘‘Korean Axe Murder Incident,’’ he played a vital role in maintaining morale and operational readiness as
U.S. forces prepared for potential escalation.
His dedication and leadership earned him the
rank of Specialist 4 and the respect of both
peers and superiors. His military decorations
include the National Defense Service Medal
and the Korean Defense Service Medal.
Following his military service, Specialist
Johnson dedicated four decades to civil service with the Federal Highway Administration,
General Services Administration, and Federal
Aviation Administration, where his work in information technology helped streamline processes, save taxpayer dollars, and support
thousands of federal employees nationwide.
Stationed at Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma, he played a key role in the recovery
and support efforts for coworkers who survived the 1995 Murrah Federal Building bombing, providing both technical and personal assistance in the aftermath of the tragedy.
Beyond his career, Specialist Johnson has
remained deeply engaged in community service and charitable work. As a member of the
Gold Wing Road Riders Association and the
Iron Butt Association, he has helped raise
funds for organizations including The Salvation
Army, Scottish Rite Children’s Hospital, and
programs supporting children in foster care.
His compassion and generosity extend back to
his service in South Korea, where he volunteered at a local orphanage for deaf children.
Specialist Johnson’s lifelong dedication to
service across military, civil, and community
spheres reflects the highest traditions of the
United States Army and brings great credit
upon himself, the State of Texas, and the
United States of America.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF RICK
GARCIA

HON. MIKE QUIGLEY
OF ILLINOIS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. QUIGLEY. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor the life and legacy of Rick Garcia—an
LGBTQ+ rights leader, community organizer,
and above all, a man who knew how to create

E:\CR\FM\A20JA8.012

E20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

change for the betterment of LGBTQ+ people
statewide.
Garcia advocated through decades long
fights to pass city, county, and state-wide ordinances that banned discrimination against
members of the LGBTQ+ community. His
dedication to meaningful change has left a
lasting impact throughout Illinois, and in the
memories of all who were lucky enough to
have worked with him throughout his career.
Garcia was the principal founder of Equality
Illinois, the largest organizational voice for
LGBTQ+ rights in Illinois. As executive director, he worked directly with Chicago, Cook
County, and Illinois governments to codify
marriage equality and fight against the worst
forms of discrimination. He was inducted into
the Chicago LGBT Hall of Fame in 1999.
Garcia knew how to unite communities for
change, and how to bridge divides to ensure
change was not only all-encompassing, but
long-lasting. He was a member of the ‘‘Gang
of Four,’’ an activist group that played a critical
role in the passing of Chicago’s 1988 Human
Rights Ordinance. Garcia was also an involved member of the Roman Catholic community on behalf of LGBTQ+ people of faith.
He united Chicagoans from both major political parties in pursuit of justice and equality for
all.
We remember and honor Rick Garcia as not
only a dedicated activist, but a force for good
in every community he touched. May his
memory be a blessing.
Mr. Speaker, I ask everyone to join me in
recognizing Rick Garcia for his tireless commitment to equality in Chicago and honoring
his legacy.
f

HONORING MARY ALICE EDWARDS

HON. RUDY YAKYM III
OF INDIANA

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. YAKYM. Mr. Speaker, today we celebrate an incredible woman, Mary Alice
Edwards, on her 90th birthday.
Mary Alice was born February 1, 1936, in
Trenton, Tennessee, and moved to South
Bend at just six months old. She grew up on
Scott Street and later helped make history
when her family became the first African
American homeowners on the 1400 block of
Washington Street. From the start, her life has
been about courage, progress, and faith.
She attended Oliver Elementary and graduated from Central High School in 1954. That
same year, she got married and began raising
her greatest legacy: five children, three daughters and two sons. One of her sons went on
to become a respected business leader in this
community, which says a lot about the values
Mary Alice poured into her family.
Mary Alice worked hard her whole life, from
Essex Wire and Wells Electronics to more
than 20 years at Curtis Products, retiring in
2016 at the age of 80. She also served as
PTO secretary at Linden School, always making sure kids and families were supported.
Her faith has guided everything she’s done.
She joined Laken Chapel Primitive Baptist
Church on December 31, 1964, during a night
watch service, and went on to serve as assistant clerk, then clerk. For over 30 years, she
has also served as clerk of the Big Creek

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:26 Jan 21, 2026

E57

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

Primitive Baptist Association, faithfully serving
churches across the region.
So today, Mr. Speaker, we don’t just celebrate a birthday. We celebrate 90 years of
faith, hard work, leadership, and love. Mary Alice’s life has shaped her family, strengthened
her church, and lifted this community. We
thank God for her and pray for many more
healthy, joyful years ahead.
Happy 90th birthday.
f

RECOGNIZING THE 36TH ANNIVERSARY OF BLACK JANUARY

HON. ROBERT B. ADERHOLT
OF ALABAMA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. ADERHOLT. Mr. Speaker, this month,
our friend and partner, the Republic of Azerbaijan marks the 36th anniversary of ‘‘Black
January.’’
This period symbolizes the beginning of the
end of Soviet rule over Azerbaijan, an occupation that lasted for much of the 20th Century.
This was a time of oppression and horror. But
uncowed by the evil of communism, the people of Azerbaijan yearned for freedom.
On January 19, 1990, violence erupted in
Azerbaijan’s capital city of Baku where Soviet
troops killed over 100 Azeri demonstrators and
wounded another 700. Undeterred, the people
of Azerbaijan continued their peaceful protests
until declaring independence from the
U.S.S.R. on October 18, 1991.
Now, 36 years on from this tragedy, Azerbaijan can celebrate this as the first year of
sustained peace since gaining its independence. With the assistance of the American
President, the end of the Armenia-Azerbaijan
conflict promises to be a turning point for the
region.
I ask my colleagues to join me in commemorating the events of Black January in
Azerbaijan and honoring those who lost their
lives in pursuit of freedom. Further, please join
me in thanking President Donald J. Trump for
his work to secure peace and prosperity with
our friend and partner. The United States continues to stand with the people of Azerbaijan
and their right to live free.
f

SUPPORTING H.R. 6719, THE COMBATING ONLINE PREDATORS ACT

HON. LUCY McBATH
OF GEORGIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mrs. MCBATH. Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of H.R. 6719, the Combating Online Predators Act.
There are a number of teenagers and preteens who have lost their lives to suicide because of sextortion. We are fighting against
criminal individuals and groups who seek out
our children with no goal other than to cause
turmoil. Sextortion is a dangerous and sick activity that has been increasingly used against
children—so much so that the FBI has released warnings on the growing risk this
poses to our kids, and the National Center for
Missing & Exploited Children (NCMEC) has
reported a nearly 200 percent increase in at-

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

tempts. As our social landscape continues to
evolve, placing our most vulnerable population
online more often, we must be prepared with
the laws to deter and punish bad actors.
These perpetrators have taken Al-generated
images of their victims or convinced the teens
to send nude images of themselves and used
them as leverage for outrageous demands.
Some perpetrators will demand thousands of
dollars—a request that is near impossible for
the vast majority of teens.
Teenagers worry about so many things:
what they are going to wear for homecoming,
why their acne cannot seem to get under control, whether they should go to college or trade
school. They should not be worried about
someone catfishing them and using intimate
images of them to either coerce money from
them or push them to self-harm.
From Michigan, to Kentucky, to Ohio, and
Georgia, these schemes range across the
country. These sextortion operations are expanding, and we must do what we can to help
law enforcement and prosecutors bring these
evils to justice.
With this bill, we will provide prosecutors
with additional tools to hold perpetrators accountable for schemes in which they seek to
obtain explicit photos and videos of minors.
Our teenagers are in need of protection regardless of their independence and maturity. I
am proud to support this legislation to ensure
our teenagers can spend this pivotal moment
in their lives focusing on things that will positively shape them into adulthood. They should
have the chance to enjoy their teenage years
without threat or malice.
I encourage my colleagues to join me in
supporting H.R. 6719, the Combating Online
Predators Act.
f

RECOGNIZING MATTHEW MYERS

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens
of the 24th District of Texas. The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby
presented to Specialist Matthew Myers, United
States Army, of Dallas, Texas, for his honorable service in the Armed Forces of the United
States of America and for his continued service to his community.
Specialist Myers served honorably in the
United States Army from 1979 to 1982 as a
combat medic with the 1st Ranger Battalion,
U.S. Army Airborne. Throughout his service,
he exemplified the highest standards of courage, readiness, and compassion providing
emergency care under demanding conditions
while supporting the elite soldiers of the Ranger Regiment. His military decorations include
the Parachutist Badge, Army Service Ribbon,
Good Conduct Medal, Expert Rifle Badge, and
Medical Field Expert Badge, recognizing his
professionalism and technical skill as both a
soldier and a medic.
Following his military service, Specialist
Myers built a distinguished career in education, leadership, and philanthropy, continuing his lifelong commitment to service. As
Dean of the Cox School of Business at Southern Methodist University from 2017 to 2025,

E:\CR\FM\A20JA8.016

E20JAPT1

E58

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

he championed expanded scholarship opportunities for veterans and active-duty service
members, doubling the school’s Yellow Ribbon
funding to ensure broader access to graduate
education through the GI Bill. He also served
as a faculty adviser to SMU Military Veterans,
providing mentorship and advocacy for students transitioning from military to academic
life.
Beyond higher education, Specialist Myers
continues to serve his community through
board leadership with Goodwill of Dallas, the
Baylor Scott & White Dallas Foundation, King
Ranch, and The Peregrine Fund advancing
causes of workforce development, healthcare,
and conservation. His influence has inspired
countless students and colleagues, including
his own daughters, who credit his Army service for shaping their values of selflessness,
humility, and strength.
Specialist Myers’ honorable service and
continued dedication to education, veterans,
and his community reflect the highest traditions of the United States Army and bring
great credit upon himself, the State of Texas,
and the United States of America.
f

COMMEMORATING STEPHEN
MOYLAN

HON. MARY GAY SCANLON
OF PENNSYLVANIA

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Ms. SCANLON. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
commemorate one of Philadelphia’s great figures, Stephen Moylan. As we approach America’s 250th anniversary, I find it fitting that we
reflect on the individuals whose service and
sacrifice helped lay its foundation.
Born in Cork in 1737, Stephen Moylan emigrated to Philadelphia in 1767 after experiencing religious persecution. Like so many immigrants, Moylan came to America seeking
freedom and opportunity and went on to play
a critical role in the fight for independence.
During the War for Independence, he
served in several key positions, including as
the second Quartermaster General of the Continental Army, Commander of the Fourth Continental Light Dragoons, and a trusted aide to
General George Washington. Moylan is also
credited as the first to have used the phrase
‘‘United States of America’’ reflecting his belief
in unity among the colonies.
Moylan was a man of many accomplishments. Notably, in 1771 he was elected the
first president of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick in Philadelphia, an organization established on the principles of welcoming and supporting Irish immigrants. Today the organization continues his work by promoting Irish culture, education, and providing aid.
On January 14, 2026, the Friendly Sons and
Daughters of St. Patrick, in partnership with
Irish America 250, co-hosted an event at
Villanova University to honor Stephen Moylan.
This kick-off commemorated the 250th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of
Independence and highlighted the Irish contributions to American History and culture.
Ultimately, Stephen Moylan’s life and legacy
serve as a powerful reminder of the role Irish
immigrants have played, and continue to play,
shaping the American Republic. His service to
Philadelphia, the Revolutionary cause, and to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:26 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

generations of Irish Americans reflects the
long-lasting values of unity, service, and liberty
shared among the Irish and American people.
f

TRIBUTE TO DR. CECIL EDWARD
‘‘EDDIE’’ FLOYD

HON. JAMES E. CLYBURN

January 20, 2026

Cecil Edward ‘‘Eddie’’ Floyd—a healer, a leader, and a servant whose legacy will continue
to inspire South Carolina for generations to
come.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF LEDA A.
MELIDEO

HON. PAT FALLON

OF SOUTH CAROLINA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF TEXAS

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor and celebrate the extraordinary life and
legacy of Dr. Cecil Edward ‘‘Eddie’’ Floyd, a
distinguished physician, visionary leader, and
devoted servant to the people of South Carolina, who transitioned on January 15, 2026.
His life’s work reflects a rare combination of
professional excellence, civic responsibility,
and deep commitment to family and community.
A native of Lake City, South Carolina, Dr.
Floyd was educated in Lake City Public
Schools. He went on to attend the University
of South Carolina, earning his bachelor’s degree, before pursuing his calling in medicine at
the Medical University of South Carolina. Following his medical degree, Dr. Floyd completed his internship at Charity Hospital in
New Orleans, Louisiana, an experience that
further shaped his dedication to compassionate, high-quality care. Board-certified in
both General and Vascular Surgery, he built a
medical career marked by skill, integrity, and
an unwavering focus on patient well-being.
Beyond the operating room, Dr. Floyd exemplified leadership through service. He dedicated countless hours to strengthening institutions that serve the public good, including his
role as Chairman of the Board for MUSC
Health Florence Medical Center. Over the decades, he served on boards for numerous organizations spanning healthcare, higher education, finance, conservation, and public policy—always bringing thoughtful guidance,
steady leadership, and a deep sense of responsibility.
Dr. Floyd’s impact extended into higher education and civic life through long-standing
service on the University of South Carolina
Board of Trustees, including his tenure as
Chairman, and through leadership roles with
financial and philanthropic institutions. His
counsel was sought at the state, national, and
international levels, including service as a Delegate to the United Nations General Assembly
and participation in organizations shaping
healthcare policy and medical education.
His distinguished service was widely recognized. Dr. Floyd was named a Distinguished
Eagle Scout and received honorary doctoral
degrees from Francis Marion University and
the University of South Carolina. Among his
many accolades was the Order of the Palmetto, South Carolina’s highest civilian
honor—a testament to both his professional
excellence and moral character.
At the center of Dr. Floyd’s life was his family. He shared a loving marriage with his wife,
Kay Baker Floyd of Timmonsville, and together they raised three children—Dr. Coleman Floyd Buckhouse, Cecil ‘‘Bubby’’ Edward
Floyd, Jr., and Emory ‘‘Sissy’’ Kay Floyd. He
was a proud grandfather to nine grandchildren.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in honoring the life of Dr.

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Mr. FALLON. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor the life and legacy of Leda A. Melideo,
of Pittsfield, Massachusetts, who passed away
on December 20, 2025.
Leda A. Melideo was born on December 1,
1929, at home in the Lakewood section of
Pittsfield, the daughter of the late Frank and
Ida Curini Tranquilli. Her family later moved to
the Morningside neighborhood, where she attended Crane School and went on to graduate
from St. Joseph’s High School as a member
of the Class of 1947. A woman of deep faith,
Leda was a lifelong parishioner of Sacred
Heart Church, where her values of compassion, gratitude, and service were reflected
throughout her life.
On April 29, 1950, Leda married the love of
her life, Anthony Melideo. Together, they
shared 63 years of marriage and built a family
rooted in love, devotion, and togetherness.
She was a devoted mother to four children:
Nancy (Houghton) Smith of Greenfield, Massachusetts; Joseph P. Melideo of Fultonville,
New York; Anthony A. Melideo, with whom
she resided; and Thomas A. Melideo and his
wife, Gabriela, of Vienna, Virginia. She was
predeceased by her husband, Anthony; her
brother, Faro; and her sister, Diana Carlon.
Leda’s legacy continues through her family, including her three grandchildren—Marissa
Kelleher and her husband, Sean; Sophia
Melideo; and Samuel Melideo—her two greatgrandsons, Callan and Nolan Kelleher, and
several nieces and nephews who were
blessed by her love and guidance.
Known affectionately as ‘‘Nonni,’’ Leda was
a bright light to all who knew her. She possessed a remarkable ability to find joy in everyday life and to inspire that same joy in others. Her contagious laughter, warm smile, and
kind spirit made everyone feel welcome, and
she was the heart of countless happy memories that her family and friends will cherish forever. Above all, she found her greatest joy in
spending time with family and friends, embracing each moment with gratitude and grace.
I am honored to recognize Leda A. Melideo
for a life beautifully lived—one defined by love,
faith, family, and kindness. Her legacy will endure in the hearts of all who were fortunate
enough to know her, and her memory will remain a lasting blessing to the Pittsfield community and beyond.
f

RECOGNIZING BRUCE NELSON
BLACKMON

HON. BETH VAN DUYNE
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
on behalf of a grateful Nation and the citizens

E:\CR\FM\A20JA8.020

E20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

of the 24th District of Texas. The 2025 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby
presented to Master Sergeant Bruce Nelson
Blackmon, United States Air Force, of North
Richland Hills, Texas, for his honorable service in the Armed Forces of the United States
of America and for his continued service to his
community.
Master Sergeant Blackmon served honorably in the United States Air Force from 1978
to 1998, dedicating twenty years to the maintenance, repair, and readiness of critical aircraft in support of American combat operations around the world. As a sheet metal
craftsman with the 305th Maintenance Squadron under Air Mobility Command, he played a
vital role in ensuring that aircraft returning
from combat during the Gulf War could be

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:26 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

rapidly repaired and returned to mission-ready
status directly supporting air operations and
the safety of troops on the ground. His superior technical skill, leadership, and dedication
earned him numerous awards and decorations, including the Meritorious Service Medal,
Air Force Commendation Medal with oak leaf
cluster, Air Force Achievement Medal, Air
Force Good Conduct Medal with four devices,
Air Force Outstanding Unit Award with two devices, National Defense Service Medal, Air
Force Longevity Service Award with three devices, and the NCO Professional Military Education Ribbon.
Following his military career, Master Sergeant Blackmon continued his lifelong commitment to service through his work and within
his community. For more than twenty-five

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

E59

years, he worked as a kitchen designer and
salesman, helping rebuild and restore homes
devastated by natural disasters including Hurricane Charley and Hurricane Ike. Known for
his humility and willingness to help, he has
driven hours to assist friends and family in
need repairing plumbing and lighting, installing
cabinetry, or simply providing comfort and
companionship to those hospitalized or struggling. His community service reflects the same
sense of duty and compassion that defined his
military career.
Master Sergeant Blackmon’s steadfast service, both in uniform and as a civilian, exemplifies the highest traditions of the United States
Air Force and brings great credit upon himself,
the State of Texas, and the United States of
America.

E:\CR\FM\A20JA8.024

E20JAPT1

Tuesday, January 20, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate
Chamber Action

Committee Meetings

The Senate met at 10:00:01 a.m. in pro forma session, and recessed at 10:00:24 a.m. until 11 a.m. on
Thursday, January 22, 2026.

No committee meetings were held.

h

House of Representatives

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Chamber Action
Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 20 public bills, H.R. 7147–7166; and 2 resolutions, H.
Res. 1010–1011 were introduced.
Pages H947–48
Additional Cosponsors:
Page H949
Report Filed: A report was filed today as follows:
H. Res. 1009, providing for consideration of the
bill (H.R. 6945) to amend part A of title IV of the
Social Security Act to clarify the authority of States
to use funds for pregnancy centers, and for other
purposes; providing for consideration of the bill
(H.R. 6359) to require institutions of higher education to disseminate information on the rights of,
and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, and for other purposes; and providing for consideration of the joint resolution (H.J. Res. 140) providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8
of title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted
by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order No. 7917 for Withdrawal of Federal
Lands; Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis Counties, MN
(H. Rept. 119–459).
Page H947
Speaker: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he
appointed Representative Williams (TX) to act as
Speaker pro tempore for today.
Page H927
Recess: The House recessed at 12:10 p.m. and reconvened at 2 p.m.
Page H928
Recess: The House recessed at 2:08 p.m. and reconvened at 3:30 p.m.
Page H929
Recess: The House recessed at 4:43 p.m. and reconvened at 6:30 p.m.
Page H939

Suspensions: The House agreed to suspend the rules
and pass the following measures: Northern Mariana
Islands Small Business Access Act: H.R. 3496,
amended, to amend the Small Business Act for
microloan eligibility for the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands;
Pages H929–30
Main Street Parity Act: H.R. 5763, to amend
the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 to modify the criteria for loans for plant acquisition, construction, conversion or expansion, by a 2⁄3 yea-andnay vote of 383 yeas to 8 nays, Roll No. 32;
Pages H930–31, H939–40

AI for Main Street Act: H.R. 5764, amended, to
amend the Small Business Act to require small business development centers to assist small business
concerns with the use of artificial intelligence, by a
2⁄3 yea-and-nay vote of 395 yeas to 14 nays, Roll
No. 33;
Pages H931–32, H940
504 Program Risk Oversight Act: H.R. 5788, to
amend title V of the Small Business Investment Act
of 1958 to require an annual portfolio risk analysis
of loans guaranteed under such title;
Pages H932–34
Artificial Intelligence Wisdom for Innovative
Small Enterprises Act: H.R. 5784, to amend the
Small Business Act to help small business concerns
critically evaluate artificial intelligence tools;
Pages H934–36

Veterans Law Judge Experience Act: H.R. 659,
to amend title 38, United States Code, to direct the
Chairman of the Board of Veterans’ Appeals to give

D94

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:40 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D20JA6.REC

D20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

priority to individuals with certain professional experience in recommending such individuals to serve as
members of the Board of Veterans’ Appeals; and
Pages H936–37

Veterans Scam And Fraud Evasion Act: H.R.
1663, amended, to amend title 38, United States
Code, to establish in the Department of Veterans Affairs a Veterans Scam and Fraud Evasion Officer.
Pages H937–39

Quorum Calls—Votes: Two yea-and-nay votes developed during the proceedings of today and appear
on pages H939–40 and H940.
Adjournment: The House met at 12 p.m. and adjourned at 8:03 p.m.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Committee Meetings
SUPPORTING PREGNANT AND
PARENTING WOMEN AND FAMILIES ACT;
PREGNANT STUDENTS’ RIGHTS ACT;
PROVIDING FOR CONGRESSIONAL
DISAPPROVAL OF THE RULE RELATING TO
PUBLIC LAND ORDER NO. 7917
Committee on Rules: Full Committee held a hearing on
H.R. 6945, the ‘‘Supporting Pregnant and Parenting
Women and Families Act’’; H.R. 6359, the ‘‘Pregnant Students’ Rights Act’’; H.J. Res. 140, providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8
of title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted
by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order No. 7917 for Withdrawal of Federal
Lands; Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis Counties, MN.
The Committee granted, by a record vote of 8–3, a
rule providing for consideration of H.R. 6945, the
‘‘Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and
Families Act’’, H.R. 6359, the ‘‘Pregnant Students’
Rights Act’’, and H.J. Res. 140, Providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5,
United States Code, of the rule submitted by the
Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land
Order No. 7917 for Withdrawal of Federal Lands;
Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis Counties, MN. The rule
provides for consideration of H.R. 6945, the ‘‘Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families Act’’, under a closed rule. The rule waives all
points of order against consideration of the bill. The
rule provides that an amendment in the nature of a
substitute consisting of the text of Rules Committee
Print 119–17 shall be considered as adopted and the
bill, as amended, shall be considered as read. The
rule waives all points of order against provisions in
the bill, as amended. The rule provides one hour of
general debate equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Ways and Means or their respective des-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:40 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

D95

ignees. The rule provides one motion to recommit.
The rule further provides for consideration of H.R.
6359, the ‘‘Pregnant Students’ Rights Act’’, under a
closed rule. The rule waives all points of order
against consideration of the bill. The rule provides
that the amendment in the nature of a substitute
recommended by the Committee on Education and
Workforce now printed in the bill shall be considered as adopted and the bill, as amended, shall be
considered as read. The rule waives all points of
order against provisions in the bill, as amended. The
rule provides one hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Education and
Workforce or their respective designees. The rule
provides one motion to recommit. The rule further
provides for consideration of H.J. Res. 140, Providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8
of title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted
by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public Land Order No. 7917 for Withdrawal of Federal
Lands; Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis Counties, MN,
under a closed rule. The rule waives all points of
order against consideration of the joint resolution.
The rule provides that the joint resolution shall be
considered as read. The rule waives all points of
order against provisions in the joint resolution. The
rule provides one hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Natural Resources or their respective designees. Finally, the rule
provides one motion to recommit. Testimony was
heard from Chairman Walberg, and Representatives
Scott of Virginia, Stauber, Randall, Chu, Smith of
Nebraska, Davis of Illinois, and Moore of Wisconsin.

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR WEDNESDAY,
JANUARY 21, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
No meetings/hearings scheduled.

House
Committee on the Budget, Full Committee, hearing entitled ‘‘Reverse the Curse: Skyrocketing Health Care Costs
and America’s Fiscal Future’’, 10:15 a.m., 210 Cannon.
Committee on Education and Workforce, Full Committee,
markup on H.R. 7082, the ‘‘Fostering Learning and Excellence in Charter Schools (FLEX) Act’’; H.R. 7086, the
‘‘Equitable Access to School Facilities Act’’; and H.R.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D20JA6.REC

D20JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

D96

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

4624, the ‘‘Muhammad Ali American Boxing Revival
Act’’, 10:15 a.m., 2175 Rayburn.
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Full Committee,
markup on H.R. 6409, the ‘‘Foreign Emissions and Nonattainment Clarification for Economic Stability’’; H.R.
4218, the ‘‘Clean Air and Economic Advancement Reform (CLEAR) Act’’; H.R. 6387, the ‘‘Fire Improvement
and Reforming Exceptional Events (FIRE) Act’’; H.R.
4214, the ‘‘Clean Air and Building Infrastructure Improvement Act’’; H.R. 161, the ‘‘New Source Review
Permitting Improvement Act’’; H.R. 6373, the ‘‘Air Permitting Improvements to Protect National Security Act’’;
H.R. 6398, the ‘‘Reducing and Eliminating Duplicative
Environmental Regulations (RED Tape) Act’’; H.R.
2072, to require the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to extend the time period during which licensees are
required to commence construction of certain hydropower
projects; H.R. 5200, the ‘‘Emergency Reporting Act’’;
H.R. 5201, the ‘‘Kari’s Law Reporting Act’’; and H.R.
2076, the ‘‘LuLu’s Law’’, 10:15 a.m., 2123 Rayburn.
Committee on Financial Services, Full Committee, hearing
entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Department of Housing and
Urban Development and the Federal Housing Administration’’, 10 a.m., 2128 Rayburn.
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Full Committee, markup
on H.R. 6875, to require the Under Secretary of Commerce for Industry and Security to require a license for
the export, reexport, or in-country transfer of certain integrated circuits, and for other purposes; H.R. 6275, to require the Secretary of Commerce to submit a report annually on the advanced artificial intelligence capabilities of
the People’s Republic of China, and for other purposes;
H.R. 7036, to increase collaboration within the Department of State between the Office of Opinion Research of
the Bureau of Intelligence and Research and the Bureau
of Global Public Affairs; H.R. 7028, to require the Secretary of State to submit a notification to Congress prior
to obligating funds for certain art-related purchases, and
for other purposes; H.R. 6411, to direct the Secretary of
State to prepare a report on the treatment of ethnic minorities in Serbia; H.R. 7054, to require the Secretary of
State to submit to Congress a notification of certain construction projects using nonstandard designs; H.R. 4532,
to direct the Secretary of State to develop a strategy on
efforts to strengthen subnational cooperation between the
United States and Mexico, and for other purposes; H.
Res. 515, commemorating the 90th birthday of His Holiness the Dalai Lama on July 6, 2025, as ‘‘A Day of Compassion’’, and expressing support for the human rights,
religious freedom, and cultural and linguistic protection
of the Tibetan people; H.R. 4368, to authorize the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative, to enhance the United
States-Caribbean security partnership, to prioritize natural
disaster resilience, and for other purposes; H.R. 3307, to
increase cooperation with countries in the Eastern Mediterranean region in order to strengthen energy security
and defense capabilities, and for other purposes; and H.R.
7052, to establish a Center for Conflict Analysis, Planning, and Prevention in the Department of State, and for
other purposes, 10 a.m., 2172 Rayburn.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:40 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

January 20, 2026

Committee on Homeland Security, Full Committee, hearing
entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Department of Homeland Security: CISA, TSA, S&T’’, 10 a.m., 310 Cannon.
Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime and
Federal Government Surveillance, hearing entitled ‘‘When
Public Funds Are Abused: Addressing Fraud and the
Theft of Taxpayer Dollars’’, 10 a.m., 2141 Rayburn.
Subcommittee on Oversight, hearing entitled ‘‘Embedded Threats: Foreign Ownership, Hidden Hardware, and
Licensing Failures in America’s Transportation Systems’’,
2 p.m., 2141 Rayburn.
Committee on Natural Resources, Subcommittee on Federal
Lands, hearing entitled ‘‘EXPLORE America250: Celebrating One Year of the Expanding Public Lands Outdoor Recreation Experiences Act’’, 10:15 a.m., 1324
Longworth.
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, hearing
entitled ‘‘America First: U.S. Leadership and National Security in International Conservation’’, 2 p.m., 1324 Longworth.
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,, Full
Committee, markup on legislation on recommending that
the House of Representatives find William J. Clinton in
Contempt of Congress for refusal to comply with a subpoena duly issued by the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform; and legislation on recommending
that the House of Representatives find Hillary R. Clinton
in Contempt of Congress for refusal to comply with a
subpoena duly issued by the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform, 10 a.m., HVC–210.
Committee on Rules, Full Committee, hearing on H.R.
7148, the ‘‘Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026’’; and
H.R. 7147, the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’, 2 p.m., H–313 Capitol.
Committee on Small Business, Subcommittee on Rural
Development, Energy, and Supply Chains, hearing entitled ‘‘Empowering Rural America Through Investment in
Innovation’’, 10 a.m., 2360 Rayburn.
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, Full Committee, markup on H.R. 7084, the ‘‘Defending American
Property Abroad Act of 2026’’; H.R. 6744, the ‘‘Military
Air Traffic Control Transition Act’’; H.R. 6618, the
‘‘Wildfire Aerial Response Safety Act’’; H.R. 2247, the
‘‘Pilot Certificate Accessibility Act’’; and H.R. 2474, the
‘‘Expanding Appalachia’s Broadband Access Act’’, 10
a.m., 2167 Rayburn.
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity, hearing on H.R. 982, the ‘‘Warriors
to Workforce Act’’; H.R. 2878, the ‘‘Daniel J. Harvey,
Jr. and Adam Lambert Improving Servicemember Transition to Reduce Veteran Suicide Act’’; H.R. 4105, the
‘‘VET Act of 2025’’; H.R. 5634, the ‘‘Veterans Flight
Training Responsibility Act of 2025’’; legislation on the
CRUISE Act; legislation on the Improving Mental
Health Care and Coordination for Homeless Veterans Act;
legislation on the Improving Emerging Tech Opportunities for Veterans Act; legislation on the Affordable Housing Guarantee Act; H.R. 3159, the ‘‘Improving SCRA
Benefit Utilization Act’’; H.R. 5436, to amend title 38,
United States Code, to prohibit an educational institution
from withholding a transcript from an individual who

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D20JA6.REC

D20JAPT1

January 20, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

pursued a course or program of education at such institution using Post-9/11 educational assistance; legislation to
amend title 38, United States Code, to require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to submit to Congress a quarterly report on housing loans insured, guaranteed, or
under laws administered by the Secretary, and for other

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:40 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0627

D97

purposes; and legislation on the Veteran Housing Promise
Act, 2:30 p.m., 360 Cannon.
Committee on Ways and Means, Subcommittee on Work
and Welfare, hearing entitled ‘‘Strengthening the Child
Support Enforcement Program: Status, Challenges, and
Opportunities for Modernization’’, 3 p.m., 2020 Rayburn.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D20JA6.REC

D20JAPT1

D98

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 20, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

11 a.m., Thursday, January 22

10 a.m., Wednesday, January 21

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Thursday: Senate will meet in a pro forma
session.

Program for Wednesday: Consideration of H. Res.
1009—Providing for consideration of H.R. 6945, Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families
Act, H.R. 6359, Pregnant Students’ Rights Act and H.J.
Res. 140, Providing for congressional disapproval under
chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted by the Bureau of Land Management relating to
Public Land Order No. 7917 for Withdrawal of Federal
Lands; Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis Counties, MN.

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE

Fitzpatrick, Brian K., Pa., E54
Gomez, Jimmy, Calif., E56
McBath, Lucy, Ga., E57
Norcross, Donald, N.J., E54
Norton, Eleanor Holmes, The District of Columbia,
E55
Pettersen, Brittany, Colo., E55

Aderholt, Robert B., Ala., E57
Castro, Joaquin, Tex., E54
Clyburn, James E., S.C., E53, E58
Cohen, Steve, Tenn., E55
Fallon, Pat, Tex., E53, E55, E58

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Quigley, Mike, Ill., E56
Scanlon, Mary Gay, Pa., E58
Van Duyne, Beth, Tex., E53, E54, E55, E56, E57, E58
Vindman, Eugene Simon, Va., E56
Yakym, Rudy, III, Ind., E57

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:40 Jan 21, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D20JA6.REC

D20JAPT1

