UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, JANUARY 29, 2026

No. 21

House of Representatives
The House was not in session today. Its next meeting will be held on Friday, January 30, 2026, at 10:30 a.m.

Senate
THURSDAY, JANUARY 29, 2026
The Senate met at 10:30 a.m. and was
called to order by the President pro
tempore (Mr. GRASSLEY).
f

f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
Gracious God, without You, we are
but disappearing dust. Draw near to
our Senators, for in Your presence they
find their dignity, destiny, and direction. Lord, breathe into them an
awareness of Your presence and the
saving knowledge that they belong to
You. May this awareness inspire them
to walk the days of their years in service to You and humanity. Help them to
remember that You are changeless, nor
is there any variableness in Your judgment, mercy, and love. Remind them
also that they can depend on You for
the vindication of every just cause, the
forgiveness of every confessed sin, and
the strength for every setback.
May they trust You to give them
strength to work today for the glory of
Your Name.
We pray in Your omnipotent Name.
Amen.

CONCLUSION OF MORNING
BUSINESS
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Morning
business is closed.

f

Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, January is National Trafficking and Modern Slavery Prevention Month. For
that reason, the senior Senator from
Nevada and I are introducing a resolution to raise awareness and honor the
victims.
Every day, victims are trafficked
across the world. Each person has a

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The President pro tempore led the
Pledge of Allegiance, as follows:

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MULLIN). Under the previous order, the
leadership time is reserved.

I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

f

LEGISLATIVE SESSION
CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS
ACT, 2026—Motion to Proceed—Resumed
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate will resume consideration of the motion to
proceed to H.R. 7148, which the clerk
will report.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
Motion to proceed to Calendar No. 302,
H.R. 7148, a bill making further consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Iowa.
NATIONAL TRAFFICKING AND MODERN SLAVERY
PREVENTION MONTH

role to play and ought to be vigilant in
preventing the vulnerable from becoming victims of trafficking.
As chairman of the Judiciary Committee, I will continue to support legislation like the Working Families Tax
Cut law to give law enforcement all the
resources it needs to protect people
from the scourge of human trafficking.
I will also continue to push legislation
like the Senate-passed Preventing
Child Trafficking Act, which would ensure our Federal Agencies take needed
steps to protect in a better way potential victims.
So, today, please join me in raising
awareness. And to those who may be
victims, please know that there are resources available to you. If you are in
Iowa, please visit stophtiowa.org, or,
anytime and anywhere, you can text
‘‘HELP’’—H-E-L-P,
obviously—to
233733.
I thank the Senator from Nevada for
joining me in this effort.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY LEADER

The majority leader is recognized.
WORKING FAMILIES TAX CUT

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, there is
almost nothing parents won’t do for
their children. From the moment they

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S357

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:21 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.000

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S358

hand you that little bundle, your whole
life becomes about giving them a better life, ensuring that they have every
opportunity that you can give them,
and setting them up for success. Most
often, that starts with a good education. So last year, Republicans set
out to support parents and empower
them to make the choices they believe
are right for their children’s future.
For decades now, the 529 savings plan
has been a powerful tool for parents to
save for their kids’ education. At first,
529s could only be used for college, but
in 2017, Republicans expanded the eligible uses of 529 plans to include K
through 12 expenses as well. And in last
year’s Working Families Tax Cut, Republicans again expanded 529 plans to
include a number of education investments: tutoring, vocational education,
homeschool materials, and continuing
education. And on top of that, we doubled the amount that you can spend
from your 529 account to $20,000 a year.
These reforms will help more Americans find success, whether they need a
little help getting through algebra or
want to pursue a career in the trades.
As we mark School Choice Week this
week, I also want to note how the
Working Families Tax Cut supports
scholarships for students who attend
the school that best suits them. I am a
proud product of public schools, the
son of two public school educators, and
both of our daughters graduated from
our local high school. Students can get
a great education at their public
school, and they are a point of pride for
many communities. But I also understand that some parents would like to
send their child to a school outside of
their district or to a nonpublic school
or choose to homeschool.
My home State has been a leader in
offering open enrollment, which allows
students to go to the public school of
their choice, even if it is not the school
closest to home, or to enroll in another
school district altogether. South Dakota gets it.
And I am not surprised that we were
one of the first States to opt in to the
scholarship initiative created in the
Working Families Tax Cut, which encourages private support for scholarships that will help students cover a
variety of education expenses and enable them to take advantage of the
type of educational freedom that South
Dakotans have long enjoyed. And I am
glad to see that more than 20 States
have already pledged to participate in
this important initiative to encourage
donations to K through 12 scholarship
funds.
Our bill doesn’t stop there. The
Working Families Tax Cut provided additional funding for Pell grants and
created the Workforce Pell Grant Program, which will support students pursuing shorter term job training programs that prepare them for in-demand
skilled jobs.
Then there are our actions tackling
the high cost of college degrees. The
cost of a college education is out of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:21 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

control. Research suggests that a number of degree programs now have a negative return on investment. The answer isn’t throwing more Federal dollars at the problem; it is putting downward pressure on tuition and holding
schools accountable for the value of
the education they provide.
That is what Republicans did last
year. We implemented accountability
measures to rein in high costs. We also
streamlined student loan repayment
programs, simplifying the process and
providing much needed clarity to folks
repaying their loans.
And we ensured that graduates won’t
have to pay taxes on tuition assistance
from your employer, a measure that I
introduced and this bill makes permanent.
The education provisions in the
Working Families Tax Cuts gives the
next generation more opportunities to
get ahead and succeed. But before I
close, I want to talk about another
part of this bill that sets America’s
next generation up for success. That is
the new Trump Accounts.
These new investment accounts provide parents with another vehicle to
save for their children’s future, to invest that money and let it grow over
the years. And when those children
turn 18, that money—thousands or tens
of thousands of dollars—will be tax advantaged and can be used for education, to start a business, or to buy
their first home.
In short, Trump Accounts will help
the next generation get a head start on
their American dream.
And for children born between 2025
and 2028, the government is offering an
initial $1,000 investment in Trump Accounts. We have also seen similar activities
from
philanthropists
and
matching commitments from various
companies for their employees. A number of those initiatives were announced
during yesterday’s Trump Accounts
summit at the White House.
Musician Nicki Minaj was among
those at yesterday’s summit. She grew
up in a housing project in a family that
faced its share of financial struggles,
and she is now raising her own family.
She recently said of Trump Accounts:
This program will benefit everyone—decreasing the gap for future prosperity between children who traditionally aren’t born
with a full bank account and children who
are.

I hope that parents will take the opportunity to learn about this option to
invest in their children’s future because the more people learn, the more
they will see the potential to set their
children—an entire generation of
Americans—up for success.
A good education is the key to opportunity. It is one of the best gifts that
parents can give to their children.
Thanks to the Working Families Tax
Cuts, the next generation will have
greater educational freedom and be
empowered to seize more opportunities
and to find increased success.
Our legislation puts our Nation’s
children on a smoother path to achiev-

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

ing the American dream, and it gives a
whole generation more opportunities
to get ahead.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
RECOGNITION OF THE MINORITY LEADER

The Democratic leader is recognized.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, this is
a moment of truth for the United
States of America. What the Nation
witnessed on Saturday in the streets of
Minneapolis was a moral abomination.
Federal agents shot and killed Alex
Pretti, an American citizen, in broad
daylight.
It was the second time that agents
killed a U.S. citizen in 2 weeks after
the tragic killing also of Renee Good.
Enough is enough.
What ICE is doing outside the law is
state-sanctioned thuggery, and it must
stop. It is state-sanctioned thuggery,
and it must stop. Congress has the authority and the moral obligation to
act.
This morning in Minneapolis, Tom
Homan, Donald Trump’s border czar,
held a press conference. He didn’t say
much of significance, but he did say
one thing that was important. Here is
what Homan said:
For the people out there who don’t like
what ICE is doing, if you want certain laws
reformed, then take it up with Congress.
For the people out there—

Homan said,
—who don’t like what ICE is doing, if you
want certain laws reformed, then take it up
with Congress.

I don’t agree very much with Mr.
Homan, and he is certainly not my
choice for someone to lower the temperature in Minneapolis, but he is right
in saying the epicenter of change has
to be Congress—not the executive
branch.
And change is desperately needed because the images of masked men beating up people in the streets and shooting American citizens in broad daylight have shocked the conscious.
Alex was holding his hand up. He had
one hand up and another hand holding,
I believe it was, a radio, and they shot
him many times. It made every American recoil to see that our law enforcement is doing that to our citizens.
It is confounding. It does not look
like America in these pictures. Oh, no.
And it has been unleashed by Donald
Trump and the people under him—
Noem, who should be out of there.
Thank God they got rid of Bovino. His
face, when you saw, it looked like he
was grimacing like a thug.
This has got to stop.
Congress must step up to the plate.
The Republican majority must step up

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.001

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

to the plate. Republicans in Congress
cannot allow this violent status quo to
continue. They must work with Democrats on legislation—real legislation,
strong legislation—to rein ICE in.
Let me be clear: Democrats are ready
to pass five bipartisan funding bills in
the Senate. We are ready to pass them
today. We are ready to fund 96 percent
of the Federal Government today, but
the DHS bill still needs a lot of work.
So after meeting yesterday as a caucus, Senate Democrats are united on
three main goals that will rein in ICE
and end the violence—rein in ICE and
end the violence: first, end the roving
patrols; second, enforce accountability;
third, masks off; body cameras on.
Each officer must have visible—visible—ID.
Now, no one thinks we are going to
solve every single problem in one fell
swoop. But the American people are demanding that something gets done.
And, of course, to pass legislation and
enshrine this into law, we need our Republican colleagues to come along with
us.
So, again, first, we need to end ICE’s
indiscriminate patrols. We need to
tighten the rules governing the use of
warrants. ICE needs to stop the mass
chaotic patrols. They need to work
with State law enforcement, local law
enforcement—not against them.
That means no more ICE agents
barging into people’s homes without a
judicial warrant. When does that ever
happen in America? It is a flagrant violation of the Fourth Amendment.
It also means stopping the dragnet
harassment of American communities.
Second, we need accountability. ICE
needs to be held to the same basic
standards as any law enforcement
agency in the country. We need a uniform code of conduct for ICE and all
Federal agents, just like State and
local law enforcement have. If they
violate these standards—like in the instances of Renee Good and Alex
Pretti—they must be held fully accountable.
And we need independent investigations, not ICE investigating itself—
ICE, the leadership of which is a bunch
of liars. We don’t trust them to do the
investigation.
Most Americans might be shocked to
learn that these basic rules do not
apply right now to Federal agents like
ICE. It is the kind of thing most people
would just assume is already in place
because it is so obvious, but that is not
true when it comes to ICE. They are
operating effectively outside the law,
and a small glimpse of a video taken by
a bystanding citizen shows it every
day, every minute. You see these videos. Again, you recoil. It is not America. It is thugs roaming our streets.
Third, we need the masks to come
off, and we need the body cameras to
stay on. No more secret police. Masks
must come off, and body cameras must
stay on. Agents need to carry clear
identification. The public deserves
transparency as it always has asked for
with law enforcement.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:21 Jan 30, 2026

S359

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

These three—ending roving patrols;
enforcing accountability; masks off,
cameras on—are commonsense reforms.
They are reforms that Americans already expect from law enforcement.
Now, the onus now is on Leader
THUNE and Senate Republicans to work
with Democrats to turn these goals
into legislation. They are in the majority—the Republicans are. They are the
ones who have responsibility to govern,
and Democrats are ready to come to
the table.
If Republicans refuse to work with us
to rein in ICE and to end the violence,
they are telling the American people
they are choosing to protect ICE over
choosing to protect people’s safety.
Americans, by and large, support law
enforcement. I do. And most people
support border security. I do as well.
But Americans do not support ICE terrorizing our streets, operating outside
the law, killing American citizens.
The madness and violence must end.
Congress must act to rein in ICE and
end the violence—rein in ICE and end
the violence.
The American people deserve nothing—nothing—less.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SHEEHY). The majority whip.
GOVERNMENT FUNDING

Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, on
the Senate floor today, right now, are
six bipartisan appropriations bills—
six—bills to keep America safe, bills to
keep our government funded and government open, bills that the Senate
Democrats have helped draft, bills that
the majority of the House Democrats
have voted for.
These are bipartisan bills, and they
fund the rest of government for the remainder of the fiscal year. Every Senator should vote yes. Americans are
counting on our government to stay
open, to keep people safe.
Today, Senate Democrats are threatening to block these bills, not just to
vote against them but to actually
block us even getting the bills to the
floor for debate.
So, once again, Democrats are
threatening to shut down the government. If the vote we are about to take
here today in the Senate doesn’t succeed, if the bill stalls out, the government will shut down tomorrow night—
Friday night—about 36 hours from now.
Let’s talk about the painful consequences because here they are: no
funding for FEMA. Now that is the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. It would be disastrous to shut down
FEMA in the middle of a major winter
storm. It is affecting half the country,
and it appears that another storm is
along the way.
A shutdown would mean no paychecks for our troops, once again; no
money for TSA agents or air traffic
controllers. This is at the time the
country is trying to get back on the
move again. These are the consequences, and they are painful.
Now, we all remember the Democrat
shutdown at the end of last year. That

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

was the longest shutdown in the history of the American government. It
was the politics of pain delivered by
the Democrats.
The last Democrat shutdown was
about covering up the many failures of
ObamaCare. This Democrat shutdown
would be about prioritizing illegal immigrants over American citizens. The
Democrat shutdown does not change
the immigration law, nor will it halt
immigration law enforcement.
Even Senate Democrats admit that
publicly. That is because Republicans
already put into law the largest investment in border security and immigration enforcement in the history of this
Nation.
Let me be clear: The vote that we are
going to take, in just a few minutes, to
advance the six bipartisan appropriations bills allows us to avoid a shutdown, to keep the government open, to
make America safer.
The bills that are on the floor fund
disaster assistance through FEMA.
They hire thousands of new air traffic
controllers. They fund TSA agents, the
Coast Guard, and our military. They
give our troops a well-earned and welldeserved pay raise. They support housing assistance for vulnerable families.
They improve roads, bridges, and ports
across the Nation. They upgrade our
Nation’s outdated air traffic control
system. All of that is in front of us
today.
These bills are the product of the
Senate working the way it was designed to work. They reflect months of
bipartisan committee work and goodfaith negotiations.
I applaud Senator SUSAN COLLINS of
Maine. She is the chair of the Senate
Appropriations Committee. These bills
are the product of her determination to
deliver for the American people.
It is time for the Senate to vote yes,
and every Senator should vote yes to
avert a painful shutdown.
Republicans are going to keep working with Democrats to keep the government open. This Nation deserves
safety and security, not another government shutdown.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mrs. MURRAY. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mrs. MURRAY. Mr. President, Democrats have been very clear. We have
five bills in this package we would be
happy to pass today on their own. We
are all in agreement on funding for
childcare, cancer research, air traffic
controllers, our troops, and more. But
we have also been clear that we cannot
and will not move the DHS bill without
real progress on accountability.
ICE and CBP are out of control, and
we cannot approve that bill until commonsense reforms are included. That is

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.003

S29JAPT1

S360

what the vast majority of the American people are demanding, and many
Republicans now also say that must
happen as well.
So Congress, all of us, need to act.
Peaceful protesters and American citizens are being targeted, detained, attacked, and killed. We have to say no
to what this President is doing.
So while I am very glad to see that
the White House and Republicans are
now talking with Democrats to finalize
a plan to pass the five bills and split off
DHS, until that deal is finalized, I will
be a no on this vote.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Maine.
WAIVING QUORUM CALL

Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent to waive the mandatory quorum call in relation to the
motion to proceed to Calendar No. 302,
H.R. 7148.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent to be permitted to
complete my remarks before the vote
begins.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

GOVERNMENT FUNDING

Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I urge
my colleagues to vote to end debate on
the motion to proceed to the six-bill
package of appropriations legislation
sent to us by the House of Representatives. These are fiscally responsible
funding bills that reflect months of
hard work and deliberation and contributions from Members of both parties and on both sides of the Capitol.
I would like to take a few moments
to highlight some of the key aspects of
these bills.
Let’s begin with the funding for the
Department of Defense. This legislation provides U.S. military services
with the funding needed to deter China
and Russia, supports our servicemembers and their families, and strengthens the defense industrial base. It addresses major funding gaps across the
board, such as in shipbuilding. The bill
provides a critical downpayment toward an additional DDG–51, the workhorse of the U.S. surface fleet, and invests in additional Columbia- and Virginia-class submarines.
The bill also provides multiyear procurement authority for critical munitions production, a priority for the
President.
It
funds
drone
and
counterdrone technologies, which, as
we have learned in both Ukraine and
Israel, are increasingly changing the
nature of the battlefield.
And it sustains security cooperation
with close allies and partners whose
growing defense capabilities are force
multipliers for the United States and
contribute to the deterrence of shared
adversaries. This is especially true of
our NATO allies who are increasingly
increasing their own domestic levels of
military investment at the push and
encouragement of President Trump,
and appropriately so.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:21 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

Finally, the Defense bill invests in
our most precious asset: the men and
women of our Armed Forces. The bill
fully funds the 3.8-percent pay raise for
servicemembers and the additional pay
raise for our junior enlisted servicemembers, showing our commitment to
their readiness, well-being, and mission
success.
The second bill is the National Security, Department of State, and Related
Programs bill. It used to be known as
the State, Foreign Operations bill. It
contains security assistance for key allies and partners, including Israel, Jordan, Egypt, Taiwan, and the Philippines.
The bill also supports important
global health programs. It continues
support for the President’s Emergency
Plan for AIDS Relief, known as
PEPFAR, which has saved a remarkable 26 million lives since 2003, including the lives of 8 million babies born to
HIV-infected mothers. It is difficult for
me to contemplate another global
health program—and we have many
good ones—that has had more of a positive impact than PEPFAR. In many
ways, I think it was President George
W. Bush’s greatest legacy.
Turning to the Labor, HHS bill, this
appropriations bill would prioritize
funding to help make Americans
healthier, and it robustly funds lifesaving biomedical research.
This has been a top priority of mine,
and I know of many other Members as
well, including the subcommittee
chair, SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO and her
ranking member, TAMMY BALDWIN.
Funding for NIH is not decreased, as
was proposed in the administration’s
budget. Rather, it is increased by $415
million, including increases of $100 million for Alzheimer’s research and $10
million more for diabetes research,
with a focus on type 1 diabetes.
This bill also makes critical investments in our Nation’s children and
families and invests in America’s
workforce. It includes funding for
childcare programs to help low-income
working families and for apprenticeship programs to help us reach the goal
of 1 million new active apprentices.
The bill also includes more funding
for low-income heating assistance,
which is absolutely crucial for States
like Maine and is an issue that I have
worked for years on with my Democratic colleague JACK REED of Rhode
Island.
The Transportation, Housing, and
Urban Development bill focuses on our
most pressing transportation challenges, including modernizing our Nation’s outdated air traffic system. And
I give Secretary Duffy a great deal of
credit for coming up with a workable,
much needed plan in that area. It
would also address the air traffic controller shortage and provides a pay
raise there as well.
The bill invests in critical infrastructure, like our roads, bridges, ports, and
rail.
At the same time, the appropriations
will continue to fully fund existing

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

rental assistance for more than 4.6 million households to ensure that seniors,
the disabled individuals, and working
families who currently receive such assistance are not put at risk of homelessness.
The Financial Services and General
Government bill funds core government functions. It increases funding
for taxpayer services at the IRS, reallocates resources to strengthen court
security, and helps keep our Nation’s
Capital—Washington, DC—safe for both
residents and visitors.
As the vice chair of the committee
has mentioned, there has understandably been a great deal of attention focused on the Homeland Security portion of the package, given the events of
the past week. The horrific shooting
death of Alex Pretti must be thoroughly and impartially investigated,
and President Trump has promised
that it will be investigated both impartially and thoroughly.
The Homeland Security funding bill
includes important provisions that we
put in during the negotiations that
would make such incidents less likely
to occur. For example, it includes $20
million for body-worn cameras, which
help to protect both law enforcement
officials and those with whom they are
interacting. It includes $2 million to
ensure that training requirements include how to deescalate an encounter
with protestors. Yet another important
provision of the bill empowers the inspector general to review and investigate detention centers.
These are all critical reforms, but it
does not mean that we cannot do more.
But to do more, we need to get onto
the bill so that we can make the critical decisions that are being negotiated
by leadership in both the House and
the Senate and the White House as to
how we proceed. Do we split off the
Homeland Security bill and pass the
other five and put Homeland Security
on a continuing resolution, which will,
by the way, delay implementation of
the three reforms that I just discussed?
Or do we try to amend that part of the
bill with the agreed-upon additional
precautions and safeguards?
We can’t do that if we don’t get onto
the package.
It is also worth noting that more
than 80 percent of the funding in the
Homeland Security bill is for non-immigration and border security functions. For example, 35 percent of the
funding of the Homeland Security bill
is for FEMA. And think about what
FEMA has been doing on the ground,
right now, due to the horrific storm
that we have experienced.
It includes $35 billion for FEMA to
help State and local governments prepare to respond to disasters, including
funding for programs that help local
law enforcement and our firefighters
that are so important. It includes funding for the nonprofit security grant
program that helps organizations like
synagogues, churches, temples, and
mosques protect themselves from terrorism.

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.005

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

Another important component of this
bill supports our Coast Guard. Think of
our Coast Guard personnel out in this
terrible weather, being available to
rescue our fishermen, our lobstermen,
or others who are in trouble. The Coast
Guard provides critical safety, security, and stewardship functions from
Maine to the Caribbean, to the Arctic
and a myriad of places in between.
The bill provides funding to secure
our borders and to stop the flow of the
illegal drugs, money, weapons, and people being trafficked into our country
by cartels and transnational criminal
organizations. It includes funding for
TSA to help keep Americans safe while
they travel, as well as funding for a 3.8percent pay raise for air traffic controllers to help address the serious
workforce shortage that also can affect
air safety.
Mr. President, my hope is that we
can come up with an agreement that
allows us to proceed to this bill and to
provide some additional safeguards.
Those negotiations are underway right
now. But if we don’t get on to this
package, we cannot change this package. I think that our colleagues on the
other side of the aisle need to recognize
and acknowledge that.
I want to end by noting the tremendous work of the full committee staff,
my staff and Senator MURRAY’s staff. I
particularly want to acknowledge the
hard work of Betsy McDonnell, who
has worked night and day as the staff
director. I want to thank our subcommittee chairs and ranking members and their staff, who have worked
so diligently and are so dedicated.
I know the conversations are continuing even as we speak between the
administration and Congress on how to
complete action on the Homeland Security portion of this package. This
morning’s vote is about taking the
first step—not the final step—to consider the package on the Senate floor.
I urge my colleagues to support cloture
on the motion to proceed to this vital
appropriations package.
CLOTURE MOTION

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

The PRESIDING OFFICER. Pursuant
to rule XXII, the Chair lays before the
Senate the pending cloture motion,
which the clerk will state.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
CLOTURE MOTION
We, the undersigned Senators, in accordance with the provisions of rule XXII of the
Standing Rules of the Senate, do hereby
move to bring to a close debate on the motion to proceed to Calendar No. 302, H.R.
7148, a bill making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
John Thune, Chuck Grassley, Ted Budd,
Tom Cotton, Cindy Hyde-Smith, Katie
Boyd Britt, John R. Curtis, John Cornyn,
Bernie
Moreno,
Tommy
Tuberville, Roger Marshall, David
McCormick, Jerry Moran, Markwayne
Mullin, Tim Scott of South Carolina,
Tim Sheehy, Susan M. Collins.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. By unanimous consent, the mandatory quorum
call has been waived.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:21 Jan 30, 2026

S361

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

The question is, Is it the sense of the
Senate that debate on Calendar No. 302,
H.R. 7148, a bill making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes, shall be brought to a
close?
The yeas and nays are mandatory
under the rule.
The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk called the roll.
The yeas and nays resulted—yeas 45,
nays 55, as follows:
[Rollcall Vote No. 13 Leg.]
YEAS—45
Banks
Barrasso
Blackburn
Boozman
Britt
Capito
Cassidy
Collins
Cornyn
Cotton
Cramer
Crapo
Cruz
Curtis
Daines

Ernst
Fischer
Graham
Grassley
Hagerty
Hawley
Hoeven
Husted
Hyde-Smith
Justice
Kennedy
Lankford
Lummis
Marshall
McConnell

Alsobrooks
Baldwin
Bennet
Blumenthal
Blunt Rochester
Booker
Budd
Cantwell
Coons
Cortez Masto
Duckworth
Durbin
Fetterman
Gallego
Gillibrand
Hassan
Heinrich
Hickenlooper
Hirono

Johnson
Kaine
Kelly
Kim
King
Klobuchar
Lee
Luján
Markey
Merkley
Moody
Murphy
Murray
Ossoff
Padilla
Paul
Peters
Reed
Rosen

McCormick
Moran
Moreno
Mullin
Murkowski
Ricketts
Risch
Rounds
Schmitt
Scott (SC)
Sheehy
Sullivan
Tillis
Wicker
Young

NAYS—55
Sanders
Schatz
Schiff
Schumer
Scott (FL)
Shaheen
Slotkin
Smith
Thune
Tuberville
Van Hollen
Warner
Warnock
Warren
Welch
Whitehouse
Wyden

(Mr. MORENO assumed the Chair.)
(Mr. SHEEHY assumed the Chair.)
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
HAGERTY). On this vote, the yeas are
45, the nays are 55. Three-fifths of the
Senate, duly chosen and sworn, not
having voted in the affirmative, the
motion is not agreed to.
The motion was rejected.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority leader.
MOTION TO RECONSIDER

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I have a
motion to reconsider.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The motion is entered.
The Senator from North Carolina.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY

Mr. TILLIS. Mr. President, nearly a
year ago, Secretary Noem visited Western North Carolina to see the devastation caused by Hurricane Helene firsthand.
That day, the Secretary told the
crowd in Bat Cave, NC, that ‘‘the previous administration failed in many
areas and we’re going to learn from
that and do better,’’ a sentiment that I
shared wholeheartedly.
Secretary Noem highlighted some of
the actions taken in the early days of
President Trump’s second term to remove all of the redtape that previously
slowed the Department down and West-

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

ern North Carolina’s recovery. These
actions were sorely needed, and I fully
supported what she intended to do.
Now let’s fast forward a year. Earlier
this week, the New York Times reported that approximately 17 billion,
with a ‘‘b,’’ in Federal disaster funds
for States has been delayed over the
past year.
The article states:
The delays stem from a directive issued by
Ms. Noem in June that said any expenditure
of $100,000 or more must be approved by her
office, which oversees the disaster agency, to
root out ‘‘waste, fraud, and abuse.’’ The bottleneck includes money that had already
been approved by regional FEMA offices for
things like debris removal and repairs to
roads, bridges, and water and sewer systems.

This is being delayed, folks. This new
reporting sadly confirms what the people of Western North Carolina have
known for the past year.
This chart shows a comparison between FEMA obligations and outlays
in Hurricane Matthew and Hurricane
Florence under President Trump in his
first term. The obligations and outlays
to date for Hurricane Helene under the
second Trump administration are these
marks.
Down here is what I would call, in
my management consulting days, best
practice. We had storms, Florence and
Matthew. We knew what the State and
local governments needed. We got it
out without any delay.
Now, under Noem’s leadership, which
is supposed to be more efficient, more
effective, and more responsive to the
disaster in Western North Carolina and
the other States that were affected, it
looked like the EKG of somebody who
is having a heart attack. It makes no
sense. This chart shows a comparison
between FEMA obligations and outlays
for Hurricanes Matthew and Florence
under the first Trump administration
with the FEMA obligations and outlays
to date for Helene under the second
Trump administration.
The data clearly shows that something is seriously wrong here. Under
Secretary Noem’s lack of leadership,
FEMA has invented an entirely new set
of bureaucracies, the likes of which I
have never seen, and I am in a State
that deals with a disaster almost every
season.
We are about to have another one potentially this weekend, and we just are
recovering from an ice storm last
weekend. And I have got this to deal
with. What do I tell my citizens of
Western North Carolina? The result
has not been the elimination of waste,
fraud, and abuse in the Federal disaster
spending; instead, Secretary Noem’s
new review processes have indefinitely
prolonged disaster recovery efforts
across the country and inflicted needless pain onto already vulnerable communities and people.
Yesterday, in my office, I was notified that FEMA released more than
$233 million in Helene-related reimbursements. They are approved to
move to North Carolina. This is great
news. And these resources are severely

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.006

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S362

needed in Western North Carolina.
However, when you dig into the details
of the announcement, it becomes clear
that this money is long overdue.
Again, this list is just from yesterday’s announcement alone—$200 million for North Carolina Emergency
Management as partial reimbursement
for their emergency expenses incurred
in the first 6 months of Helene—folks,
we are well past 6 months—meaning
this is only part of what the State is
owed before March of 2025. We are in
2026, folks.
There is nearly $9 million for the
Blue Ridge Electric Cooperative for repairing and replacing electric and fiber
infrastructure. Great, glad to see it
come. For comparison, this is roughly
equivalent to what Blue Ridge Electric
spent on fiber for the entire year in
2023.
Mr. President, 1.8 million for the
town—this is one I hope people pay attention to, 1.8 million for the town of
Lake Lure to rebuild its marina and
docks. For those that don’t know, Lake
Lure is some of the most iconic scenes
that you are going to find in the movie
‘‘Dirty Dancing.’’ That is where that
movie was filmed out in Western North
Carolina.
The entire economy depends on access to the lake through the marina.
The Corps of Engineers recently finished removing more than a million
cubic yards of debris just from the lake
itself.
After losing more than a year of
tourism revenue, the town hopes to reopen the lake and the marina at some
point in the spring or summer. This
one award represents more than 20 percent of the town’s general fund budget
for this fiscal year, and it is just coming.
There is 22 million for the NCDOT for
road repairs. Again, much needed funding, but to put things in perspective, I
don’t know, if you have not been
through Western North Carolina, I–40
is a two-lane road now. It was down to
a single lane at one point. We have
managed to get two lanes. Everybody
thought it was going to be done in a
year-and-a-half. I told everybody they
are crazy. Now it looks like it is going
to be 2027. It is going to cost $2 billion,
twice what we thought it was, and we
hope it gets opened by 2027. It is
trending more like 2028.
So think about that, a major interstate section, a major economic corridor between my State and the Presiding Officer’s State of Tennessee is at
a trickle right now. That is the sort of
damage we are experiencing every day
in North Carolina. And yet, I have got
a Secretary of Homeland Security who
thinks, at one point, FEMA shouldn’t
even exist and now is running the organization like some amateur.
So moving from yesterday’s funding
approvals, I want to share the plight of
1 of the 39 Helene-impacted counties in
North Carolina, Yancey County. It is
home to some of North Carolina’s most
cherished natural resources, including

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:21 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mount Mitchell. If you want to win a
bar bet, ask somebody what is the
highest peak east of the Mississippi
River. They are probably going to say
Mount Washington or somewhere up in
New England. It is actually in the
great State of North Carolina at almost 6,700 feet, a little over.
But Yancey County was at the epicenter of Hurricane Helene’s impact in
North Carolina. There is a good chance,
if you remember any of the devastating
images of the aftermath of Helene, you
are probably thinking about Burnsville, the Yancey County seat. To date,
Yancey County has incurred $50 million in debris removal costs alone for
Hurricane Helene, far exceeding the annual budget of the county of $37 million.
You would think that today, more
than 16 months after Helene, Yancey
County would have received a significant amount of funding from FEMA to
help the county recover from this historic devastation. Well, you would be
wrong under the so-called leadership of
Secretary Noem.
As of today, Yancey County received
a grand total of $5.7 million from
FEMA. Remember, we are talking
about a $50 million debt right now, a
$50 million deficit in a small county—
$5.7 million. And of that, only $3 million of it was for debris removal.
In fact, Yancey County has not even
been approved for a $5 million Community Disaster Loan that the county
began application process for in October of 2024, after the hurricane impact.
The county was told just last week
that FEMA should have an answer for
them by June of this year. Good on
you, Secretary Noem, 2 years late—
more than a year-and-a-half after the
storm, folks.
This is completely unacceptable and,
sadly, just wrong.
So it is not a secret that I have problems with the Secretary of Homeland
Security and the way that her failed
leadership has led to unconscionable
results in Minneapolis.
I thank the President for putting an
adult in charge who actually knows
law enforcement by having Mr. Homan
go there. He is going to lower the temperature. He is going to keep the law
enforcement officers safe. He is going
to make Minneapolis safer. Thank God
we have adult supervision there.
But another part of the Secretary of
Homeland Security job is disaster response, and I cannot tell you enough
how incompetent, based on the facts,
she is on that score as well. The people
of western North Carolina, the people
of eastern Tennessee, the people of
South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida
who were affected by Helene deserve
better. No reasonable businessperson
would accept this in the C-suite. She
needs to get out of the C-suite.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from West Virginia.
ENERGY

Mrs. CAPITO. Mr. President, this
week—this is no news flash here—a

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

major winter storm brought snow,
sleet, frozen rain, and bitter, bitter
cold temperatures to most of the middle and eastern parts of the country. I
rise
today
to
really
highlight
dispatchable
baseload
power—coal,
natural gas, and nuclear—the role
those items played in keeping the 200
million Americans impacted by this
winter storm safe and warm.
Common sense tells us that in the
peak heat of summer or the depth of a
winter cold, we are going to consume
more electricity. Americans expect,
very reasonably, that our country’s energy policies will result in affordable
and reliable electricity so that they
can keep their homes cool in the summer and warm in the winter. If we
know that demand for electricity is at
its peak during times of extreme heat
or extreme cold, such as we are experiencing—I think it was 6 degrees this
morning—then it would make sense
that our energy policy would prioritize
those generation sources that are
available to meet the demand when
electricity is needed the most.
So which sources of energy showed
up this week? Not surprisingly, fossil
fuels and nuclear power provided the
bulk of electricity during this week’s
storm and the intense cold that has followed.
PJM Interconnection is the electric
grid operator in all or parts of 13
States—including my State of West
Virginia—that were impacted by this
winter storm. In a filing with the Department of Energy, PJM projected
that its highest ever—highest ever—
winter peak electricity demand would
take place on Tuesday morning of this
week. At 8 a.m. on Tuesday morning,
fossil energy sources, including coal,
natural gas, and oil, provided twothirds of PJM’s power, and another 23.6
percent of that was nuclear power. So
that means that at a time of record
winter electricity demand, 90 percent
of the load was shouldered by baseload
energy sources.
Electricity is just part of the story
because natural gas is also used for residential heating in many of the same
areas, providing energy beyond what is
reflected in electricity generation
sources.
This chart here really shows—it is
from the Energy Policy Research
Foundation, and it shows PJM electricity generation by source for the
past week. It illustrates just what I
have said—that fossil fuels and nuclear
carried the load across PJM throughout this week’s winter storm and its
aftermath.
The solid-blue here represents nuclear. It stayed solid—like you would a
baseload energy resource.
Similarly, the red shows the reliable
supply of electricity from coal plants.
You see it fluctuates a little bit, but it
is still very steady and very meaningful.
The green shows electricity produced
from natural gas—the largest single
source in the PJM region. There is the
green.

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.010

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

At the very top, what you see here is
you see the relatively small amount of
electricity produced from wind, solar,
and hydroelectric sources.
What is notable is not just that the
renewable sources generate smaller
amounts of electricity, but see how
sporadic they are. This is through a
whole week here of the last storm we
just had. So you can see from the chart
that solar energy, which is yellow, basically disappears at night, of course.
Then on Saturday, we had all that
cloud cover, and again—or Sunday,
cloud cover, too, from the snow. No
generation. Wind power produced more
on Friday—wind is the blue—but then
it basically disappears on Saturday because the wind wasn’t blowing.
So I highlight this chart not because
I want to pick winners and losers
among our energy sources. To the contrary, I believe all types of energy, all
of this, including renewables, should be
part of our energy mixture. But our
country
must
have
enough
dispatchable baseload energy—that is
from green on down—the type of reliable power that fossil fuels and nuclear
provide, if we are going to stay warm
in situations such as this during the
depths of the winter.
The Biden administration, like the
Obama administration before this, did
everything possible to shut down our
coal fleet. The Biden EPA had an entire strategy for pursuing multiple regulations, and I will just name a few of
them: Clean Power Plan 2.0, ELG rules
for powerplants, coal ash regulations,
unachievable particulate matter rules,
ozone rules, and the MATS rule—all to
make it impossible to keep a coal plant
open.
As the Wall Street Journal editorialized on Monday, coal is an especially
valuable part of our grid during periods
of peak winter demand because months
of fuel can be stockpiled onsite at a
plant—you see this all over West Virginia because we have not just the resource but the power generation from
it—and can be used to supply more
electricity when natural gas is also
needed for residential heating.
On the oil and gas side, the Biden administration imposed a natural gas tax
designed to make energy more expensive for consumers. The administration
canceled the Keystone XL Pipeline
and, working with their allies in State
governments, stood in the way of pipelines that could move abundant natural gas produced in West Virginia,
Pennsylvania, and Ohio to gas-starved
areas in our Northeast and in our
Southeast.
I was very proud of the bipartisan
work that we did in passing the ADVANCE Act to make nuclear licensing
more efficient, but even that overwhelmingly bipartisan bill took years
longer to pass because of a handful of
Democrat opponents.
So I am glad that we had sufficient
dispatchable power to make it through
the winter storm this week, but I am
not convinced that we would have if we

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:41 Jan 30, 2026

S363

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

had continued the Biden administration’s radical opposition to the energy
sources that people rely on to keep
them warm in the winter and cool in
the summer.
I appreciate President Trump, EPA
Administrator Lee Zeldin, Energy Secretary Chris Wright, and others across
the administration for their commonsense approach to regulation that allows us to keep producing and utilizing
the energy resources that we need, especially during periods of peak demand.
Going forward, I will continue working with my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle to lock in commonsense permitting reform so that projects of all
types,
including
sources
of
dispatchable baseload electricity, can
be permitted through a fair and efficient process.
GOVERNMENT FUNDING

Mr. President, I am going to switch
gears here to another hat that I wear,
and I want to talk about another
topic—and that is the progress we have
made in restoring a functioning appropriations process—and the critical importance of the work before us. But
first, I would like to thank our Appropriations leaders Chair COLLINS and
Vice Chair MURRAY, as well as Leader
THUNE. I applaud them for their steadfast commitment to returning to regular order, and I am glad to see that
our work has brought these bills to the
Senate floor.
In particular, I am proud of the work
we accomplished in a bipartisan fashion on my Labor, Health and Human
Services, Education, and Related Agencies bill. It is a big bill. I would like to
thank all of my fellow committee
members for their input. We received
12,000 total member requests for this
bill.
As Senator BALDWIN and I begin our
fourth year this year of working on
this subcommittee together, I am
pleased that we are once again able to
bring forward a bipartisan bill that reflects targeted investments, disciplined
decision making, and a shared commitment to meeting the needs of the
American people.
The Labor-H bill allocates limited
taxpayer resources to key bipartisan
priorities, and it does so at a lower
level than we did in fiscal year 2025. In
fact, it decreases the base discretionary cost of the bill by $3.2 billion
compared to fiscal year 2025.
To achieve this, the bill reduces or
eliminates funding for more than 40
programs and activities and realigns
spending to reflect Republican values
and priorities, while continuing to deliver on areas where agreements exist
across the aisle.
The bill includes a number of Member priorities, such as greater investments in America’s biomedical research, childcare, mental and rural
health, workforce development, and
continued efforts to combat the opioid
epidemic.
As we work to rightsize the Federal
Government, the bill also includes tar-

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

geted decreases in administrative funding while ensuring that our Agencies
have appropriate staffing levels to
carry out their statutory responsibilities.
We also preserve longstanding, consensus-driven policy provisions and reject the inclusion of any new controversial riders. That stability is really important, not only for our Agencies
but for our families, our workers, and
communities counting on the programs
that we authorize.
A major priority in this bill is our
sustained commitment to the National
Institutes of Health. We provide funding for NIH to support lifesaving biomedical research, which touches us all,
and research that makes Americans
healthier. It strengthens our economy
and pushes the boundaries of what is
possible in medicine.
This investment includes targeted increases for research in critical areas
such as Alzheimer’s, diabetes, Parkinson’s,
women’s
health,
maternal
health, rare diseases, and cancer.
We also increase support for NIH’s
IDeA Program, which expands research
capacity in 23 States, including my
home State of West Virginia, and continues to be important for institutions
like West Virginia University and Marshall University.
The bill strengthens our efforts to
combat substance abuse—an issue that
still continues to affect many families
and communities across the country
and my State most deeply. So we are
supporting prevention, treatment, research, and recovery programs. If you
look at the latest statistics, we are actually bringing the statistics down, but
they are still way too high. We bolster
support for rural healthcare programs.
Rural America is tough to get
healthcare affordable and accessible in
some ways, but we are trying to increase access to care for more than 60
million Americans who live in rural
areas.
Critically, we maintain important
conservative policy riders, like the
Hyde and Weldon amendments, ensuring the bill reflects longstanding bipartisan consensus.
The Labor-HHS bill focuses on our
children from early childhood through
postsecondary education, ensuring that
they are prepared for the jobs of today
and the jobs of tomorrow. This includes
critical infrastructures to help American workers upskill and to advance in
their careers. We include funding for
apprenticeship grants to support the
Trump administration’s goal of creating 1 million active apprenticeships.
The bill is important to our country.
But make no mistake, it is really important to my State of West Virginia,
for our universities, our hospitals, dozens of nonprofits and workforce programs, treatments for our coal miners
and those suffering from opioid addiction. All of these things help my fellow
West Virginians. And I know this because I hear directly from them about
it every single day. My driving force in

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.012

S29JAPT1

S364

crafting this bill was to help meet
those needs for my fellow Virginians,
and I am proud to say this bill does
just that.
Mr. President, as encouraging as this
progress sounds, our work is not done.
The American people expect Congress
to fulfill its most basic responsibility:
funding the government responsibly
and on time. Every delay undermines
confidence in our institution and forces
our Agencies into wasteful, short-term
planning cycles.
Completing this work is not about a
partisan victory. It is about good government. It is about keeping our commitments. It is about demonstrating
that Congress can function and can
work together to deliver real results.
That is why we must come together to
pass this package. It ensures that the
priorities that we carefully crafted, debated, and agreed to on a bipartisan
and bicameral manner can actually be
carried out.
So, once again, I want to thank Chair
COLLINS for her leadership throughout
this process. I encourage all my colleagues to vote positively on the entire
package. We saw earlier, it didn’t pass.
But we still have negotiations moving
so we can responsibly fund the government. This is what the American people sent us here to do.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Kansas.
ANNIVERSARY OF FLIGHT 5342

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Mr. MARSHALL. Mr. President, I
rise today to mark a solemn anniversary, one that continues to weigh heavily on the hearts of Kansans and families across this great Nation.
It was a year ago today that flight
5342 left Wichita, KS, en route to Washington, DC. As we all know, it never
reached its destination. Sixty-seven
lives were lost, amongst them, seven
Kansans. Certainly, families were
changed forever.
Today, we pause to remember those
lives and honor their memory and to
stand with the loved ones who carry
this burden every day. Kansans grieve
together. When tragedy strikes, we
don’t do it alone. We lean on each
other, we lean on our faith, and we lean
on our communities.
Today, we just want to remember
those who were lost, remembering
these were Kansans. They were sons
and daughters, husbands and wives,
parents, friends, and coworkers. And
many were simply doing what so many
of us do every day: traveling for work,
for family, or to return home.
The best way we can honor those we
lost is by remembering them and learning from the tragedy. We tried to ensure there was full accountability since
this tragic accident. We tried our best
to ensure complete transparency, and
then take a look to the future to see
what we could do for the safety of future flights. And, certainly, we owe it
to their families and to the memory of
these loved ones to pursue these improvements and never forget why it
matters.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:41 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

I recall a phone call early the next
morning from the mayor of Wichita,
KS, Mayor Lily Wu. She asked me—and
we have a good friendship. She said,
‘‘ROGER, what can I tell the people of
Wichita so they know that it is safe to
travel on this flight?’’
And she pointed out this is the busiest runway in all of America. She
asked me: Why was a military helicopter in that airspace?
So I picked up the phone and I asked
our Secretary of Transportation and
our Secretary of Defense that same
question: Why would a helicopter be in
that airspace?
At that moment—or shortly minutes
after that, they grounded any helicopters from being in that airspace.
Then what did the Senate do? I am so
proud of what my colleagues have
done. Senator MORAN helped lead the
charge on that—and many others. We
passed the ROTOR Act out of the Senate, which would implement commonsense reforms to ensure a tragedy like
this never happens again. I would hope
that our colleagues on the House side
would also pass this bill and we can get
it to the President’s desk.
Just in closing, here we are a year
later, and we are here to remember, to
honor, and try to figure out the best
ways to move forward. But at the end
of the day, we want the families of
those back home to remember that we
have not forgotten about their loved
ones and that their lives did matter.
I think I would be remiss not to express gratitude to the first responders
that we met that night out in the frigid cold, sacrificing their lives, diving
into the chilly waters in hopes of finding someone whom they could save.
Thanks to all of our first responders.
Finally, of course, we pray that God
would continue to comfort the families
who lost their loved ones.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Tennessee.
TENNESSEE

Mrs. BLACKBURN. Mr. President, I
would like to take a moment and express my gratitude for the Tennessee
National Guard, the Tennessee Emergency Management Agency, our Governor, our electric power distributors,
and our first responders, who are in
every county, for working around the
clock, as well as local elected officials.
I thank everyone who has stepped up to
help keep Tennesseans safe during this
horrific storm, as it is truly one of the
worst winter storms that has hit our
State in decades.
At its peak, you had over 200,000 people in the Middle Tennessee area who
were without any power. Days later,
people are still waiting for that power
to come back on. We are hearing from
some people that they have been told it
is going to be days or weeks before that
power is restored, and we know that
everyone is working as quickly as they
can to restore this. We are grateful for
the support that has come from surrounding States in order to help in
ours.

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

We know people are really braving
these downed powerlines, these hazardous roads, frozen pipes, and frigid
temperatures. We have lost 13 individuals connected to the storm, and I am
joining all Tennesseans in mourning
their loss and in praying for their families. We also are focusing on making
certain that roads are cleared, that
water mains are repaired, and that
power is restored.
I am continuing to get updates from
mayors across our State and especially
there in the mid-State, and I am so
grateful for President Trump’s swift
approval of Governor Lee’s emergency
declaration request so that we can get
our State the resources that we need.
As we recover, I encourage everyone
to stay off the roads, to stay home, and
to be mindful of all of the recovery
crews that are out working and to stay
safe.
ONLINE TICKETING PRACTICES

Mr. President, any American who has
purchased tickets for a concert, a
sporting event, or a show knows that
online ticket-selling is broken. Scalpers are using AI-powered bots and software programs to scoop up hundreds
and thousands of tickets at a time.
They are forcing some events to sell
out within just a minute or two of the
window’s opening for ticket purchase.
With no other options, consumers are
forced into the secondary, or resale,
market, and scalpers are marking up
ticket prices to extreme rates.
The consequences have been disastrous for the ticket-selling marketplace. In 2022, Ticketmaster’s website
crashed after scalpers used bots to purchase thousands of tickets for ‘‘Taylor
Swift’s Eras Tour,’’ reselling them by
as much as 70 times the face value.
One of the scalpers involved in the fiasco is a U.S.-based company that is
actually located in Maryland. It is
called Key Investment Group. They
purchase more than 375,000 event tickets over the course of a year. In the
process, they clear millions of dollars
in markup resale.
These scalpers add zero value to the
ticket-selling market. Fans are extorted to go see their favorite singers,
teams, and entertainers. Performers do
not see a dime of the money that these
bots and scalpers are skimming.
This practice is illegal. In 2016, I led
the enactment of the Better Online
Ticket Sales Act, or the BOTS Act,
which prohibits ticket scalpers from
using software to purchase high volumes of tickets. Yet, under the Biden
administration, the FTC rarely enforced the law, and scalpers like
Ticketmaster turned a blind eye and
bypassed the safeguards to prevent
mass ticket buying. In some cases, the
company allegedly engaged in baitand-switch schemes with scalpers to
drive up the ticket price.
Live Nation, the company that owns
Ticketmaster, even, allegedly, provided
tech support for scalpers by helping
them aggregate tickets purchased from
multiple Ticketmaster accounts.

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.014

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

The reason is simple: If Live Nation
enforced its ticket-purchasing limits,
then Ticketmaster would lose $220 million in resale revenue. But by working
with the scalpers, it was able to collect
fees at three different points in the
purchase and resale process.
This extortion of the American people is inexcusable. That is why Republicans and the Trump administration
are demanding accountability from
ticket sellers and cracking down on the
fraudsters.
In September, Senator LUJÁN and I
sent a letter to Live Nation’s president, demanding answers about his
company’s abusive practices.
Yesterday, I chaired a hearing for the
Senate Commerce Subcommittee on
Consumer Protection, Technology, and
Data Privacy on live performance ticket sale practices. We had the opportunity to hear from Kid Rock, who explained how bot scalpers harm the entertainment industry. I also questioned
a representative of Live Nation, who
had no explanation for why his company is putting fraudsters ahead of
hard-working Americans.
Thankfully, the FTC, under President Trump and Chairman Ferguson,
have launched several enforcement actions under the BOTS Act, including
against Live Nation, Ticketmaster, and
scalpers like Key Investment Group.
Unlike the Biden administration, the
Trump administration is enforcing the
BOTS Act, as it is intended, to hold accountable both ticketing platforms and
scalpers.
In the entertainment industry, nothing is more important than the relationship between the performers and
their fans. With the exploitive practices
of
these
scalpers
and
Ticketmaster, bot-powered scalpers
threaten that bond. Republicans are
doing everything possible to hold these
criminals to account.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant bill clerk proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. HICKENLOOPER. Mr. President,
I ask unanimous consent that the order
for the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MORENO). Without objection, it is so ordered.
The Senator from Colorado.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. HICKENLOOPER. Mr. President,
we like to believe that when democracy erodes, it is unpredictable and in
some ways out of our control, but history tells us a different story.
Authoritarianism rises through a timetested playbook. These leaders have
learned which moves weaken opponents, which tactics will rally a crowd,
and which moments of fear or crisis
work best to their advantage.
They don’t need to invent new strategies. They can run familiar plays.
There is one target we are watching
this administration go after the hard-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:41 Jan 30, 2026

S365

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

est, and that is the truth. They begin
by attacking every source of independent information. It started with
universities and colleges. They moved
on to our largest research institutions.
They discredited or tried to discredit
every journalist whose reporting differs
from their own narrow point of view,
and in doing so, they have tried to
make the administration and the
President the sole source of truth.
We have seen this play out in Minneapolis during the past few weeks. So
let’s get a few facts straight.
On January 7, ICE officers shot and
killed Renee Good while she was in her
own car. She was a mother of three,
originally from Colorado Springs.
Then, again, this past weekend, Americans watched the videotape of Federal
immigration agents shooting and killing Alex Pretti. They fired 10 times in
5 seconds.
It is sickening. No family should
have to witness their loved one being
killed in such a fashion, and yet, obviously, Alex’s parents did.
His parents live in Colorado. I connected with them earlier this week.
Among other things, they wanted to
make sure that we do everything we
can to make sure that Alex’s name is
out front, that we keep their son’s
story alive to make sure that his life
wasn’t lost in vain. They have asked
for truth and accountability. What
they are getting—what all of us are
getting—are excuses and lies—lies
about their son. The reality of who
Alex Pretti was doesn’t fit the administration’s playbook, so they are filling
the airwaves with lies, repeating them
over and over and over to try to somehow get them to stick.
DHS Secretary Noem, within hours
of Pretti’s death, said:
It looks like a situation where an individual arrived on the scene to inflict maximum violence . . . and kill law enforcement.

Next, it was Greg Bovino, Trump’s
now-fired Border Patrol commander,
saying that Pretti intended ‘‘to massacre law enforcement’’ and that he
‘‘violently resisted.’’
Stephen Miller called Alex Pretti a
domestic terrorist, with Vice President
VANCE and President Trump promoting
that sentiment and that blatant lie
from their pulpits.
By this point, we have all seen that
video from multiple angles. We have
seen it with our own eyes. Alex was not
a terrorist. He was in no way an assassin. He was a U.S. citizen exercising his
First Amendment right to protest
ICE’s lawlessness.
This week, families in Eagle County,
CO, experienced another type of cruelty that fits into this administration’s
playbook. They found ‘‘death cards’’
left in the automobiles of their family
members who were taken away by ICE
agents. These cards—I hold one up
here—have a history of being used by
White supremacist groups to intimidate people of color. Death cards is
what they call them. These cards found

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

in Colorado had the address and phone
number of the Aurora ICE detention facility printed on them. Aurora is a
neighboring city to Denver.
Now, imagine just for a second that
you haven’t heard from your brother,
your sister, and when you finally find
their empty, abandoned car, it has one
of these death cards sitting in the driver’s seat. I mean, this is cruelty for the
sake of cruelty, and it fits into the
troubling pattern that we are seeing
coming from some of the top officials
in the White House.
This morning, I voted against a government funding that would have handed billions of dollars to DHS. Continuing to fund ICE while Federal officers terrorize our cities and kill people
is unconscionable. We need to stop ICE
officers beating Americans, killing
Americans, arresting Americans without due process, taking away the civil
rights of Americans.
The overhaul of ICE that we are demanding is common sense. The fact is
that these are all basic standards of
local law enforcement, who go after
violent criminals, gangsters—in many
ways, the worst of the worst. These are
standards that those local police officers already follow.
ICE needs, first, to take their masks
off. They need to turn on body cameras. They need to be clearly identified. There can be no accountability
without transparency.
No more unmarked vans and masked
agents pulling people over and pulling
people away and arresting them to
wherever. No more roving patrols. ICE
needs to have judicial warrants signed
by a judge. They need to stop arresting
children on the side of the road and end
these cruel family separation policies.
Secretary Noem—what she said, I
think, is untenable and unacceptable,
and I think she needs to resign. But
let’s be clear. ICE is carrying out the
policies of our President, so just changing leadership at ICE or DHS is not
going to be sufficient. We have to fundamentally overhaul the lawlessness of
these organizations.
This administration is asking us to
ignore what we can see with our own
eyes. They get us to a point where we
mistrust so many sources of information, and they force us to rely on believing what we see. They are asking us
to believe lies about Alex and about
Renee, about what is happening in Minneapolis, but we watched the videos.
We saw those videos.
Those words matter—‘‘we watched,’’
‘‘we saw’’—because they acknowledge a
larger truth that binds us all together.
We saw what happened. We saw what
happened. We saw the cruelty, and we
saw and understand that it needs to
end.
Asking us to make peace with that
cruelty is asking us to ignore the values that make us Americans. It is telling us to believe that somehow we owe
nothing to each other—not to our
neighbors, not to our community, not
to our country. We will not. We know

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.015

S29JAPT1

S366

the truth, and we are not going to look
away.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
BUDD). The Senator from Oklahoma.
NATIONAL SCHOOL CHOICE WEEK

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Mr. LANKFORD. Mr. President, this
body disagrees on a lot of things—a lot.
But we should have at least one thing
we can agree on. It is pretty simple.
Kids are different.
You get three kids in a room and all
three of those kids are very, very different. I know. I have two daughters,
and they are different. I love them both
deeply, but they are very different. I
find that in a lot of different families.
Students and kids are different. One
kid likes football. One kid likes baseball. Another kid doesn’t like any
sports at all. One likes the band. One
likes choir. One likes drama. One
doesn’t like any clubs at all. One is in
Latin club and another is in chess club
and the other thinks chess club is
dorky. You know why? Because people
are different.
That seems normal for us to be able
to think about that most basic thing,
that not everyone is the same and not
everyone chooses the same things that
they like or has the same needs. But
sometimes when we get into school, we
will say: Oh, but they all need to go to
the same school. I just disagree.
In America this week—this is actually School Choice Week. Some people
may or may not even track that. That
is fine. There is a week designated for
everything across the country. But in
Oklahoma, we really prioritize the
ability for every family to be able to
make their own choices for education
for their kids. We have strong
homeschooling. We have strong private
schools. We have strong public charter
schools. And we have public education.
All of them are important to us, and
all of them provide different options
for families. Now, we have still got a
long way to go in education in Oklahoma, but we are investing more and
more and more into education. And I
am proud of our State legislators
prioritizing—in this coming session—
reading for early childhood education
and to make sure that we are doing the
things that we need to do to improve
our public education.
In the meantime, we want to continue to provide options to every single
family and to every single kid to be
able to make sure that the best education environment is out there for
that particular child because we want
every child to be able to thrive in
America. We want every child to be
able to have the opportunities that
they need to be able to be successful in
the days ahead, and that starts with a
great education.
Quite frankly, some of our districts
are doing not as well as others. Some
are doing great, and some are struggling. I don’t want a single family in
my State, though, to have to think: My
kids have to go to a certain school because of the ZIP Code that I live in and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:41 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

that is the only option. Quite frankly,
I don’t even want for families to say,
‘‘Every one of my kids has to go to the
same school,’’ because sometimes it
just doesn’t work the same.
Now, I have heard some folks that
are very passionate about public education, which, by the way, I am too.
My mom was a lifelong public school
educator. My degree was in secondary
education. My family is very, very involved in education, and I am very passionate about public education. I think
it is vitally important that we do it
and that we do it very, very well. But
I want to make it very clear for all of
the folks whom I meet who say: If you
will just give us a couple more years,
this will improve. Give us a couple
more dollars and a couple more semesters and this will get better for this
particular school. I want to remind
them that the kid growing up next to
that school doesn’t have a couple more
years. It has to be right now for them.
They can’t wait until things get better.
They only have today. So that is why
school choice is so incredibly important, that every family and that every
kid has the options to be able to get a
better education or to get an education
that exactly fits them best. That works
better.
This past July, we passed the historic
Working Families Tax Cuts Act. In
that act, we did a lot of investment in
education.
We expanded the 529 savings account
to allow more parents to be able to set
aside funding for private education if
they choose to do that and put that in
their 529 so it can grow tax-free.
We invested more into Pell grants
and expanded the growth of Pell
grants.
Now, you might say: Why does that
matter for K through 12?
Well, Pell grants have been really
targeted towards institutions that do
what is called terminal degrees. So, if
you are a kid in poverty and you want
to get a degree in philosophy, we would
help you do that. But if you are a kid
in poverty and you want to get a certification in welding or in plumbing or
in carpentry or as a truckdriver, we
would say: You are on your own. Well,
what in the world? For years, we have
been fighting this to be able to say: If
we are going to help somebody, give
them more options than just a 4-year
degree. If they want to do certification
programs to be able to get into a vocation faster, why wouldn’t we help them
do that to be able to rise out of poverty? We fixed that in the Working
Families Tax Cuts Act to expand the
use of Pell grants so that more individuals who are in poverty can get access
to education that helps them get a job
even faster.
We actually reversed some changes
that were done in the FAFSA. I am not
even going into all of the issues of the
FAFSA and for getting into higher
education, but it actually blocked out
kids from agricultural families because
of the land and the equipment that

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

they owned. They may be land rich,
but they are often cash poor, and they
were still blocked out of getting Federal assistance and getting a higher
education. We finally fixed that, and
there are a lot of other areas we fixed.
We also set up a new program where
individuals could actually give to
school choice for other families they
will probably never ever meet. It is to
help them in the days ahead be able to
have an option for private education
when they couldn’t get there.
I have folks who catch me on this occasionally and will say: You talk about
school choice all the time and the different options for families. Do you just
hate public education or why is this
such a big deal to you?
I smile at them and remind them of
my mom and of my own past and that
I am very, very passionate about public
education and that we need to make
sure we are investing in doing that
well. But if I have a quiet moment with
folks when they say to me, ‘‘Why do
you care so much about school
choice?’’ I will tell them there are two
reasons. One is that my State cares
about this a lot. Our homeschool programs and our programs for private
education are thriving, and we have
great public charter schools. We have a
lot of great districts around, but in
many of our districts, according to our
State law—even in our public education in Oklahoma—you can choose
from one district to another district
even if you don’t live in that ZIP Code
for that district so that you even get
school choice in Oklahoma even in public education. It is a big deal to us, but
it is a big deal to me personally because I have personally experienced it.
You see, my mom—a single mom, a
public school educator—did not make
much. There was a time when I was in
elementary school, and so was my
brother, that education was not working for us. So my single mom sacrificed
everything for my brother and me to
go to private school. I went to private
school for 2 years, and then she ran out
of money. My brother continued on for
a while, but I went back into public
school, which there is no complaint
there, but I watched, even in my own
family, my mom say: I wish we had different options. As a public school educator and a single mom, she made the
hard call to say: I have got to figure
out a better place because my kids will
only get one shot at education, and it
has got to count.
I could not tell you how grateful I am
for my mom and the sacrifices that she
made for my brother and me because it
made all the difference for us, but it is
because she made a choice, where you
would have looked at her and said she
had no choice. She figured it out. We
all sacrificed a lot, but education was
just that important to her.
I don’t want that to just be for my
family. I want that option for every
family. I want the option for every kid
to have the opportunity to get the best
possible education for who they are, because my brother and I—I love him—

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.017

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

but we could not be more different because we are two different kids, which
is just like a lot of other families. So
please don’t say every kid has to do
education exactly the same way when
we all know every kid is different.
Why don’t we give families the option to choose what is the best education environment for that particular
kid and to allow them to thrive in the
days ahead? I think that is better for
kids—to allow them to have a choice—
and for every family to get that choice
as well.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Florida.
Mrs. MOODY. Mr. President, as you
may know, we are recognizing National
School Choice Week, and I thank my
colleague for organizing those of us
who believe dearly in educational options for children to come to the floor
and speak about what we have accomplished and what we hope to accomplish on behalf of America’s kids.
As you may know, in addition to
being a U.S. Senator, I am also a mom
of a kid in school who has gone to
many different kinds of schools over
the course of his educational career,
and I am honored to serve as a cohost
this week with the chairman of the
HELP Committee Senator CASSIDY, as
well as my friend Senator TIM SCOTT to
represent the long strides that my
home State of Florida has taken to
make us the best State, I believe, in
the Nation for educational freedom.
This did not happen overnight. It
took decades of thoughtful policymaking
and
implementation
and
tweaks along the way, and we are still
working to get it right. But I wanted to
show up here today and tell my colleagues about how Florida has set its
kids on paths to success by thinking
outside the one-size-fits-all approach
for education. That has happened from
tireless work from parents, from advocates, and a State government that has
transformed Florida from a State with
poor performance across the board to a
leader nationwide in education.
We went from having graduation
rates at just 60 percent, with less than
1 percent of K through 12 students attending a public charter school, and
fewer than 10 students in the State receiving a K through 12 scholarship in
1999. I will say that again: a 60-percent
graduation rate. In the decades that
have followed—today, I am proud to
say Florida now has a graduation rate
of 92 percent of its kids graduating on
time. That coincides with when we
really started pushing educational options for our kids, beginning with Governor Bush right up until our current
Governor Ron DeSantis, who got to
make this great announcement. We
were one of the first States, a few years
ago, to adopt universal school choice.
Close to 1 in 8 of our students now attends a public charter school—a public
charter school—and more than 450,000
students receive some form of K
through 12 scholarship, including the
Florida Tax Credit Scholarship.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:41 Jan 30, 2026

S367

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

For our children in Florida, school
choice has been an invaluable tool for
success no matter their background,
their means, or what ZIP Code they
live in. It is these accomplishments in
Florida that drive me now as a U.S.
Senator to ensure that all of America’s
kids can prosper.
I have been a proud champion of the
Education Freedom Tax Credit, which
is now, I am proud to say, signed into
law. Not only do Florida kids have access to all of the options that we have
provided to them through State law,
but they now have access to supplemental resources that were provided
through the Education Freedom Tax
Credit. I thank my colleagues, and I
thank the President for supporting this
measure as, now, 2 million children
across the Nation will be able to seek
the schooling that best fits their needs.
This is another way that we are empowering parents: by supporting educational freedom across the country.
As we wrap up National School
Choice Week, we must remember and
keep advocating publicly because there
are some States that have the opportunity to opt in but refuse to do so, and
that breaks my heart for the many
kids who could benefit from what is
available to them through educational
choice. We must continue to remind
the rest of America about the success
we have seen in States that have embraced educational alternatives and
have seen what it means when you
place an emphasis on individual school
needs and student needs, not ZIP Codes
or economic means.
The individual needs of students and
the individual circumstances of students should drive their opportunities
for success. The possibilities are endless when we do away with that onesize-fits-all approach and empower parents to choose what best fits their individual child. That is why I commit to
continuing to advocate for school
choice—so that all of America’s kids
see the same opportunities that we
have been able to offer to the children
of Florida.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Colorado.
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION

Mr. BENNET. Mr. President, for
many months, the Trump administration has unleashed a campaign of fear
across American cities, deploying thousands of immigration agents onto our
streets and into our neighborhoods in
an effort to terrorize and punish communities.
In Chicago, Portland, Los Angeles,
and most recently Minneapolis, we
have watched masked Federal agents
in unmarked cars snatch people from
the street, destroy private property,
and leave others bloodied on the side of
the road.
We have witnessed an approach to internal immigration enforcement that
no President in our history has pursued, that no President would ever
have conceived because of how fun-

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

damentally it violates our principles
and the rule of law.
We have witnessed children separated
from their parents—a 5-year-old detained by armed agents in Minnesota—
people pulled from their cars, their engines still running.
All us have read reports of people
grabbed off the sidewalk and abandoned hours later, miles away.
Every step along the way, Donald
Trump’s immigration troops have escalated tension on our streets with total
disregard for the rule of law, basic safety, and their own accountability.
These events would be terrible
enough, but even as communities
across the country have struggled to
pick up the pieces left in their wake,
we have been forced to contend with
another injustice: an administration
that has tried to convince us time and
time again that what we have seen
with our own eyes is not the truth,
that somehow the opposite has taken
place, that reports and testimony contradicting the administration’s position are simply political propaganda.
Over and over again, DHS Secretary
Kristi Noem and others in the administration have lied to the American people and to Congress about what we are
all seeing in plain sight. Now they are
lying to justify the murder of Alex
Pretti.
Right after the shooting of Alex
Pretti in the street, Noem went on national television and told us that Alex
was ‘‘brandishing’’ a firearm, ‘‘impeding’’ the law enforcement officers and
attacking them, and that he acted
‘‘violently’’ or ‘‘reacted violently’’
when officers attempted to disarm him.
She insisted that ‘‘an agent fired defensive shots’’ and that it appeared that
this was ‘‘a situation where an individual arrived at the scene to inflict
maximum damage on individuals and
kill law enforcement.’’
Stephen Miller, who works at the
White House, called Alex a domestic
terrorist and a would-be assassin. Vice
President JD VANCE amplified these
statements.
Gregory Bovino, a senior Border Patrol official who is serving as ‘‘commander at large,’’ maintained that
Alex had intended to ‘‘massacre’’ law
enforcement agents. At a press conference, Bovino turned the facts completely upside down, insisting that the
victims of Saturday’s violence were the
Border Patrol agents that were there.
Bovino, by the way, has served as the
face of the administration’s operations
as they have swept through America’s
cities—in Chicago, in Charlotte, in New
Orleans and then Minneapolis.
The American people deserve to
know the truth, and Alex Pretti and
his family deserve to have the truth
told about him and what he did.
Thanks to a number of courageous
bystanders at the scene, we know what
happened that day, and we know that
everything that Noem and Miller and
others have said has been lies. The
truth is that Alex put himself between

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.019

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S368

Federal agents and a woman they were
shoving in the street. He had been filming Border Patrol agents detaining
someone else on the side of the road
when he went to help this woman. The
officers responded by pepper-spraying
him and wrestling him to the ground,
where he was quickly surrounded by a
group of seven agents. They struck him
repeatedly with the pepper spray canister while he lay in the street. One officer took away his gun—a gun that
had remained holstered and that Alex
was legally allowed to carry. Then, disarmed and incapacitated, they shot
him in his back. They shot him at least
10 times within 5 seconds.
Alex Pretti was killed by his own
government, and then his government
immediately began to lie about him
and what had happened. He did not attack the agents. He did not threaten
them. And at no point did he pull a
gun. In the video of that horrific scene,
it is clear that an agent disarmed him
before any shots were fired. Multiple
agents held him to the ground. Three
of them beat him.
No reasonable person would have believed he posed any threat to the
agents or anyone else at the scene, but
the agents still shot him. They shot
him 10 times.
(Mr. HUSTED assumed the Chair.)
In the days since his murder, we have
learned a lot more about Alex from
those who knew him and loved him.
Alex was a dedicated ICU nurse at the
Veterans Affairs hospital in Minneapolis. His colleagues described him
there as helpful and kind and that he
was uniquely capable of handling
things with integrity and with grace.
His high school classmates remember
him as a role model. They recalled him
being a really good friend and a really
good man.
Alex loved his country, and, like
many of us, he was deeply concerned
about the Trump administration’s actions and the devastating effects they
are having on our democracy.
It is true that he had very strong
feelings about the presence of ICE on
his city streets, but the day he was
killed, Alex was exercising his First
Amendment rights to peacefully protest and document the actions of Federal agents as they threatened his community.
Alex’s parents, Michael and Susan,
live in Colorado. They want the world
to know the truth about what happened that day and the truth about the
kind of person their son really was.
They told the world that Alex wanted
to make a difference in the world. His
patients and colleagues, friends and
family testified to the fact that he did,
and it is another tragedy that he will
no longer be able to continue to do so.
But Alex’s murder is only the most
recent outrage we have been subjected
to by a reckless and out-of-control
DHS. On January 7, Federal agents
shot and killed Renee Good in Minneapolis. Renee was a mother of three
and a native of Colorado Springs. The

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:41 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

next day, Federal agents shot and
wounded two people in Portland. A
week later, Federal agents shot and
wounded another man, again, in Minneapolis.
It is worth remembering that these
are just a few of the instances that
have occurred in broad daylight and in
public spaces, where bystanders have
been there to witness these brutal activities firsthand and managed to capture video of what happened.
But if this is what is happening out
in the open, it is hard to imagine what
is happening behind closed doors.
Last year, 32 people died in ICE custody. That is the most in over 20 years.
Given the total lack of transparency
and accountability that we have seen
from ICE, we can’t be sure what has
happened to these people. There have
been reports about sexual abuse of detainees. There are disputed facts over
deaths that occurred in ICE custody.
People in ICE facilities have reportedly been forced to ration food. They
often go days or weeks without their
prescription medicines or access to
medical care.
Overcrowded
detention
facilities
leave the lights on 24–7, and families
report extreme violence and intimidation by guards.
These stories are consistent for people held in detention across the country, including in the detention facility
in Aurora, CO. But the administration
has lied about all of them.
President Trump has claimed that
Renee Good was a ‘‘professional agitator,’’ that she was ‘‘very disorderly, obstructing and resisting, then violently,
willfully, and viciously ran over the
ICE officer.’’
Noem described Good’s efforts to
leave the scene peacefully as ‘‘an act of
domestic terrorism.’’ Her Department
issued a statement saying that ‘‘violent’’ rioter had ‘‘weaponized her vehicle.’’
In October, Noem and her Department lied when she said no U.S. citizens had been arrested, detained, or deported.
In November, Federal Judge Sara
Ellis described Gregory Bovino as ‘‘evasive,’’ ‘‘not credible,’’ and declared that
he was ‘‘outright lying’’ when questioned under oath.
A consistent pattern of lies corrodes
American’s faith in our government,
which is already stretched dangerously
thin. It strikes at the core of our constitutional system, which requires at
least some basic level, some basic fidelity to facts in the conduct of our public
affairs and our public discourse.
When the Secretary of Homeland Security appears on television to insist
repeatedly on her preferred version of
events, she is not just offering another
lie that must be rebutted; she is insisting that there could never be a truth
that actually mattered to the American people or to our sense of public
safety or to our exercise in self-government.
And that is what is at stake here. If
we allow this to continue, we risk fall-

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

ing into a degraded version of political
debate when there are so many lies and
so many contested facts, that the
American people regard any claim with
exhausted cynicism and suspicion. And
if we go too far down that path—and we
are headed a long way down it right
now—the only guaranteed outcome will
be greater contempt felt by Americans
for their government and for the political process.
They will withdraw from public life,
and the possibility for genuine political disagreement—in other words, a
debate over what to do in the face of
facts, rather than over the facts themselves, or unwilling to even have a discussion about it because of our permanent partisan division—will be erased.
Every one of us has a responsibility
at a moment like this, and we know
from American history that, in some
ways, the most significant resistance
in moments like this comes from the
public itself. It comes from the people
of this country. I could see that on the
steps and the grounds of the State capitol in Colorado, last weekend, when
thousands of Coloradans were there to
rally, not just for themselves but for
their fellow citizens in Minnesota and
across our country.
I think, when times are tough, we
often have a tendency to think that we
are living in uniquely bad times. But I
believe that way of thinking almost always does a disservice to the people
who have come before us, who took on
even tougher battles with longer odds
and who, while they were doing that
and because they were doing that, bequeathed to us their own legacy of resistance and the possibility of change,
no matter how hard it seemed. And I
think we should look to those battles
for inspiration in our time.
It is important for us to tell our kids
about those battles, to make sure they
understood what those fights actually
looked like and how hopeless, at times,
those fights seemed to the people that
were waging them.
When I was growing up—and I know
this is true for many of my colleagues
who are here—the moral character of
this country was defined by the civil
rights movement, the struggle against
segregation, and the fight for equality.
This fight, this battle—the effort to demolish centuries of legalized discrimination and disenfranchisement—never
was going to be easy, and many believed that it was nearly impossible.
And there were others who believed
that it shouldn’t have been fought to
begin with. And, I would say, to this
day, we have a long, long way to go.
The structure of Jim Crow, of the
poll tax, of separate and worse schoolrooms and hospital wards and lunch
counters had been built up over generations. State laws had established these
exclusionary practices. State officials
enforced them, and State courts upheld
them.
There was no guarantee that they
would ever come crashing down, but
they did because the leaders of the civil

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.021

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

rights movement and ordinary citizens
in the streets and in America’s pulpits,
and reporters and journalists sent their
reports on the demonstrations. And the
conditions of real life in the South of
this country made it impossible to ignore the facts.
It was harder then than it is in our
own time just to turn the channel and
imagine that that alternate reality
didn’t actually exist. For people in
that country, with the broadcasters—
ABC and CBS and NBC—it was impossible for the public to ignore what was
right before their eyes.
The success of that generation of
brave Americans was achieved because
they forced a broad swath of this country, a majority of this country, to finally see what they would have preferred to be blind to—the reality of segregation and the subordination of their
fellow citizens under law.
It is a story of moral reckoning and
of citizen action. It is a story of street
protests and police brutality and political vacillation, but it is also a story of
American renewal, of our ability to author our own history, to continue the
endless founding and refounding of this
country as generations of Americans
lay claim to it and shape it.
I don’t believe that we have lost that
ability. I don’t believe that we have
lost that ambition. I don’t believe that
people in Colorado and Minnesota and
all across this country have given up
on the promise offered by America, a
promise that can only be given and
kept to each other.
As Alex Pretti said himself when
honoring a veteran who died in his
care, ‘‘today we remember that freedom is not free. We have to work at it,
nurture it, protect it, and even sacrifice for it.
In the end, it is also not enough for
there to be just public expressions of
disapproval. We actually have to
change the laws.
Part of our job here as Senators is to
uphold the ideals that Alex and so
many others in Minnesota and across
Colorado and across the country believe in and are fighting for. And it is
our job here in the Senate to provide a
check on an Executive that our Founders knew was always susceptible to the
temptations of unlimited power. That
was their concern about a unitary Executive, the President of the United
States.
And this week we have an opportunity to be that check. We have an opportunity to change the law.
The Senate is considering a number
of bills to fund the government, including one that provides over $10 billion to
the varied Departments responsible for
the murder of Alex Pretti and the
chaos we are seeing in communities
across the country.
It would be unconscionable for us to
pass this bill without amending how
ICE or the Border Patrol operate at all.
In fact, we should use this as an opportunity to do it. What better opportunity will there be?

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:41 Jan 30, 2026

S369

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

As written, the Homeland appropriations bill provides no real accountability, no oversight, no guardrails or
transparency. It offers no guarantee at
all that what happened to Alex Pretti
won’t happen again.
That is all the more absurd because
Republicans gave the Department of
Homeland Security an additional $190
billion on top of the regular annual appropriations. Think about that—190
billion additional dollars on top of the
annual appropriations last year as part
of their Big Beautiful Bill that they
passed on a partisan vote. And this
funding, I can assure you, came with
no accountability or oversight at all.
In the midst of all this, it would be a
profound abdication of our responsibility as Senators to entertain the idea
of providing more funding to the Department unless serious reforms are
put in place. I think these reforms are
common sense that you would want for
any law enforcement agency operating
in America but especially when it
comes to a Federal Agency operating
in some sense now as the President’s
internal army.
I think the least we could ask is that
children are no longer detained or
stripped from their families. Who
wants to come to this floor and debate
the opposite of that point?
Immigration officers should take off
their masks and provide clear identification.
There is no doubt in my mind that
the minute we get through this fraught
political moment in America, there
will be a broad consensus—in fact, I
think there is one now—that ICE
shouldn’t be separating children from
their families; that law enforcement
agents shouldn’t be wearing masks;
that they should use body cameras consistently with any immigration enforcement activities; that ICE stay
away from sensitive areas like schools
and hospitals and places of worship;
and, consistent with our responsibility,
our duty to provide a check, to provide
our own oversight, that Members of
Congress have full access to immigration detention facilities.
Those are reforms that do not today
define the way ICE does its work—they
do define the way a lot of our local law
enforcement does its work—but I think
they reflect a massive consensus in the
country about what would fix the challenges we are facing. It would at least
be a basic start in the right direction.
In my view—you might disagree, but
in my view, President Trump would be
doing himself and the country a favor
if he removed Kristi Noem from her position and prevented her from doing
any more harm to this country and to
our communities and if he removed
DHS agents from Minnesota and other
cities across our country.
I would say to all of my colleagues
here, Republicans and Democrats, that
we cannot simply accept a promise of
change or action or reform from this
administration,
which
has
spent
months lying to Congress and the

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

American people with a straight face.
There is no world where we can sit
back and assume that the President
and his team are going to be persuaded
to do anything—anything—unless we
write it into law. Even then, we have
no guarantee, of course, that this administration won’t just break the law
as soon as it is written. That has been
our experience in Colorado. But at
least putting this into statute would be
a better pathway for holding Noem and
Miller and others accountable for the
bloodshed and chaos we are seeing in
our streets.
After that, I think we could have serious conversations about passing a
funding bill. Until then, we can’t allow
this legislation to go forward.
Our children and future generations
have a reasonable expectation that
their elected officials will do everything in their power to keep them safe
and to provide the plain facts as they
are.
As legislators, it is our responsibility
to stand up to an executive branch that
is unleashing mayhem in our streets
and gunning down American citizens
while insisting that the public should
not believe what they have seen and
what they have heard or that it is unpatriotic all of a sudden to disagree
with the President’s version of events.
We have seen this story before. There
is nothing new under the Sun. We know
the dark path this can lead us down.
But we have also seen the courage that
was demonstrated by the generations
of Americans who have come before us,
who have disagreed in this Chamber,
who have disagreed with each other,
but who ultimately have rejected injustice, particularly when it was directed
from the highest levels of government.
One of these people was a hero of
mine, it won’t surprise anybody here to
know, and it was Colorado’s former
Governor Ralph Carr, who spoke out
against Japanese internment when
most politicians in the West and in this
country were staying silent.
Addressing a crowd one day on the
Eastern Plains of Colorado, Governor
Carr said:
I am talking to . . . all American people
whether their status be white, brown, or
black . . . when I say that if a majority may
deprive a minority of their freedom, contrary to the terms of the Constitution today,
then you as a minority may be subjected to
the same ill-will of the majority tomorrow.

What happened to Alex Pretti and
the lies that followed were an assault
on every one of us, on all of our children, on our sense of dignity and our
innate understanding of right and
wrong.
Now is the time for my colleagues to
come together and demand that we reassert these principles and demand the
return of safety and security and sanity to our government rather than the
chaos and destruction we have recently
seen. It is what all Americans expect,
and it is what our country deserves.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.023

S29JAPT1

S370

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
(Mrs. MOODY assumed the Chair.)
Mr. LEE. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the
quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MCCORMICK). Without objection, it is
so ordered.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

GOVERNMENT FUNDING

Mr. LEE. Mr. President, I have come
to the floor today, once again, to raise
objections—in fact, deep concerns—
about something known as congressionally directed spending, but the
more colloquial term for what I am describing is ‘‘earmarks.’’ Specifically, I
want to talk about the inclusion of earmarks—a lot of them—about $5 billion
worth in this particular package of
bills.
The
government-directed
micromanagement of any large, complex
economy never works. By ‘‘never,’’ I
mean literally never. Never in the history of human beings has this worked
or has it ended well except for a small
handful who grow richer and more powerful every time government attempts
it. Very often, it is undertaken with an
eye toward a populous objective, one
that is supposed to elevate the poor,
but it, in the end, has quite the opposite effect. A reverse Robin Hood world
then develops, one in which those who
are already wealthy and already powerful become more so and everyone else
suffers. It has been attempted time
after time in this country and in other
countries all over the world, in many
different eras, and it literally never
works.
It is like the game Mouse Trap. If
you ever played Mouse Trap as a kid,
you know the experience that I am
talking about. In the game of Mouse
Trap, you would set up this elaborate
system of marbles, and they would go
down a little tunnel and a little ditch,
and they would turn a wheel and ring a
bell at the end of it. The game never
worked. Mouse Trap never works. Earmarks never work—neither does socialism, neither does the progressive nightmare that we have been living in for a
long time—nursing it along—pretending that somehow, this time, it
will turn out differently. It will not.
Our former colleague and dear friend
of mine, the late Senator Tom Coburn
from Oklahoma—a dedicated fiscal
conservative and a fierce, stalwart opponent of earmarks—once said, ‘‘Earmarks are the gateway drug to spending addiction.’’ His words were prescient, and they remain as truthful
today as ever.
Earmarks are, by their very nature,
corrupting—corrupting of the process—
perhaps not in a legally cognizable
way, but they are corrupting, nonetheless, of the process. They allow for special interests to exert greater influence
in our politics and steer Federal taxpayer dollars to pet projects in individual States or specific congressional

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:41 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

districts often to benefit a particular
business enterprise, nonprofit, or someone else. They fund projects that, as
worthy or unworthy as they might be—
and there is a broad spectrum of earmark beneficiaries that can be found at
every point along a continuum of worthy in the abstract, or unworthy. But
they have got certain things in common, and one of those is that they
often shouldn’t be funded by government at all. And for those that ought
to be funded by the government, many
of them shouldn’t be funded by this
government—this government, which
is a government of limited, enumerated
power, something that we fail most of
the time to even acknowledge anymore, much less respect.
Remember,
James
Madison
described, at the dawn of our Republic, as
our Constitution had been proposed but
not yet ratified—and during the ratification debates, he penned so many of
the Federalist Papers. And in Federalist 45, he wrote that the powers of
the Federal Government are ‘‘few and
defined’’ and those reserved to the
States are ‘‘numerous and indefinite.’’
The ‘‘few and defined’’ powers really
are that. As much as we sometimes
like to pretend otherwise, we are in
charge of just a few basic responsibilities where we have exclusive domain
within our system of government,
where our power trumps State and
local power. But those areas really are
limited, you see, because our Founding
Fathers understood a very simple
truth, which is that the risk of corruption grows larger and the difficulty of
overcoming corruption becomes more
distant, more remote, more tenuous
the higher the level of government you
go. They understood that problems
arising in a government are much more
difficult to eradicate in a larger, more
national government, and that is why
they
very
carefully—almost
religiously—reserved most of the power to
be exercised at the State and local
level.
But they carved out exceptions. What
are those exceptions? Well, the most
notable and obvious among them are
national defense, weights and measures, trademarks, copyrights and patents, postal roads, regulating the interstate, and foreign trade or commerce.
And there are a few others, but that is
the gist of it. There is no general power
in there. There is no power in there, for
example, to say: Let’s make sure we
have good schools. Let’s make sure everybody is happy. Let’s make sure that
a good idea gets funded.
No, those things don’t exist in there.
That is a figment of our imagination.
For the first 150 years of our Republic
when operating under the Constitution,
we respected those limits and those
boundaries. It started to change during
the New Deal era in the 1930s where
Congress and the executive branch and
the judicial branch undertook a sort of
collusive pattern of behavior to sideline principles that had fostered the development of the greatest civilization

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

the world had ever known and ushered
in one of the greatest, most prolonged
eras of more or less continuous peacetime economic expansion.
And they just said: Oh, those rules
that have worked here in the past that
are still the law, were still the law in
the 1930s, and remain the law today, we
are going to set those aside. We are
going to make them malleable. We are
going to decide that they can mean
whatever we want them to mean.
But, Mr. President, as Mark Twain is
quoted as having said: If you name the
tail of a dog a leg and you ask how
many legs does the dog have, what is
the answer? Well, it is still four legs.
The tail of a dog is still a tail and is
not a leg, even if you call it a leg.
We have called these things Federal
powers, many of them since the 1930s,
or at least looked the other way, with
the Supreme Court also looking the
other way since the 1930s, but it doesn’t
mean that these are appropriate activities for the Federal Government to engage in.
Now, what does this have to do with
earmark spending? Everything. Because when we earmark spend, almost
every time—not always, but almost
every time—it is dealing with something that is at the far frontiers of
what is even debatably connected to
something that is debatably connected
to an enumerated Federal power.
We have steered so far away from
where we are supposed to be acting, we
have forgotten why we are here. And as
is the case when raising kids, especially when they get to be teenagers,
you get into trouble when you stop
doing the things that you are supposed
to be doing. And when you start doing
things that you are not supposed to be
doing, you forget the things that you
are supposed to be doing, and you don’t
do them very well.
We see that today, here, in this bill
package right now, where we are being
asked to jettison funding for a Department that includes, among other
things, the enforcement of our immigration laws and the enforcement of
our borders, something that has been
severely compromised in the last few
years and that President Trump is
working hard to overcome. We are
being asked to jettison that portion of
the bill and replace it with a 2-week
substitute, a 2-week temporary continuing resolution.
What does this have to do with earmarks? Everything. It has everything
to do with it because, as we are not
doing that, we are focusing on a whole
bunch of stuff that we have no business
doing, no business funding. And the
way in which we are funding it is itself
corrupting and corrosive of our process.
Any process that is designed to maintain sanity, fiscal responsibility, it is
designed to maintain limited government with limited enumerated powers,
we have thrown it all to the wind. The
consequences have been disastrous. We
are $38.5 trillion in debt, and we are

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.024

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

adding to that debt at a staggering
rate, close to $2 trillion a year, with no
end in sight. Now, I can already hear
the apologists of earmarks, the earmark brigade we will call them, saying:
Well, earmarks are just a tiny, tiny
percentage of overall spending.
That is true. They are. The same way
that when you look at a locomotive,
something that might stretch, I don’t
know, a half mile or a mile, the engine
car of the mile-long locomotive is a
tiny, tiny piece of the train, but it is
what is driving the train. That is what
earmarks do. They drive excessive Federal spending; they facilitate $2 trillion
annual deficits; and they drive us into
this awful downward spiral that leads
us to a very dark place.
Now, at a time like this when American families around the country are
working hard and the comeback is still
just getting started, Congress really
does need to remember its role as the
steward of tax dollars. And to be a good
steward of tax dollars, it has got to
recognize some limit around its authority, but it doesn’t do that. Its earmarks facilitate our further drift away
from that standard.
We should consider earmark spending
in the context of our $38.5 trillion debt,
but we are adding to it at a rate of
nearly $2 trillion a year. And our debt
itself is a percentage of the economy—
and you have to remember, it is at an
alltime high. It is not just that the
nominal debt, that the number is higher than it has ever been. It is true. We
have never had a $38.5 trillion debt. But
adjusted by every conceivable measure,
whether you look at it in inflation-adjusted dollars, whether you look at it
as a percentage of the economy, it is at
an alltime high.
Now, fortunately, President Trump
and many Senate Republicans have
worked hard in an effort to root out
wasteful spending and decrease the
likelihood of a debt crisis or inflation
or both. Remember the excitement
when, about a year ago, first—a little
over a year ago, as we were preparing
for the new administration and the new
Senate Republican majority to kick in
and the new House of Representatives
to continue under Republican control,
there was a lot of enthusiasm over it
with President Trump and Elon Musk
kick-starting the DOGE process? You
saw every Republican in Congress, and
really in both Chambers, champing at
the bit to be part of the DOGE movement. It was cool. It was hip. It was
happening. It was the energy that this
town needed. Everybody was excited
about it. Everybody wanted to be part
of the DOGE process. And then all of a
sudden, they lost interest in it. Within
just a few months, it has faded. And
that is really, really sad.
But fast-forward to now, and there is
still a lot of good things that we could
and should be doing. In fact, just days
ago, President Trump announced his
appointment of a new Department of
Justice official who will focus specifically on efforts to root out the fraud

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:41 Jan 30, 2026

S371

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

and abuse of American taxpayer dollars. That is a good thing. That is a
natural outgrowth of the DOGE effort.
It is a natural outgrowth of President
Trump’s desire to make America great
again. This is an important project,
and I hope and expect that it will succeed.
Yet sometimes I think that, while we
draw near to the concept, to the idea,
to the suggestion of being more efficient, of being more careful as stewards
of the people’s hard-earned money, we
draw near to these concepts with our
lips, but we show through our actions
that our hearts are far from it. Democrats are continuing to push for more
spending, more earmarks, and more
government. That is not the path to
prosperity.
As I have said before, earmarks don’t
just promote reckless spending; they
are reckless spending. The process
itself, when in the hands of fallible,
mortal human beings, is itself naturally corrupting. They naturally do
lead to and contribute to but fundamentally are reckless spending.
Now, according to the Congressional
Research Service, from 1944 to 2011,
there was a 282-percent increase in earmarks in appropriations bills. So after
the very successful red wave election of
2010, the election in which I was first
elected to the U.S. Senate, both the
Senate and the House Republican conferences simultaneously adopted earmark bans correctly recognizing the
corrupting nature of earmarks and
their growing contribution to an increasingly
problematic
and
unsustainable fiscal picture for the
Federal Government.
I remember that moment well. I had
just been elected to the Senate. It was
November of 2010. I had yet to be sworn
in. That wouldn’t happen until January
of 2011. But I came back here for my
new Member orientation and was permitted, as a newly elected Senatorelect, to participate in my first Senate
Republican conference. And it was in
that measure that I supported and advocated aggressively for the earmark
ban that we adopted.
It was a great move. So successful
and so popular, so backed by popular
voter demand was this anti-earmark
wave that even former President
Obama, while occupying the White
House at the time, agreed, agreed right
then, he said—shortly after the November 2010 election, about the same time
the Senate Republican conference, just
down the Hall from here in the Capitol,
adopted this earmark ban which, in my
view, is still in place—he said:
I agree with those Republican and Democratic members of Congress who have recently said that in these challenging days
(referring to rising deficits and debt levels)
that we cannot afford . . . earmarks.

He was absolutely right. And if he
was right then, it follows—in fact, it
follows a fortiori that it is even more
true today that the same words that
President Obama uttered then are even
more applicable then—they were appli-

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

cable then; they are more applicable
now, way more applicable.
Our national debt is several multiples of what it was then, $38.5 trillion, adding to it at a rate of about $2
trillion a year. Now, in 2019, Senate Republicans made the earmark ban permanent that had previously been considered temporary, a pause, a moratorium. And we had this decades-long
earmark moratorium.
During that moratorium, what happened? Did the sky fall? No, it didn’t.
It didn’t fall. Were there dogs and cats
living together in the streets? Book of
Revelation stuff? Not at all. There was
no Armageddon. Were there disastrous
political consequences to the Republicans who had spearheaded that earmark ban? No, not at all. Republicans
did not suffer massive electoral defeat.
In fact, within a few years, we captured the majority again in the U.S.
Senate. So to my Republican colleagues, stop telling yourselves that
earmarks are necessary, that they are
indispensable either for electoral success or the survival of the American
economy or the survival of your home
States’ economy. They are not. That
simply is not true. That is a lie we tell
ourselves. It is not true.
Unfortunately, however, after Democrats took back the White House with
House and Senate majorities also under
Democratic control in 2021, they
brought back the earmark practice.
And, sadly, many Senate Republicans
decided to go along with it at that
time. Let’s just go along because they
are doing it. We might as well not let
them have all the fun. So some started
to do that.
Now, this return in recent years,
starting in 2021, to include billions of
dollars’ worth of earmarks in annual
spending bills, this is a microcosm of
Federal waste and Congress’ refusal to
properly act to stave off a fiscal crisis.
This is the kind of direct attack on
the President’s economic agenda that
goes unnoticed because those who support it often do so quietly, sometimes
with a whisper or a whimper.
I will not go quietly, nor should I,
nor should any of us when we consider
what we do to our children and our
grandchildren, whether they are born
or unborn. Whether their parents are
alive yet or not, our posterity will suffer from the consequences of these.
But it is not just that. It is those of
us who are alive today, those of us who
are working hard just to provide for
our families today who suffer because
when we spend too much money, everything costs more money. As Milton
Friedman used to say, the true rate of
taxation has to be measured not just
by the top marginal tax rate. You have
to look at the rate of government
spending as a percentage of the economy because, one way or another, that
piper has got to be paid. One way or another, it comes out in the wash. One
way or another, the people will pay for
it. They pay for it in terms of higher
prices on everything they buy—every
good, every service.

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.034

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S372

And, tragically, it is not the wealthy
who bear this burden disproportionately. It is hard-working Americans,
poor and middle-class Americans, those
who work hard, pay their bills, pay
their taxes and find that every dollar
they earn buys a little bit less. We
have seen more of that in the last few
years than we have in a very long time.
Government Agencies, for their part,
very often will try to hide the true impact of this, but they can’t hide it for
too long. They can conceal it. They can
obscure it a little bit. But the American people know; they know what is
happening. This is catching up to us.
Are earmarks the whole problem? No.
Are they a small percentage of overall
Federal spending? Yes, they are. Is discretionary spending much smaller than
all mandatory spending? Yes. But this
is all part of the same problem. And,
again, it is earmark spending that
drives the train. It is earmark spending
that very often distracts us away from
the things we are supposed to be doing
and takes us down the direction of
areas where the Federal Government
probably shouldn’t be acting in any
event.
So let me ask this question: How are
voters to trust Republicans in Congress
to get spending in order and reduce our
national budget deficits and eventually
our debt if we don’t have the discipline
as a conference to cut even a few billion dollars in pork-barrel spending?
How can we, as Republicans in Congress, in the House or the Senate,
rightfully cancel wasteful foreign aid
and subsidies to leftwing public radio
but then simultaneously offset those
things by greenlighting the enactment
of several billion dollars’ worth of
wasteful earmarks?
Now, I will concede here everybody
has a different definition of what is
wasteful, what is good, what is bad. I
will concede that a number of these
probably go to worthy beneficiaries or
at least good people intending, wanting
to do good things for the American
people. That doesn’t mean that it is
our money to spend. It doesn’t mean
that it is the appropriate role of the
Federal Government to do that. It
doesn’t mean it is appropriate for any
government to do that. And it doesn’t
mean that this process—the way we do
it here—isn’t terribly corrupting, with
the tendency to drive up overall Federal spending.
To quote President Trump, ‘‘For
years, the radical left Democrats exploited the green-energy scam as an excuse to funnel many billions of dollars
into their own massive slush funds’’
and ‘‘drastically drove up prices.’’
That is what happens. That is what
they do. Well, through certain earmarks, they quietly do the same, diverting the tax dollars of the American
people to the kinds of projects that
should never receive taxpayer money.
In total, the cost of earmarks this
time around is around $5.2 billion. Yes,
it is a small percentage of overall Federal spending. Yes, it is a small per-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:02 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

centage even of the Federal spending in
this particular package. But it is what
is driving the train, and it is emblematic of the kind of problem that creates
the much larger problem. While we are
focused obsessively on doing these, we
are not doing what we are supposed to
be doing.
Speaking of emblematic, as we remove funding from the Department of
Homeland Security, one of the few Departments that is pretty easy to fit
within the enumerated powers of the
Federal Government—why? Because
the Federal Government is in charge of
immigration laws, borders, and the enforcement of those laws governing immigration and nationality and that
sort of thing. And yet that is what gets
pulled out. We leave in there all the
stuff that is tangentially related, at
best, to enumerated Federal powers
under the Constitution. Now, in total,
yes, it is a small percentage, but it is
what is driving the train.
Earmarks aside, perhaps the biggest
problem with spending bills—with
these spending bills, this package of
spending bills that we will soon be considering—is that they simply spend too
much money. Much of this stems from
the fact that discretionary outlays
spiked during COVID, and they never
came back down to pre-COVID levels.
In fact, total discretionary spending
from fiscal year 2020 through fiscal
year 2024 was $1 trillion higher than
the Congressional Budget Office had
projected it to be over that timeframe
when they issued their 2019 budget
baseline projections. That is the discretionary side.
Meanwhile, the mandatory side also
exploded, so it got a lot worse. A lot of
people are fond of saying: Well, it is
not discretionary spending; it is mandatory spending. But they both went
way, way up.
It is time to stop talking a big game
about fiscal responsibility and to show
voters that we measure up to the task.
We cannot simply relent when Democrats want to tie the hands of this administration and saddle the American
people with unsustainable debt.
So the question I pose to my colleagues who are OK with earmarks in
their spending bills is this: Why are
Senate Republicans supporting the effort to ignore our conference’s still active, still intact earmark ban to partner with Democrats and reverse course
on President Trump? You don’t believe
me? Well, this bill, as presently constituted, does among many, many
other things the following: It funds
hospitals and healthcare clinics that
provide puberty blockers to children
and perform abortions. It does that.
It sends money to a dance festival.
This dance festival may be lovely. I am
not really personally into dance festivals. Maybe some are. Those who like
them, I hope they enjoy them. Dance
festivals, I am sure, can be a great
thing. That doesn’t mean that the Federal Government should be funding it—
or any government. I don’t know why

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

it is the job of any government that
collects money from people, loosely
speaking, at the point of a gun—because if you don’t pay your taxes, eventually people with guns will come and
issue a fine or haul you off if you refuse
to pay—but we are funding it anyway.
It provides for million-dollar renovations at both the Metropolitan Museum
of Art and the Metropolitan Opera in
New York City. Let’s think about that
for a minute. That is one of the
wealthiest cities not only in America
but in the world. And let’s take the
opera, for example. The opera: It is a
great thing. I love the arts. It is fantastic. This is not exactly an everyman
hobby. Now, I am sure there are exceptions. But it has a well-earned reputation for being something that is favored by the elite, by very wealthy individuals, in one of America’s wealthiest cities.
So why are we sending them a million dollars? The Metropolitan Opera,
the last time I checked, has an endowment worth about $255 million. It has
multiple employees earning in excess
of $1 million a year. I believe it has
real estate assets valued at around half
a billion dollars. And yet hard-working
Americans in Peoria, IL, and in Orem,
UT, all over the country, people who
probably don’t visit New York very
often, if ever, who may not be into the
opera, they are all being asked to subsidize that, to pay a million dollars for
elevator renovations not only at the
Metropolitan Opera but also at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art. Why?
Why is that our role?
But not only why is it our role; why
is it the responsibility of a plumber
from Montana who is just trying to
feed his family, who is probably never
going to attend that opera or the Metropolitan Museum of Art? Why are you
sticking that person with the bill?
The spending package also allocates
dollars for nonprofits; specifically,
nonprofits providing aid and counseling
and legal services to illegal aliens, to
individuals whose sole uniting characteristic is that they are here inside
the United States unlawfully. Why are
we doing that when it is counter to
what we are supposed to be doing,
which is to discourage illegal immigration and to make possible bringing to
justice those who break the laws—
something that—oh, yeah, we are removing that part of the bill that would
even do that because we are too busy
making sure that we are funding the
hobbies of the ultrawealthy in one of
America’s wealthiest cities that most
Americans will never visit. This is reverse Robin Hood at its worst. This is
taking money from the poor and giving
it to the rich, and it is wrong.
The bill also contains earmarks funding a nonprofit organization called
NICE. Now, don’t let the name fool
you. NICE is not so nice. NICE is the
New Immigrant Community Empowerment to assist illegal aliens in getting
jobs—jobs that ought to go to American citizens or at least individuals

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.029

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

who, if not citizens, are inside the
United States legally and legally authorized to work in the United States
of America.
The Federal Government, through
taxpayers, should not be funding hospitals that give puberty blockers to
children or nonprofit museums or leftwing labor activist organizations or
leftwing physicians activist organizations or groups providing legal aid or
subsidized housing specifically to illegal aliens. It shouldn’t do that. It
shouldn’t do that ever, regardless of
who is in charge, especially in a time
when the House of Representatives is
under Republican control, when the
Senate is under Republican control,
and the White House is occupied by a
Republican President. It shouldn’t do
it ever but especially not when Republicans are in charge of all three levers
of the two political branches: the legislative and the executive.
Senate Republicans especially should
not be facilitating this abuse of power
and at the hard-earned money of the
American people, many of whom work
months out of every year just to pay
their Federal taxes only to find that
every dollar they have left buys less
because we are spending too much
money.
We shouldn’t be facilitating this
abuse of power and violating pledges
that President Trump and that we ourselves, as Senate Republicans, have
made on the campaign trail to root out
and end wasteful, woke spending across
the Federal Government.
Even in a Republican-controlled Congress, Democrats are still able to effectuate and fund a radical agenda that
the American people opposed when
they elected us to this majority and
that we promised we wouldn’t perpetuate. And yet here we are. It is tragic.
Congress does not need to and should
not use earmarks as sweeteners, for
lack of a better word, to make the appropriations process work. We cannot
continue appropriations bills that perpetuate excess spending, especially
when those same things are pushing
policies that inevitably, invariably, deliberately hobble the efforts of this administration.
This is like putting a humidifier and
a dehumidifier in the same room and
just letting them fight it out when you
promised only the dehumidifier would
be there.
And at a minimum we should build
on the successful rescissions bill initiated through the DOGE process and
carried forward throughout the last
year, the successful rescissions bill
that, by exerting some basic fiscal discipline to enforce our conference rules
and put an end to earmarks—or rather
than just put an end to it, resume the
end that we put in place 15 years ago,
heal the breach that has now been
there for about 5 years, and honor what
is still our conference position.
Only then will we be able, I believe,
to tackle the self-inflicted economic
wounds that cloud the bright skies of
opportunity before us.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:02 Jan 30, 2026

S373

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

As President Trump said in his endof-year speech, just a few weeks ago,
‘‘we’re poised for an economic boom
the likes of which the world has never
seen.’’
I believe him, and he is doing a lot of
things that are helping us get there.
The least we can do is not undercut
him. And to achieve that potential, we
the Congress, we the Senate, and we
the Senate Republican conference in
the majority must act.
Earmarks aren’t the way. They are
the wrong way. Earmarks aren’t the
solution. They are the problem. We
need to end them.
In connection with this package of
bills, I have put forward an amendment
to strip them from this bill, and I humbly, with all the conviction I am capable of communicating, implore my colleagues to support the amendment.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
TUBERVILLE). The majority leader.
f

MORNING BUSINESS
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Senate be
in a period of morning business, with
Senators permitted to speak therein
for up to 10 minutes each.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

H.R. 7148
Mr. VAN HOLLEN. Mr. President, we
are considering an appropriations
package on the floor this week, and
there has rightfully been a lot of focus
on the section of the bill that funds the
Department of Homeland Security, a
section that I and my Democratic colleagues continue to insist should be
considered separately, as it was in the
House, to secure essential reforms to
end the Department’s abuses, stop the
killings, protect people’s rights, and
ensure real accountability. Any additional funding for this unconstrained,
lawless operation at DHS is unacceptable as we witness executions of civilians in our streets, unaccountable and
warrantless raids, and in my home
State of Maryland, inhumane conditions at the Baltimore Holding Center
even as ICE moves to set up a warehouse with the capacity to process and
detain 1,500 persons. I said I would not
support one more dime for Trump’s
lawless ICE operation, and I meant it—
not even for 1 more day.
But I also want to take a moment to
speak to the rest of that funding package, which includes the work of five
other Appropriations subcommittees:
Defense, State and Foreign Operations,
Transportation and Housing, Labor,
Health and Human Services, and Education, and Financial Services and
General Government.
I appreciate the work of the Democratic ranking members of these subcommittees and Vice Chair MURRAY,
who secured some important provisions
in the bill to reassert the congressional
power of the purse with specific spend-

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

ing directives in legislative text. For
example, the Labor, Health and Human
Services, and Education bill rejects the
administration’s effort to eliminate
the Department of Education and cut
Pell grants.
It also rejects the Trump proposal to
cut NIH nearly in half and instead increases funding; and it successfully
overrides the OMB directive that NIH
fund more lump sum multi-year grants,
which would otherwise result in fewer
overall grants and less research activity. NIH, which is located in my home
State of Maryland, is one of our greatest American success stories, where
some of our brightest minds pursue
treatments and cures to diseases that
impact virtually every American family. This administration has spent the
last year attacking the critical work of
NIH, canceling grants and clinical
trials and short-circuiting lifesaving
research. I am glad this bill roundly rejects that and requires the administration to change course. At the same
time, I am very disappointed that the
bill does not reverse the rescission cut
to public broadcasting, which provides
critical services to Americans across
the country, particularly in rural communities.
Indeed, while these bills make important investments and include some
critical safeguards, I have serious concerns that they do not go far enough to
protect the power of the purse and the
Federal employees who carry out the
programs we fund, particularly as the
administration continues its efforts to
strip away the protections that safeguard our nonpartisan civil service and
hollow out Agencies. Without enhanced
guardrails in this package, the administration will continue to wreak havoc
on the ability of our dedicated, meritbased civil servants to provide critical
services to the American people.
I also have deep concerns about the
State foreign operations bill, now
called the national security package. I
know and appreciate the work of Vice
Chair MURRAY and Ranking Member
SCHATZ to preserve the legacy of U.S.
foreign assistance in this bill after
Elon Musk, Russell Vought, and their
DOGE cronies took a chainsaw to
USAID and the State Department.
The bill includes some new guardrails
to prevent deeper cuts going forward,
but it still reflects a $9 billion cut from
FY25 levels. The largest share of those
cuts comes from humanitarian assistance and development assistance.
Foreign aid is not a giveaway; it is
an investment in the world we all live
in. When your neighbor’s house is on
fire, it is foolish to wait until the
flames reach your own home. Conflicts,
pandemics, and humanitarian collapse
do not respect borders. Preventing
wars from starting and stopping new
diseases before they reach American
shores costs far less than fighting
those threats once they arrive here.
For less than 1 percent of the Federal
budget, we can help save the lives of
the world’s most vulnerable children.

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.030

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S374

Cutting that support is not fiscally responsible; it is morally indefensible. A
Lancet study estimated that Trump’s
foreign aid cuts will cost 14 million
lives by 2030, including over 4.5 million
kids. Thousands of children are already
dying.
The bill also codifies an $850 million
‘‘America First Opportunity Fund’’ for
an administration that has proven
itself to be a reckless and unlawful custodian of Federal funding. This risks
becoming a political slush fund,
untethered from evidence-based programs and longstanding safeguards
that ensure taxpayer dollars are used
to advance genuine U.S. interests, not
pet projects and foreign ventures that
serve the interests of the Trump family, Trump campaign contributors, and
his billionaire buddies at the expense
of America’s national security interests.
The bill imposes a new cap on how
much foreign assistance can be transferred to the Department of Homeland
Security—an important check—but it
still allows hundreds of millions of dollars to be transferred to an already
bloated DHS for immigration enforcement. That is unacceptable.
I also object to the bill’s $3.3 billion
in foreign military financing to the
Government of Israel with no conditions or guardrails. The Netanyahu
government has spent years openly
flouting international law and disregarding U.S. interests, advice, and
warnings, including concerns ranging
from blocking humanitarian assistance
and ethnic cleansing in Gaza to continued settler violence and mushrooming
illegal settlements in the West Bank.
I made clear on October 7, 2023, the
day the heinous Hamas attack brutally
killed over 1,200 people and seized over
200 hostages, that Israel had a right—
indeed a duty—to go after Hamas. But
the Netanyahu government’s response
went way beyond targeting Hamas to
imposing collective punishment on all
the people of Gaza.
In Gaza, entire neighborhoods have
been
systematically
destroyed.
Throughout the war, more than 1.9 million Palestinians have been forcibly
displaced, many of them multiple
times, through military orders, bombardment, and the deliberate rendering
of civilian areas unlivable. All of this
has occurred with U.S.-funded weapons
and equipment.
In the West Bank, 240 Palestinians,
including 55 children, were killed by
Israeli forces or settlers in 2025, according to OCHA. Even the IDF found that
Israeli settler violence in the West
Bank rose by about 25 percent in 2025.
This violence happened with virtual
impunity and in many cases with the
complicity of Israeli forces in the area.
Along with settler violence, Israeli settlement expansion continues to rise,
with a record number of 9,629 settlement housing units being approved by
the Israeli Government in 2025, more
than the previous 6 years combined.
This includes approval for construction

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:02 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

in the area known as E1, east of Jerusalem. Construction in E1 would effectively bisect the West Bank, preventing the development of a contiguous Palestinian state and sounding
the death knell of the already diminishing prospects for a two-state solution. The Netanyahu government also
retroactively legalized eight illegal
outposts, half of which are located deep
within the West Bank.
We should be using every tool at our
disposal to ensure that the Netanyahu
government complies with President
Trump’s stated objective of a ‘‘credible
pathway to Palestinian self-determination and statehood’’ and end its slowmotion annexation of the West Bank,
destruction of neighborhoods in Gaza,
and displacement of the Palestinian
people.
Conditions on foreign military financing and other types of assistance
are not unusual; in fact, they are the
norm. Other U.S. partners—including
longstanding recipients like Egypt,
Lebanon, Pakistan, El Salvador, Colombia, and Mexico—have had their assistance routinely tied to human
rights, accountability, or other statutory benchmarks. Yet this bill provides
the Netanyahu government with a
blank check and no meaningful guardrails. That double standard weakens
U.S. credibility and undermines our
commitment to our core values.
I appreciate that the Defense title in
this bill funds a pay raise for our servicemembers and makes investments to
support military families and critical
work at Maryland’s military bases. But
I am deeply disturbed by the way
Trump has misused and wrongfully deployed our military, from our ActiveDuty forces to our National Guard.
The Trump administration’s abduction of dictator Nicolas Maduro wasn’t
a ‘‘law enforcement operation’’ or an
effort to stop drug trafficking. It was
about oil, seizing and controlling Venezuela’s oil for the benefit of Trump’s
billionaire buddies. It is simply wrong
to risk the lives of brave American soldiers to profit the Trump campaign’s
political contributors.
And Trump has deployed the National Guard to DC, Los Angeles, Memphis, and Chicago, manufacturing
claims of emergency and chaos to use
the Guard in domestic law enforcement
and his mass deportation agenda rather
than using Justice Department resources to work with local partners
and keep communities safe. And as
State and local leaders and courts have
stood in the way of these deployments,
Trump has threatened to invoke the
Insurrection Act to bypass them and
the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus
Act.
Taken together, these abuses of
power show an authoritarian administration using the military for its own
ends, not for U.S. national security.
These concerns only reinforce my existing reservations about the continued
uncontrolled growth in defense spending, especially when the Pentagon con-

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

tinues to fail independent audits for 8
consecutive years.
Finally, I want to underscore a point
regarding the financial services and
general government portion of this bill,
which funds the General Services Administration. GSA, together with the
FBI, is responsible for the FBI headquarters project. This bill provides no
additional funding for that project, but
GSA has funding available from prior
year appropriations. There are still significant outstanding questions about
this project and a security assessment
and construction plan is underway and
must be delivered to Congress as directed in the CJS Appropriations bill.
From the start of this project, Congress has expected that the building
would meet Level 5 ISC security requirements to safeguard the FBI mission, and GSA has shared its expectation that this project will meet that
standard, though the security assessment is not yet complete. In order to
ensure adequate congressional oversight and use taxpayer resources responsibly, GSA should also pause activities until the plan is finished and
Congress has reviewed it.
As a member of the Appropriations
Committee, I recognize the challenges
in negotiating these bills given the radical demands of the administration and
the complicity of too many of my Republican colleagues in the House and
Senate. I appreciate the hard-won investments and safeguards in these bills
and the rejection of dozens of partisan
House policy riders. That said, for the
reasons I have outlined and because I
believe more can be done to rein in this
administration’s
authoritarian
impulses, I oppose this package.
f

U.S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON ETHICS ANNUAL REPORT
Mr. LANKFORD. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent, for myself as
chairman of the Select Committee on
Ethics and for Senator COONS, vice
chairman of the committee, that the
annual report of the Select Committee
on Ethics for calendar year 2025 be
printed in the RECORD.
The committee issued this report on
January 31, 2026, as required by the
Honest Leadership and Open Government Act of 2007.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
[Jan. 31, 2026]
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON ETHICS
119TH CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION
The Honest Leadership and Open Government Act of 2007 (the Act) calls for the Select Committee on Ethics of the United
States Senate to issue an annual report no
later than January 31st of each year providing information in certain categories describing its activities for the preceding year.
Reported below is the information describing
the Committee’s activities in 2025 in the categories set forth in the Act:
(1) The number of alleged violations of
Senate rules received from any source, including the number raised by a Senator or

E:\CR\FM\G29JA6.025

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

staff of the Committee—181. (In addition, 5
alleged violations from previous years were
carried into 2025.)
(2) The number of alleged violations that
were dismissed—
(A) For lack of subject matter jurisdiction
or in which, even if the allegations in the
complaint are true, no violation of Senate
rules would exist: 150.
(B) Because they failed to provide sufficient facts as to any material violation of
the Senate rules beyond mere allegation or
assertion: 10.
(3) The number of alleged violations for
which the Committee staff conducted a preliminary inquiry: 27. (This figure includes 5
matters from previous years carried into
2025.)
(4) The number of alleged violations for
which the Committee staff conducted a preliminary inquiry that resulted in an adjudicatory review: 0.
(5) The number of alleged violations for
which the Committee staff conducted a preliminary inquiry and the Committee dismissed the matter for lack of substantial
merit or because it was inadvertent, technical or otherwise of a de minimis nature: 18.
(6) The number of alleged violations for
which the Committee staff conducted a preliminary inquiry and the Committee issued
private or public letters of admonition: 0.
(7) The number of matters resulting in a
disciplinary sanction: 0.
(8) Any other information deemed by the
Committee to be appropriate to describe its
activities in the previous year:
In 2025, the Committee staff conducted 20
Member and office campaign activity briefings; 26 employee code of conduct training
sessions; 3 public financial disclosure clinics,
seminars, and webinars; 32 ethics seminars
and customized briefings for Member DC offices, state offices, and Senate committees;
and 1 private sector ethics briefing.
In 2025, the Committee staff handled approximately 12,974 inquiries (via telephone
and email) for ethics advice and guidance.
In 2025, the Committee wrote approximately 1,023 ethics advisory letters and responses including, but not limited to, 822
travel and gifts matters (Senate Rule 35) and
143 conflict of interest matters (Senate Rule
37).
In 2025, the Committee received 4,485 public
financial disclosure reports including periodic transaction reports.
f

VOTE EXPLANATION
Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, I was
unable to attend votes on January 15,
2026. Had I been able to attend, I would
have continued to vote in favor of H.R.
6938, Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations
on rollcall vote No. 10.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

200TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE
TOWN OF CUTLER
Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, in 1826,
6 years after Maine became our Nation’s 23rd State, a small fishing town
was incorporated in downeast Maine.
Cutler, named after Joseph Cutler, an
early settler from Massachusetts, is a
beacon of Maine’s nationally renowned
beauty and a stronghold for Maine’s
traditional lobstering sector. From its
humble beginnings to a booming fishing industry, Cutler remains a great
pearl of the State of Maine.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:23 Jan 30, 2026

S375

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

During the mid-19th century, Cutler
Harbor fostered substantial growth in
the town’s fishing industry, lumber
shipping, and small boat operations.
Known as the Harbor of Refuge, it became a safe place for fisherman to ride
out the vicious storms of the coast.
As the town grew, Cutler played an
important role in the promotion of
maritime safety and American national security. Since 1876, the Little
River Lighthouse, with a formidable
cast iron tower, has guided fishermen
and has been integral to U.S. Coast
Guard operations in the area. It is now
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, ensuring its existence for
generations to come.
In addition, for 65 years, the Cutler
Naval Station, with one of the most
powerful radio transmitters in the
world, has provided critical communications for the U.S. Navy’s submarine fleet, anywhere in the world,
whether on the surface or submerged.
Cutler is home to Maine’s spectacular Bold Coast. The Cutler Coast Public Reserved land boasts an abundance
of scenic hiking trails, peatlands, secluded beaches, and wild ocean views,
offering a stunning example of the
beauty that defines the State of Maine.
In addition, Cutler remains a hub of
the Maine blueberry industry that produces almost 85 percent of the world’s
wild blueberries.
Cutler’s spirit and historic connection to America’s freedom continues
today. Every Fourth of July, the
townspeople honor the courage, sacrifice, and vision that won our Nation’s
independence. This year’s observation
will be especially meaningful with the
addition of a fun-filled bicentennial
celebration.
The Maine State motto is ‘‘Dirigo,’’
meaning ‘‘I Lead.’’ With the beacon
from its Little River Lighthouse lighting the way, Cutler has a bright and
hopeful future. I congratulate the people of Cutler, ME, on this 200th anniversary and wish them all the best in
the years to come.
f

MESSAGES FROM THE PRESIDENT
Messages from the President of the
United States were communicated to
the Senate by Ms. Holstead, one of his
secretaries.
f

EXECUTIVE MESSAGES REFERRED
As in executive session the Presiding
Officer laid before the Senate messages
from the President of the United
States submitting sundry nominations
which were referred to the appropriate
committees.
(The messages received today are
printed at the end of the Senate proceedings.)
f

EXECUTIVE REPORTS OF
COMMITTEES
The following executive reports of
nominations were submitted:

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

By Mr. RISCH for the Committee on Foreign Relations.
*Gregory LoGerfo, of Massachusetts, a Career Member of the Senior Foreign Service,
Class of Minister-Counselor, to be Coordinator for Counterterrorism, with the rank
and status of Ambassador at Large.
Nominee: LoGerfo, Gregory Daniel.
Post: Counterterrorism Coordinator.
(The following is a list of members of my
immediate family. I have asked each of these
persons to inform me of the pertinent contributions made by them. To the best of my
knowledge, the information contained in this
report is complete and accurate.)
Contributions, amount, date, and donee:
Scott Brown for Senate, $50, June 2025,
Gregory LoGerfo; Brian Shortsleeve for Governor, $50, July 2025, Gregory LoGerfo; Louis
Ingrassia for New York Assembly, $50, Oct.
2024, Gregory LoGerfo.
Spouse: None.
*Eric Meyer, of California, to be Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of
the United States of America to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.
Nominee: Eric Meyer.
Post: Sri Lanka.
(The following is a list of members of my
immediate family. I have asked each of these
persons to inform me of the pertinent contributions made by them. To the best of my
knowledge, the information contained in this
report is complete and accurate.)
Contributions, donee, date, and amount:
Eric Meyer: None.
Karina Fausing (spouse): None.
*Jennifer Wicks McNamara, of Virginia, to
be Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the United States of America
to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
Nominee: Jennifer Wicks McNamara.
Post: Hanoi, Vietnam.
(The following is a list of members of my
immediate family. I have asked each of these
persons to inform me of the pertinent contributions made by them. To the best of my
knowledge, the information contained in this
report is complete and accurate.)
Contributions, donee, date, and amount:
Self: None.
Spouse: None.
*Frank Weiland, of the District of Columbia, to be an Assistant Secretary of State
(International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs).
By Mr. WICKER for the Committee on
Armed Services.
*Army nomination of Lt. Gen. Joshua M.
Rudd, to be General.
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Col. Joshua E. Izenour and ending with Col.
Guillermo Rosales, Jr., which nominations
were received by the Senate and appeared in
the Congressional Record on December 10,
2025.
*Air Force nomination of Gen. John D.
Lamontagne, to be General.
Air Force nomination of Brig. Gen. Christopher A. Eason, to be Major General.
Army nominations beginning with Brig.
Gen. Phillip C. Baker and ending with Brig.
Gen. Patrick A. Teague, which nominations
were received by the Senate and appeared in
the Congressional Record on December 15,
2025.
Army nomination of Brig. Gen. Rhett R.
Cox, to be Major General.
*Army nomination of Lt. Gen. Patrick D.
Frank, to be Lieutenant General.
*Air Force nominations beginning with Lt.
Gen. Stephen F. Jost and ending with Maj.
Gen. Joel L. Carey, which nominations were
received by the Senate and appeared in the
Congressional Record on December 15, 2025.
(minus 4 nominees: Lt. Gen. Patrick D.

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.002

S29JAPT1

S376

Frank; Maj. Gen. Steven M. Marks; Maj.
Gen. Jefferson J. O’Donnell; Maj. Gen.
Thomas M. Suelzer)
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Brig. Gen. Raymond L. Adams and ending
with Brig. Gen. John K. Jarrard, which
nominations were received by the Senate and
appeared in the Congressional Record on December 15, 2025.
*Navy nominations beginning with Vice
Adm. Jeffrey T. Jablon and ending with Rear
Adm. Douglas C. Verissimo, which nominations were received by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on December 15, 2025. (minus 2 nominees: Maj. Gen.
Lorna M. Mahlock; Maj. Gen. Sean M.
Salene)
*Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Maj. Gen. Lorna M. Mahlock and ending with
Maj. Gen. Sean M. Salene, which nominations were received by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on December 15, 2025. (minus 4 nominees: Vice
Adm. Jeffrey T. Jablon; Vice Adm. Robert M.
Gaucher; Rear Adm. Darin K. Via; Rear Adm.
Douglas C. Verissimo)
Air Force nomination of Col. Christine C.
Piper, to be Brigadier General.
Army nomination of Col. Jodi J. Smith, to
be Brigadier General.
*Marine Corps nomination of Lt. Gen.
Francis L. Donovan, to be General.
*Army nomination of Maj. Gen. Brian W.
Gibson, to be Lieutenant General.
*Air Force nomination of Maj. Gen. B.
Mark Pye, to be Lieutenant General.
*Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Lt. Gen. James H. Adams III and ending with
Lt. Gen. Joseph A. Matos III, which nominations were received by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 15, 2026. (minus 6 nominees beginning
with Maj. Gen. Brian W. Gibson).
Army nominations beginning with Brig.
Gen. Derek L. Adams and ending with Brig.
Gen. Matthew S. Woodruff, which nominations were received by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 15, 2026. (minus 4 nominees: Brig. Gen.
Tracey L. Poirier; Brig. Gen. William E.
Temple V; Brig. Gen. Kendrick D. Traylor;
Brig. Gen. Brian F. Wertzler).
Army nomination of Brig. Gen. Diane L.
Dunn, to be Major General.
*Marine Corps nomination of Maj. Gen.
Marcus B. Annibale, to be Lieutenant General.
*Navy nomination of Rear Adm. Richard E.
Seif, Jr., to be Vice Admiral.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Mr. WICKER. Mr. President, for the
Committee on Armed Services I report
favorably the following nomination
lists which were printed in the
RECORDS on the dates indicated, and
ask unanimous consent, to save the expense of reprinting on the Executive
Calendar that these nominations lie at
the Secretary’s desk for the information of Senators .
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Air Force nomination of Patrick W.
McMorrow, to be Colonel.
Air Force nomination of Sunil L. Amin, to
be Colonel.
Air Force nomination of Leslie A. Woll, to
be Colonel.
Air Force nominations beginning with
Ayad M. Abisaab and ending with Anthony
P. Zelasko, which nominations were received
by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Air Force nomination of Evangeline C. Obi,
to be Lieutenant Colonel .
Air Force nomination of Adrianna Perez,
to be Lieutenant Colonel.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:02 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

Air Force nomination of Marcus W. C.
MacNealy, to be Major.
Army nomination of Paul V. Johnson, to
be Major.
Army
nomination
of
Raymond
F.
Jaklitsch, Jr., to be Colonel.
Army nomination of Timothy T. Chan, to
be Major.
Army nomination of Michael P. Thomas,
to be Major.
Army nomination of Scott M. McGinley, to
be Major.
Army nomination of Anthony C. Kight, to
be Colonel.
Army nominations beginning with Krista
L. Bartolomucci and ending with Abraham
L. Young, which nominations were received
by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Army nomination of Scott M. Katalenich,
to be Colonel.
Army nomination of Mark J. Crow, to be
Colonel.
Army nomination of Mark C. Rummel, to
be Colonel.
Army
nomination
of
Christopher
Fuhriman, to be Colonel.
Army nomination of Javier F. Barrera, to
be Lieutenant Colonel.
Army nomination of Joseph D. Frjelich, to
be Major.
Army nominations beginning with Scott D.
Gale and ending with Allie M. Scott, which
nominations were received by the Senate and
appeared in the Congressional Record on
January 15, 2026.
Army
nomination
of
Andrew
J.
Withington, to be Major.
Army nomination of Casey C. Gower, to be
Major.
Army nominations beginning with Clyde B.
Gore, Jr. and ending with Matthew B.
Mcdonald, which nominations were received
by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 15, 2026.
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Andrew J. Clarke and ending with Joel C.
Ellis, which nominations were received by
the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Darien J. Garland and ending with Andres A.
Madera, which nominations were received by
the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Jason R. Mclamb and ending with George
Vinay, which nominations were received by
the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Travis L. Elliott and ending with Nathen J.
Werner, which nominations were received by
the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Marine Corps nomination of Thomas J.
Heinsohn, to be Major.
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Brencent T. Berry and ending with Andrew
J. Vanhoogmoed, which nominations were
received by the Senate and appeared in the
Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
John R. Hall, Jr. and ending with Nicholas
G. Welborne, which nominations were received by the Senate and appeared in the
Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
Robert S. Jevning and ending with Gregorio
W. Pro, which nominations were received by
the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Marine Corps nominations beginning with
David K. Burger and ending with Joseph F.
Soileau, which nominations were received by
the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Marine Corps nomination of Steven S.
Mitchell, Jr., to be Major.

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

Navy nomination of Ryan D. Curran, to be
Lieutenant Commander.
Navy nominations beginning with Satya K.
Gutta and ending with Luis E. Torres, which
nominations were received by the Senate and
appeared in the Congressional Record on
January 13, 2026.
Navy nomination of Timothy R. Trimble,
to be Captain.
Navy nomination of Victor C. Schaefer, to
be Commander.
Navy nomination of Ashley E. Allison, to
be Commander.
Navy nomination of Jess B. Feldon, to be
Captain.
Navy nominations beginning with Reza J.
Mehran and ending with Parsa P. Salehi,
which nominations were received by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional
Record on January 13, 2026.
Navy nominations beginning with Anita R.
Bhardwaj and ending with Brandee D.
Wimberly, which nominations were received
by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 13, 2026.
Navy nominations beginning with John B.
Newman and ending with Natasha Rai Morris, which nominations were received by the
Senate and appeared in the Congressional
Record on January 15, 2026.
Navy nomination of Ian W. McMenamin, to
be Lieutenant Commander.
Navy nominations beginning with Lawrence E. Burkart and ending with Brendon
W. Kiely, which nominations were received
by the Senate and appeared in the Congressional Record on January 15, 2026.
Navy nominations beginning with Ali A.W.
Abdul Wahid and ending with Imani N. Williams-Vaughn, which nominations were received by the Senate and appeared in the
Congressional Record on January 15, 2026.

*Nomination was reported with recommendation that it be confirmed subject to the nominee’s commitment to
respond to requests to appear and testify before any duly constituted committee of the Senate.
(Nominations without an asterisk
were reported with the recommendation that they be confirmed.)
f

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND
JOINT RESOLUTIONS
The following bills and joint resolutions were introduced, read the first
and second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated:
By Mr. WHITEHOUSE (for himself, Ms.
Mr.
REED,
and
Mr.
WARREN,
MERKLEY):
S. 3721. A bill to amend the Truth in Lending Act to empower the States to set the
maximum annual percentage rates applicable to consumer credit transactions, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Ms. CORTEZ MASTO:
S. 3722. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to restore and extend certain tax credits to incentivize energy efficiency; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. THUNE (for himself and Mr.
ROUNDS):
S. 3723. A bill to require the Secretary of
the Interior to conduct a study to determine
the feasibility of constructing a project to
supply municipal, rural, and industrial water
from the Missouri River to the Western Dakota Regional Water System, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Energy and
Natural Resources.
By Ms. HIRONO (for herself and Ms.
COLLINS):

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.024

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

S. 3724. A bill to amend the Omnibus Crime
Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to include certain reporting to the uniform crime
reporting program; to the Committee on the
Judiciary.
By Mr. THUNE (for himself, Mr.
ROUNDS, and Ms. KLOBUCHAR):
S. 3725. A bill to require the Secretary of
the Interior to conduct a study to determine
the feasibility of constructing a project to
supply municipal, rural, and industrial water
to expand the capacity and reach of the
Lewis and Clark Rural Water System, Inc.
(doing business as ‘‘Lewis & Clark Regional
Water System’’), in the States of Iowa, Minnesota, and South Dakota; to the Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mr. MORAN (for himself and Mr.
BLUMENTHAL):
S. 3726. A bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to require the President to define veteran success and to develop and implement a National Veterans Strategy, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Ms. ERNST:
S. 3727. A bill to combat fraud in Federal
programs, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Finance.
By Mr. SHEEHY (for himself and Mr.
MERKLEY):
S. 3728. A bill to remove the requirement
that the Secretary of Transportation consider the committed or anticipated non-Federal funding for long distance intercity passenger rail routes under the Corridor Identification and Development Program; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
By Mr. WARNER (for himself, Mr.
TILLIS, Ms. CORTEZ MASTO, and Mr.
MARSHALL):
S. 3729. A bill to require the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) submit to Congress two reports on agreements
with pharmacy benefit managers with respect to prescription drug plans and MA–PD
plans; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. WELCH (for himself, Mr. SANDERS, Ms. SMITH, Ms. KLOBUCHAR, Mr.
FETTERMAN, and Mr. BENNET):
S. 3730. A bill to amend title XVIII of the
Social Security Act to provide Medicare coverage of ambulance services that do not include transportation; to the Committee on
Finance.
By Mr. KAINE:
S. 3731. A bill to require Federal, State,
and local law enforcement agencies to report
information related to allegations of misconduct of law enforcement officers to the
Attorney General, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. GALLEGO (for himself, Mr.
KELLY, and Mr. PADILLA):
S. 3732. A bill to amend the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act
to authorize assistance under the storage
program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mr. FETTERMAN (for himself and
Mr. MCCORMICK):
S. 3733. A bill to amend the Passport Act of
June 4, 1920 to authorize certain public libraries to collect and retain a fee for the execution of a passport application; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
By Mr. KENNEDY (for himself and Mr.
KIM):
S. 3734. A bill to address applications for
deposit insurance submitted by industrial
banks to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Mr. MERKLEY (for himself, Mr.
VAN HOLLEN, Mr. PADILLA, Ms. BLUNT
ROCHESTER, Mr. SCHIFF, Mr. WYDEN,
Mr. BENNET, and Mr. BOOKER):

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:02 Jan 30, 2026

S377

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

S. 3735. A bill to amend the Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement Act to prohibit the
use of the image of living political figures on
the America the Beautiful-the National
Parks and Federal Recreational Lands Pass;
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mr. ROUNDS (for himself and Mr.
THUNE):
S. 3736. A bill to require the Secretary of
the Interior to conduct a study to determine
the feasibility of constructing a project to
supply municipal, rural, and industrial water
to the Dakota Mainstem Regional Water
System service area in the States of South
Dakota, Iowa, Nebraska, and Minnesota, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mr. PADILLA:
S. 3737. A bill to amend the Reclamation
States Emergency Drought Relief Act of 1991
to provide financial and technical assistance
to eligible entities for the conduct of innovative approaches to voluntary water partnership agreements among multiple water users
and projects conducted by individual agricultural entities, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mr. PADILLA:
S. 3738. A bill to amend the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act to reauthorize the
large-scale water recycling and reuse program, to establish a Water Conveyance Improvement Program, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mrs. BLACKBURN (for herself, Mr.
SCHIFF, and Mr. GRASSLEY):
S. 3739. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs to carry out a demonstration project on coverage by the Department
of Veterans Affairs of over-the-counter hearing aids, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. GRAHAM (for himself and Mr.
BLUMENTHAL):
S. 3740. A bill to impose sanctions and
other measures with respect to the Government of Syria, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs.
By Mr. COTTON (for himself and Ms.
KLOBUCHAR):
S. 3741. A bill to require the Secretary of
Commerce to promulgate regulations to improve nucleic acid synthesis security, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
By Mr. MARKEY:
S. 3742. A bill to improve incident reporting with respect to certain autonomous vehicles, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
By Mr. LEE:
S. 3743. A bill to direct the Secretary of the
Interior to carry out a feasibility study on a
selective water withdrawal system at Glen
Canyon Dam, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mr. GRAHAM:
S. 3744. A bill to amend chapter 93 of title
18, United States Code, to prohibit obstruction of immigration laws by official interference; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MERKLEY (for himself and Mr.
WYDEN):
S. 3745. A bill to provide a civil remedy for
any individual whose rights have been violated by an officer or agent of U.S. Customs
and Border Protection or U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement; to the Committee
on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MORENO:
S. 3746. A bill to prohibit individuals receiving public assistance from conducting re-

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

mittance transfers; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mrs. MOODY (for herself and Mr.
BANKS):
S. 3747. A bill to amend the Higher Education Act of 1965 to recognize students who
have completed secondary school education
in a home school setting as high school graduates, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions.
By Mr. LEE:
S. 3748. A bill to terminate the United
States African Development Foundation; to
the Committee on Foreign Relations.
By Mr. MCCORMICK (for himself and
Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER):
S. 3749. A bill to lower the aggregate market value of voting and non-voting common
equity necessary for an issuer to qualify as a
well-known seasoned issuer; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Mr. BENNET (for himself, Mr.
TILLIS, and Mr. WYDEN):
S. 3750. A bill to amend title XVIII of the
Social Security Act to establish provider directory requirements, and to provide accountability for provider directory accuracy,
under Medicare Advantage; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. BENNET (for himself and Mr.
LANKFORD):
S. 3751. A bill to require the Comptroller
General of the United States to conduct a
study and submit a report on price-related
compensation and payment structures in the
prescription drug supply chain; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. LEE (for himself, Mr. SCOTT of
Florida, Mr. BUDD, Mr. BANKS, and
Mrs. MOODY):
S. 3752. A bill to amend the National Voter
Registration Act of 1993 to require proof of
United States citizenship to register an individual to vote in elections for Federal office,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Rules and Administration.
By Mr. KAINE (for himself and Mr.
PAUL):
S.J. Res. 104. A joint resolution to direct
the removal of United States Armed Forces
from hostilities within or against the Islamic Republic of Iran that have not been
authorized by Congress; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
f

SUBMISSION OF CONCURRENT AND
SENATE RESOLUTIONS
The following concurrent resolutions
and Senate resolutions were read, and
referred (or acted upon), as indicated:
By Mrs. FISCHER (for herself, Ms.
KLOBUCHAR, Mrs. HYDE-SMITH, Ms.
LUMMIS, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, Ms. SMITH,
Mrs.
BRITT,
Ms.
Ms.
HIRONO,
Ms.
BALDWIN,
Ms.
DUCKWORTH,
ERNST, Mrs. GILLIBRAND, Mrs. SHAHEEN, Ms. SLOTKIN, Mr. FETTERMAN,
Mr. DAINES, Mr. RISCH, Mr. WELCH,
Mr. RICKETTS, Mr. SCHIFF, Mr. BENNET, Mr. BOOKER, Mr. PADILLA, Mr.
HICKENLOOPER, Mr. WYDEN, Mr. JUSTICE, Mr. MORAN, Mr. TILLIS, Mr.
CRAMER, Mr. GRASSLEY, Mr. BARRASSO,
Mr.
VAN
HOLLEN,
Mr.
WARNOCK, Mr. PETERS, Mr. BOOZMAN,
Mr. LUJÁN, Mr. DURBIN, Mr. ROUNDS,
Mr. HOEVEN, Mr. KING, Mr. COONS,
Mr. MCCORMICK, Mr. YOUNG, and Mr.
SCOTT of South Carolina):
S. Res. 592. A resolution supporting the
designation of 2026 as the ‘‘International
Year of the Woman Farmer’’ to recognize
and honor the critical role of women in agriculture; considered and agreed to.

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.025

S29JAPT1

S378

By Mr. MARSHALL (for himself, Mr.
MORAN, Mr. OSSOFF, Mr. WARNOCK,
Mr. YOUNG, Mrs. HYDE-SMITH, Mrs.
GILLIBRAND, Mr. BUDD, Mr. TILLIS,
Mr. HUSTED, Mr. WHITEHOUSE, Mrs.
BLACKBURN, Mr. CRUZ, Ms. CANTWELL,
Mr. MURPHY, Mr. REED, Mr. WICKER,
Ms. WARREN, Mr. MARKEY, Mr. VAN
HOLLEN, Mr. BLUMENTHAL, Ms. BLUNT
ROCHESTER, Mr. KAINE, Ms. KLOBUCHAR, and Mr. WARNER):
S. Res. 593. A resolution honoring the victims of the 2025 Potomac River mid-air collision; considered and agreed to.
By Mr. SCHMITT (for himself and Mr.
KAINE):
S. Res. 594. A resolution supporting the
contributions of Catholic schools in the
United States and celebrating the 52nd annual National Catholic Schools Week; considered and agreed to.
f

ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS

S. 1352

At the request of Ms. HIRONO, the
name of the Senator from Colorado
(Mr. HICKENLOOPER) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1352, a bill to secure the
rights of public employees to organize,
act concertedly, and bargain collectively, which safeguard the public interest and promote the free and unobstructed flow of commerce, and for
other purposes.
S. 1374

At the request of Mr. HEINRICH, the
name of the Senator from Massachusetts (Ms. WARREN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1374, a bill to amend title
18, United States Code, to prohibit machinegun conversion devices and illegal
modifications of semiautomatic firearms, and for other purposes.

S. 128

S. 1410

At the request of Ms. KLOBUCHAR, the
name of the Senator from Maryland
(Ms. ALSOBROOKS) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1410, a bill to provide for
health coverage with no cost-sharing
for additional breast screenings for certain individuals at greater risk for
breast cancer.

S. 272

At the request of Mr. PETERS, the
name of the Senator from Washington
(Mrs. MURRAY) was added as a cosponsor of S. 272, a bill to improve the safety of infant formula through testing of
infant formula for microorganisms and
toxic elements, and for other purposes.
S. 455

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the name of the Senator from New
York (Mrs. GILLIBRAND) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 455, a bill to amend section 287 of the Immigration and Nationality Act to limit immigration enforcement actions at sensitive locations, to clarify the powers of immigration officers at sensitive locations, and
for other purposes.
S. 494

At the request of Mr. SCHMITT, the
name of the Senator from Maryland
(Ms. ALSOBROOKS) was added as a cosponsor of S. 494, a bill to establish a
national plan to coordinate research on
epilepsy, and for other purposes.
S. 1228

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

to expand access to telehealth services,
and for other purposes.

At the request of Mr. LEE, the names
of the Senator from Mississippi (Mr.
WICKER) and the Senator from Iowa
(Mr. GRASSLEY) were added as cosponsors of S. 128, a bill to amend the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 to
require proof of United States citizenship to register an individual to vote in
elections for Federal office, and for
other purposes.

At the request of Mr. RISCH, the
names of the Senator from Colorado
(Mr. HICKENLOOPER) and the Senator
from Montana (Mr. DAINES) were added
as cosponsors of S. 1228, a bill to amend
the Public Lands Corps Act of 1993 to
modify the cost-sharing requirement
for conservation projects carried out
by a qualified youth or conservation
corps, and for other purposes.
S. 1261

At the request of Mr. SCHATZ, the
names of the Senator from Washington
(Mrs. MURRAY) and the Senator from
Kentucky (Mr. MCCONNELL) were added
as cosponsors of S. 1261, a bill to amend
title XVIII of the Social Security Act

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:02 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

S. 1552

At the request of Mr. COTTON, the
name of the Senator from Kansas (Mr.
MARSHALL) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 1552, a bill to promote and protect
from discrimination living organ donors.
S. 1562

At the request of Mr. BENNET, the
name of the Senator from Florida (Mr.
SCOTT) was added as a cosponsor of S.
1562, a bill to reauthorize the Prematurity Research Expansion and Education for Mothers who deliver Infants
Early Act.
S. 1677

At the request of Ms. BALDWIN, the
name of the Senator from North Dakota (Mr. CRAMER) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1677, a bill to provide
health insurance benefits for outpatient and inpatient items and services related to the diagnosis and treatment of a congenital anomaly or birth
defect.
S. 1773

At the request of Ms. BALDWIN, the
name of the Senator from Florida (Mr.
SCOTT) was added as a cosponsor of S.
1773, a bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to reinstate the deduction for personal casualty losses as
in effect prior to the enactment of Public Law 115–97.
S. 1808

At the request of Mr. MCCORMICK, the
names of the Senator from Louisiana
(Mr. KENNEDY) and the Senator from
New Hampshire (Mrs. SHAHEEN) were
added as cosponsors of S. 1808, a bill to
permit a registered investment company to omit certain fees from the calculation of acquired fund fees and expenses, and for other purposes.
S. 1892

At the request of Ms. MURKOWSKI, the
names of the Senator from North Caro-

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

lina (Mr. TILLIS) and the Senator from
Vermont (Mr. WELCH) were added as cosponsors of S. 1892, a bill to clarify that
amounts from declinations should be
deposited in the Crime Victims Fund
and to temporarily provide additional
deposits into the Crime Victims Fund.
S. 2106

At the request of Mr. SCHUMER, his
name was added as a cosponsor of S.
2106, a bill to provide a process for
granting lawful permanent resident
status to aliens from certain countries
who meet certain eligibility requirements, and for other purposes.
S. 2212

At the request of Mr. PADILLA, the
name of the Senator from New York
(Mrs. GILLIBRAND) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2212, a bill to amend section 287 of the Immigration and Nationality Act to require all immigration enforcement officers to display
visible identification during public-facing immigration enforcement actions
and to promote transparency and accountability.
S. 2518

At the request of Mr. BENNET, the
names of the Senator from Virginia
(Mr. WARNER) and the Senator from
Montana (Mr. SHEEHY) were added as
cosponsors of S. 2518, a bill to amend
title XVIII of the Social Security Act
to revise payment for air ambulance
services under the Medicare program.
S. 3062

At the request of Mr. HAWLEY, the
name of the Senator from Virginia (Mr.
KAINE) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3062, a bill to require artificial intelligence chatbots to implement age
verification measures and make certain disclosures, and for other purposes.
S. 3108

At the request of Mr. HAWLEY, the
name of the Senator from Virginia (Mr.
KAINE) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3108, a bill to require reports regarding
artificial intelligence-related job impacts, and for other purposes.
S. 3187

At the request of Mr. WHITEHOUSE,
the name of the Senator from Connecticut (Mr. BLUMENTHAL) was added
as a cosponsor of S. 3187, a bill to provide a civil remedy for an individual
whose rights have been violated by a
person acting under Federal authority,
and for other purposes.
S. 3302

At the request of Mr. MULLIN, the
names of the Senator from Maryland
(Mr. VAN HOLLEN) and the Senator
from Arizona (Mr. GALLEGO) were
added as cosponsors of S. 3302, a bill to
amend the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act with respect to molecularly targeted pediatric cancer investigations, and for other purposes.
S. 3368

At the request of Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER, the name of the Senator from
Maryland (Ms. ALSOBROOKS) was added
as a cosponsor of S. 3368, a bill to improve patient protections and affordability under the Patient Protection

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.027

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

and Affordable Care Act, and for other
purposes.
S. 3520

At the request of Ms. LUMMIS, the
name of the Senator from South Dakota (Mr. ROUNDS) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3520, a bill to prohibit the
Secretary of Agriculture from implementing a Forest Service rule relating
to criminal prohibitions, and for other
purposes.
S. 3606

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the name of the Senator from Ohio
(Mr. MORENO) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3606, a bill to subject aliens convicted of fraud to deportation and to
bestow concurrent jurisdiction to revoke the citizenship of any naturalized
United States citizen convicted of
fraud on any court that enters such a
conviction.
S. 3653

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the name of the Senator from Indiana
(Mr. BANKS) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3653, a bill to require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to carry out
efforts to inform veterans of their
rights with regards to the receipt of
health care, benefits, and services furnished under provisions of law administered by the Secretary, and for other
purposes.
S. 3660

At the request of Mr. FETTERMAN, the
name of the Senator from Minnesota
(Ms. SMITH) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3660, a bill to amend the Truth in
Lending Act to reduce excessive credit
card late fees, and for other purposes.

Mexico (Mr. HEINRICH), the Senator
from Nevada (Ms. CORTEZ MASTO) and
the Senator from Rhode Island (Mr.
REED) were added as cosponsors of S.J.
Res. 103, a joint resolution providing
for congressional disapproval under
chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code,
of the rule submitted by the Department of Veterans Affairs relating to
‘‘Reproductive Health Services’’.
S. RES. 61

At the request of Mr. MARKEY, the
names of the Senator from Illinois (Mr.
DURBIN) and the Senator from Delaware (Mr. COONS) were added as cosponsors of S. Res. 61, a resolution expressing support for the continued value of
arms control agreements and negotiated constraints on Russian and Chinese strategic nuclear forces.
S. RES. 573

At the request of Mr. RISCH, the
name of the Senator from Ohio (Mr.
HUSTED) was added as a cosponsor of S.
Res. 573, a resolution expressing the
need for the United States’ continued
leadership on matters of religious freedom.
AMENDMENT NO. 4245

At the request of Ms. CORTEZ MASTO,
the name of the Senator from Wisconsin (Ms. BALDWIN) was added as a
cosponsor of amendment No. 4245 intended to be proposed to H.R. 7148, a
bill making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
f

STATEMENTS ON INTRODUCED
BILLS AND JOINT RESOLUTIONS

S. 3687

At the request of Ms. DUCKWORTH,
the name of the Senator from California (Mr. PADILLA) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3687, a bill to amend title
5, United States Code, to prohibit the
appointment of political appointees as
Inspectors General, and for other purposes.
S. 3720

At the request of Mr. SCHIFF, the
name of the Senator from California
(Mr. PADILLA) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3720, a bill to amend the National
Trails System Act to direct the Secretary of the Interior to conduct a
study on the feasibility of designating
the Bay Area Ridge as a national scenic trail, and for other purposes.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S.J. RES. 102

At the request of Mr. SCOTT of Florida, the names of the Senator from
Tennessee (Mrs. BLACKBURN), the Senator from Iowa (Ms. ERNST), the Senator from Kansas (Mr. MARSHALL), the
Senator from Oklahoma (Mr. MULLIN)
and the Senator from North Dakota
(Mr. CRAMER) were added as cosponsors
of S.J. Res. 102, a joint resolution disapproving the action of the District of
Columbia Council in approving the D.C.
Income and Franchise Tax Conformity
and Revision Temporary Amendment
Act of 2025.
S.J. RES. 103

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the names of the Senator from New

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:02 Jan 30, 2026

S379

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

By Mr. THUNE (for himself and
Mr. ROUNDS):
S. 3723. A bill to require the Secretary of the Interior to conduct a
study to determine the feasibility of
constructing a project to supply municipal, rural, and industrial water
from the Missouri River to the Western
Dakota Regional Water System, and
for other purposes; to the Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources.
S. 3723
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Western
South Dakota Water Supply Project Feasibility Study Act’’.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

In this Act:
(1) NON-FEDERAL PROJECT ENTITY.—The
term ‘‘non-Federal project entity’’ means
the Western Dakota Regional Water System,
Inc., a nonprofit corporation.
RURAL
WATER
SUPPLY
(2)
PROPOSED
PROJECT.—The term ‘‘proposed rural water
supply project’’ means the proposed project
to supply municipal, rural, and industrial
water from the Missouri River to the Western Dakota Regional Water System.
(3) SECRETARY.—The term ‘‘Secretary’’
means the Secretary of the Interior.
SEC. 3. WESTERN SOUTH DAKOTA WATER SUPPLY
PROJECT FEASIBILITY STUDY.
(a) STUDY.—

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary, in coordination with the non-Federal project entity,
shall carry out a study to determine the feasibility of the proposed rural water supply
project.
(2) FEASIBILITY REPORT.—After completion
of the feasibility study for the proposed rural
water supply project under paragraph (1), the
Secretary shall—
(A) develop a feasibility report that includes a recommendation of the Secretary
on—
(i) whether the proposed rural water supply
project should be authorized for construction; and
(ii) the appropriate non-Federal share of
construction costs, which shall be—
(I) at least 25 percent of the total construction costs; and
(II) determined based on an analysis of the
financial capability-to-pay the allocated
construction and operations, maintenance,
and replacement costs of the recommended
plan;
(B) submit the report under subparagraph
(A) to the Committee on Energy and Natural
Resources of the Senate and the Committee
on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives; and
(C) make the report under subparagraph
(A) publicly available, along with associated
feasibility study documents.
(3) CONSULTATION AND COOPERATION.—In addition to the non-Federal project entity, the
Secretary shall consult and cooperate with
appropriate Federal, State, Tribal, regional,
and local authorities during the conduct of
the feasibility study and development of the
feasibility report under this subsection.
(b) COST-SHARING AGREEMENT FOR FEASIBILITY STUDY COSTS.—The Secretary shall
enter into a cost-sharing agreement (or an
appropriate financial assistance agreement,
as determined by the Secretary) with the
non-Federal project entity to conduct a
study under subsection (a) that complies
with the reclamation feasibility standards.
(c) FEDERAL SHARE OF FEASIBILITY STUDY
COSTS.—The Federal share of the total costs
of carrying out the feasibility study under
subsection (a) shall not exceed 50 percent.
(d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
There is authorized to be appropriated to the
Secretary to carry out this section
$10,000,000.
(e) TERMINATION OF AUTHORITY.—The authority provided by this section expires on
the date that is 10 years after the date of enactment of this Act.

By Mr. THUNE (for himself, Mr.
ROUNDS, and Ms. KLOBUCHAR):
S. 3725. A bill to require the Secretary of the Interior to conduct a
study to determine the feasibility of
constructing a project to supply municipal, rural, and industrial water to
expand the capacity and reach of the
Lewis and Clark Rural Water System,
Inc. (doing business as ‘‘Lewis & Clark
Regional Water System’’), in the
States of Iowa, Minnesota, and South
Dakota; to the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources.
S. 3725
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Lewis &
Clark Regional Water System Expansion
Feasibility Study Act’’.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

In this Act:
(1) NON-FEDERAL PROJECT ENTITY.—The
term ‘‘non-Federal project entity’’ means—

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.029

S29JAPT1

S380

(A) the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System, Inc. (doing business as ‘‘Lewis & Clark
Regional Water System’’); and
(B) any nonprofit successor entity to the
corporation described in subparagraph (A).
RURAL
WATER
SUPPLY
(2)
PROPOSED
PROJECT.—The term ‘‘proposed rural water
supply project’’ means the proposed project
to supply municipal, rural, and industrial
water to expand the capacity and reach of
the Lewis & Clark Regional Water System in
the States of Iowa, Minnesota, and South
Dakota.
(3) SECRETARY.—The term ‘‘Secretary’’
means the Secretary of the Interior.
SEC. 3. LEWIS & CLARK REGIONAL WATER SYSTEM
EXPANSION
FEASIBILITY
STUDY.
(a) STUDY.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary, in coordi-

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

nation with the non-Federal project entity,
shall carry out a study to determine the feasibility of the proposed rural water supply
project.
(2) FEASIBILITY REPORT.—After completion
of the feasibility study for the proposed rural
water supply project under paragraph (1), the
Secretary shall—
(A) develop a feasibility report that includes a recommendation of the Secretary
on—
(i) whether the proposed rural water supply
project should be authorized for construction; and
(ii) the appropriate non-Federal share of
construction costs, which shall be—
(I) at least 25 percent of the total construction costs; and
(II) determined based on an analysis of the
financial capability-to-pay the allocated
construction and operations, maintenance,
and replacement costs of the recommended
plan;
(B) submit the report under subparagraph
(A) to the Committee on Energy and Natural
Resources of the Senate and the Committee
on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives; and
(C) make the report under subparagraph
(A) publicly available, along with associated
feasibility study documents.
(3) CONSULTATION AND COOPERATION.—In addition to the non-Federal project entity, the
Secretary shall consult and cooperate with
appropriate Federal, State, Tribal, regional,
and local authorities during the conduct of
the feasibility study and development of the
feasibility report under this subsection.
(b) COST-SHARING AGREEMENT FOR FEASIBILITY STUDY COSTS.—The Secretary shall
enter into a cost-sharing agreement (or an
appropriate financial assistance agreement,
as determined by the Secretary) with the
non-Federal project entity to conduct a
study under subsection (a) that complies
with the reclamation feasibility standards.
(c) FEDERAL SHARE OF FEASIBILITY STUDY
COSTS.—The Federal share of the total costs
of carrying out the feasibility study under
subsection (a) shall not exceed 50 percent.
(d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
There is authorized to be appropriated to the
Secretary to carry out this section
$10,000,000.
(e) TERMINATION OF AUTHORITY.—The authority provided by this section expires on
the date that is 10 years after the date of enactment of this Act.

By Mr. PADILLA:
S. 3737. A bill to amend the Reclamation States Emergency Drought Relief
Act of 1991 to provide financial and
technical assistance to eligible entities
for the conduct of innovative approaches to voluntary water partnership agreements among multiple water

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:02 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

users and projects conducted by individual agricultural entities, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on
Energy and Natural Resources.
Mr. President, I rise today to introduce the ‘‘GROW SMART Act’’. This
bill would fund the design and development of voluntary demonstration
projects for innovative agricultural
water efficiency measures and agricultural partnerships with municipal, industrial, and commercial entities.
Our water supply deficit in California
and the West is growing increasingly
severe, and we need cost-effective adaptation strategies. Studies have shown
that agricultural-sector water conservation approaches can be among the
most cost-effective strategies available. They cost only $385 to $417 per
acre-foot saved, as compared to thousands of dollars per acre-foot for most
water supply projects.
For example, one potential project
could replace some of the alfalfa that
an Arizona integrated dairy relies on
for forage with hydroponically-grown
sprouted grain. The grain could be
grown on-site to keep the land in production. If the capital cost of the hydroponic facilities is amortized over
their 20-year expected life, the cost per
acre-foot of water savings is $200–$500.
Other examples include low water use
crops like paulownia and other alfalfa
substitutes; a mesquite-like crop that
could provide a domestic, low-cost alternative for paper products; guayule,
a rubber substitute; and so on.
If market prices governed water investments, cities and industries would
be investing in these low-cost agricultural water-efficiency projects and
sharing the benefits with agriculture.
The bill seeks to overcome barriers to
introducing market incentives into
Western water in a way that is respectful of and profitable to holders of senior water rights.
Barriers like distrust and lack of information often prevent market pricing from influencing water investments. Farmers are often wary about
outreach from cities and industrial and
commercial entities, especially given
the legacy of ‘‘buy-and-dry’’ efforts
where wealthier urban areas have
bought virtually all the water rights in
rural areas and completely dried up the
communities.
Relying completely on voluntary efforts, the bill would authorize Federal
funding support to demonstrate that
there are agricultural water efficiency
measures, including switching to low
water use crops, that could reduce
water use by 25–80% and continue to
support farmers and rural communities
by keeping land in production:
The bill would preclude ‘‘buy-anddry’’ by requiring that demonstration
projects keep agricultural land in production for the majority of the growing
season (or the majority of years of the
agreement for drought-year agreements).
The bill would also prioritize projects
that would dedicate a portion of the

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

water savings back to the relevant irrigation district or broader agricultural
community.
A few farmers in each area could test
out which measures work and at what
yield and cost; the bill would only fund
practices/crops without a demonstrated
local track record. Once they have
learned about the costs and benefits of
these voluntary partnerships on small
demonstration plots, farmers can decide whether they want to pursue them
further.
Finally, the bill would authorize $5
million per year for 7 years to fund the
development of these projects. Reclamation, with its experience with
WaterSMART and municipal partnerships with other entities, would take
the lead on project development.
USDA, with its expertise in agriculture, would fund project implementation.
Because cities and industries can pay
for the investments in these projects
once they have been demonstrated to
be effective, these projects are much
less costly for the federal budget than
buying out water rights or relying
completely on paying for expensive
water infrastructure.
I believe that given the magnitude of
our water supply deficit in many Western states, including in the Colorado
Basin, it is well worth trying innovative demonstration projects that could
help meet our water needs in a
costeffective manner.
Thank you, Mr. President. I yield the
floor.
By Mr. PADILLA:
S. 3738. A bill to amend the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act to
reauthorize the large-scale water recycling and reuse program, to establish a
Water Conveyance Improvement Program, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
Mr. President, I rise today to introduce the ‘‘MORE Water Act’’.
The California Department of Water
Resources estimates that the drinking
water deficit will reach 6 million acre
feet of water per year by 2040—enough
drinking water for 36 million people.
The Making Our Communities Resilient through Enhancing Water for Agriculture, Technology, the Environment, and Residences Act (MORE
WATER Act) would help fill this deficit
by reauthorizing expiring Bureau of
Reclamation programs that support
the development of new water supply
and recycling projects and by creating
a new federal grant program to help repair California’s water delivery system.
WATER RECYCLING PROGRAMS

The MORE WATER Act would reauthorize Reclamation’s large-scale recycled water program, providing federal
grants for up to 25% of the cost of these
recycling projects. Multiple water districts in cities across Southern California and the Bay Area have largescale water recycling projects (which
cost $500 million or more) that together could create over half a million

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.032

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

acre-feet of water per year, enough
water for 3 million people, including
Metropolitan Water District’s project
that involves a collaboration with Arizona and Nevada to work together to
address water shortages on the Colorado River. The program benefits water
supply as well as the environment by
reducing the need to divert water from
rivers and the Delta.
California also has dozens of other
water recycling projects for which the
bill would reauthorize federal grants
for up to 25% of the costs. The MORE
WATER Act also increases the cap on
funding for these projects to $50 million.
Furthermore, the bill would reauthorize a program that funds in-stream
and floodplain habitat restoration and
other projects to benefit threatened
and endangered salmon and other fish
species.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

IMPROVING CALIFORNIA’S WATER DELIVERY
SYSTEM

As more and more of California’s precipitation comes from a few major atmospheric rivers, restoring the capacity of the California Aqueduct and
other large canals is critical in order to
capture this precipitation and move it
to places where it can be stored in the
ground for future use. To support this
effort, the bill would create a new
multi-benefit conveyance program that
would provide federal grants for up to
30% of the cost of restoring these canals. Additionally, the new program
would issue federal grants for up to
20% of the projects’ costs to provide environmental benefits and/or safe drinking water benefits for the many low-income communities in the San Joaquin
Valley and Southern California.
Designing projects for multiple benefits can incentivize the inclusion of
win-win features that benefit both
water supply and either the environment or drinking water for low-income
communities. For example, the voluntary buyout of lands adjoining the
canals and conversion to significant
blocks of terrestrial habitat for native
species in the San Joaquin Valley consistent with California’s Mult-Benefit
Land Repurposing Program could save
hundreds of millions of dollars in additional repair costs for the canals by
liming further groundwater pumping
while simultaneously advancing important environmental goals.
Furthermore, water districts can be
quite creative in delivering safe drinking water to low-income communities
if incentivized to do so. For example,
the Antelope Valley-East Kern Water
Agency exchanged some of its water
supplies to low-income communities
along the California Aqueduct in return for state funding of a pipeline on
the western edge of the Mojave Desert.
BUILDING PROJECTS FASTER

Besides authorizing federal funding,
the bill also expedites Congressional
approval for these projects so they can
be built faster and cheaper. The bill reauthorizes an expired programmatic
approval for water recycling projects

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:02 Jan 30, 2026

S381

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

and establishes a new programmatic
approval so Congress does not have to
enact specific bills for every project.
This can trim five years or more off the
process of developing projects and getting federal funding, without any reduction in the environmental reviews
that projects must undergo.
I want to thank Congressman
VALADAO (R–CA) for working with me
on this effort.
Thank you, Mr. President. I yield the
floor.
f

SUBMITTED RESOLUTIONS
SENATE
RESOLUTION
592—SUPPORTING THE DESIGNATION OF
2026 AS THE ‘‘INTERNATIONAL
YEAR OF THE WOMAN FARMER’’
TO RECOGNIZE AND HONOR THE
CRITICAL ROLE OF WOMEN IN
AGRICULTURE
Mrs. FISCHER (for herself, Ms. KLOBUCHAR, Mrs. HYDE-SMITH, Ms. LUMMIS,
Ms. ALSOBROOKS, Ms. SMITH, Ms.
HIRONO, Mrs. BRITT, Ms. DUCKWORTH,
Ms. BALDWIN, Ms. ERNST, Mrs. GILLIBRAND, Mrs. SHAHEEN, Ms. SLOTKIN, Mr.
FETTERMAN, Mr. DAINES, Mr. RISCH,
Mr. WELCH, Mr. RICKETTS, Mr. SCHIFF,
Mr. BENNET, Mr. BOOKER, Mr. PADILLA,
Mr. HICKENLOOPER, Mr. WYDEN, Mr.
JUSTICE, Mr. MORAN, Mr. TILLIS, Mr.
CRAMER, Mr. GRASSLEY, Mr. BARRASSO,
Mr. VAN HOLLEN, Mr. WARNOCK, Mr.
PETERS, Mr. BOOZMAN, Mr. LUJÁN, Mr.
DURBIN, Mr. ROUNDS, Mr. HOEVEN, Mr.
KING, Mr. COONS, Mr. MCCORMICK, Mr.
YOUNG, and Mr. SCOTT of South Carolina) submitted the following resolution; which was considered and agreed
to:
S. RES. 592
Whereas the United States proudly recognizes its agricultural heritage and acknowledges the vital role that women have played
in advancing agriculture both domestically
and globally;
Whereas women are essential to agriculture, serving as leaders on and off the
farm, with more than 1,200,000 female agricultural producers in the United States comprising 36 percent of the agricultural producers of the United States;
Whereas, in addition to their leadership in
farming and ranching operations, women in
agriculture continue to make significant
contributions across a wide range of sectors,
including research and development, manufacturing, sales and distribution, agricultural education, agribusiness, and advocacy,
benefitting communities in the United
States and around the world;
Whereas 2026 has been designated as the
International Year of the Woman Farmer;
Whereas women professionals and leaders
in agriculture in the United States should be
recognized and celebrated for their contributions during this designated year: Now,
therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) supports the designation of 2026 as the
‘‘International Year of the Woman Farmer’’;
(2) recognizes the critical role of women in
agriculture; and
(3) encourages all citizens to—
(A) honor and recognize the contributions
of women working in agriculture; and

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(B) celebrate the positive impact these
women have on the food systems and agricultural workforce of the United States by encouraging and empowering women to—
(i) pursue careers in agriculture, a high-demand and essential field;
(ii) cultivate leadership opportunities; and
(iii) help feed a growing and hungry world.
f

SENATE
RESOLUTION
593—HONORING THE VICTIMS OF THE 2025
POTOMAC RIVER MID-AIR COLLISION
Mr. MARSHALL (for himself, Mr.
MORAN, Mr. OSSOFF, Mr. WARNOCK, Mr.
YOUNG, Mrs. HYDE-SMITH, Mrs. GILLIBRAND, Mr. BUDD, Mr. TILLIS, Mr.
HUSTED, Mr. WHITEHOUSE, Mrs. BLACKBURN, Mr. CRUZ, Ms. CANTWELL, Mr.
MURPHY, Mr. REED, Mr. WICKER, Ms.
WARREN, Mr. MARKEY, Mr. VAN HOLLEN, Mr. BLUMENTHAL, Ms. BLUNT
ROCHESTER, Mr. KAINE, Ms. KLOBUCHAR,
and Mr. WARNER) submitted the following resolution; which was considered and agreed to:
S. RES. 593
Whereas, on January 29, 2025, a United
States Army Black Hawk helicopter and a
passenger aircraft, operated as American
Airlines Flight 5342 from Wichita, Kansas, to
Washington, D.C., collided in flight above
the Potomac River near Ronald Reagan
Washington National Airport;
Whereas this tragedy took the lives of all
64 passengers and crew aboard the airliner
and the lives of the 3 crew members aboard
the helicopter, including individuals from
Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Indiana,
Kansas, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Mississippi, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Virginia, and several foreign countries;
Whereas 11 young United States figure
skating athletes, along with their parents
and coaches, were among the victims of the
collision;
Whereas 3 United States Army soldiers,
who selflessly chose to serve and defend their
country, lost their lives in this tragic accident;
Whereas 78 agencies and organizations responded in the aftermath of the January 29,
2025 mid-air collision, including first responders of the District of Columbia Fire and
Emergency Medical Services Department,
the Metropolitan Police Department of the
District of Columbia, the Metropolitan
Washington Airports Authority Fire and
Rescue Department, the United States Coast
Guard, the Maryland State Police, and other
local, State, and Federal agencies, all of
which acted promptly and selflessly in responding to the disaster and assisting in the
recovery efforts;
Whereas Federal, State, and local officials
have cooperated to conduct a thorough investigation of this incident;
Whereas countless individuals suffered the
loss of a spouse, parent, sibling, friend, family member, or loved one; and
Whereas the lives of those lost will be remembered and cherished by those who loved
them: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) honors the memory of all victims of the
2025 Potomac River mid-air collision near
Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, recognizing their lives and contributions to their families and the United States
of America;
(2) offers sincere condolences to the families, loved ones, and friends of those who lost
their lives in this tragic incident;

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.036

S29JAPT1

S382

(3) acknowledges the bravery and professionalism of the more than 1,700 first responders
and
emergency
personnel,
servicemembers, medical professionals, and
investigators who assisted in the rescue and
recovery efforts following the collision;
(4) expresses its commitment to honoring
and supporting the families affected by this
tragedy; and
(5) expresses its commitment to translating the safety lessons learned from the
collision into action to prevent future incidents and ensure a similar crash does not
happen again.
f

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SENATE
RESOLUTION
594—SUPPORTING THE CONTRIBUTIONS
OF CATHOLIC SCHOOLS IN THE
UNITED
STATES
AND
CELEBRATING THE 52ND ANNUAL NATIONAL
CATHOLIC
SCHOOLS
WEEK
Mr. SCHMITT (for himself and Mr.
KAINE) submitted the following resolution; which was considered and agreed
to:
S. RES. 594
Whereas Catholic schools in the United
States are internationally acclaimed for
their academic excellence and provide approximately 1,700,000 students with more
than an exceptional scholastic education;
Whereas Catholic schools instill a broad,
values-added education, emphasizing the
life-long development of moral, intellectual,
physical, and social values in young people
in the United States;
Whereas Catholic schools serve the United
States by providing a diverse student population from all regions of the United States
and all socioeconomic backgrounds with a
strong academic and moral foundation, including, according to the 2024–2025 National
Catholic Education Association survey of elementary and secondary Catholic schools in
the United States—
(1) 34.9 percent of students from racial minority backgrounds;
(2) 15.4 percent of students of Hispanic heritage; and
(3) 21.8 percent from non-Catholic families;
Whereas Catholic schools are an affordable
option for parents, particularly in underserved urban areas;
Whereas Catholic schools produce students
who are strongly dedicated to their faith,
values, families, and communities by providing an intellectually stimulating environment that promotes spiritual, character, and
moral development;
Whereas Catholic schools are committed to
community service, producing graduates who
hold ‘‘helping others’’ among their core values;
Whereas the total Catholic school student
enrollment for the 2024–2025 academic year is
approximately 1,700,000, and the studentteacher ratio is 10 to 1, according to the 2024–
2025 National Catholic Education Association survey of elementary and secondary
Catholic schools in the United States;
Whereas the Catholic high school graduation rate is 98.6 percent, with 83.7 percent of
graduates attending 4-year colleges;
Whereas the week of January 25, 2026, to
January 31, 2026, has been designated as ‘‘National Catholic Schools Week’’ by the National Catholic Educational Association and
the United States Conference of Catholic
Bishops;
Whereas, in 2026, National Catholic Schools
Week marks a significant milestone and
celebrates its 52nd anniversary, having been
first established in 1974; and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

Whereas the theme for National Catholic
Schools Week 2026 is ‘‘Catholic Schools:
United in Faith and Community’’, which reflects the fact that Catholic schools, united
in their faith, expand beyond the walls of the
classroom to include the parents and families of students as integral parts of the
school community: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) supports the goals of National Catholic
Schools Week, an event—
(A) cosponsored by the National Catholic
Educational Association and the United
States Conference of Catholic Bishops; and
(B) established to recognize the vital contributions of the thousands of Catholic elementary and secondary schools in the United
States;
(2) applauds the National Catholic Educational Association and the United States
Conference of Catholic Bishops on their selection of a theme that all can celebrate; and
(3) supports—
(A) the dedication of Catholic schools, including the students, parents, and teachers
of such schools, across the United States toward academic excellence; and
(B) the key role they play in promoting
and ensuring a brighter, stronger future for
the United States.
f

AMENDMENTS SUBMITTED AND
PROPOSED
SA 4253. Mr. CRUZ submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes;
which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4254. Ms. CORTEZ MASTO submitted
an amendment intended to be proposed by
her to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4255. Mr. BUDD submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4256. Mr. BUDD submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4257. Mr. CRUZ submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4258. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4259. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4260. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4261. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4262. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4263. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4264. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4265. Mr. SCOTT of Florida submitted
an amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was
ordered to lie on the table.

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

SA 4266. Mr. BENNET submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4267. Mr. BENNET submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4268. Mr. BENNET submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4269. Mr. BENNET submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie
on the table.
SA 4270. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4271. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4272. Mr. PAUL (for himself and Mr.
LEE) submitted an amendment intended to
be proposed by him to the bill H.R. 7148,
supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4273. Ms. COLLINS submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by her
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4274. Mrs. SHAHEEN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by her
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4275. Mr. LEE submitted an amendment
intended to be proposed by him to the bill
H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on
the table.
SA 4276. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4277. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4278. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4279. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4280. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4281. Mr. BLUMENTHAL submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4282. Mr. BLUMENTHAL (for himself
and Ms. HIRONO) submitted an amendment
intended to be proposed by him to the bill
H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on
the table.
SA 4283. Mr. BLUMENTHAL (for himself
and Ms. HIRONO) submitted an amendment
intended to be proposed by him to the bill
H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on
the table.
SA 4284. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4285. Mr. SANDERS submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
SA 4286. Mr. LEE submitted an amendment
intended to be proposed by him to the bill
H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on
the table.
SA 4287. Mr. MERKLEY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.038

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

to the bill H.R. 7148, supra; which was ordered to lie on the table.
f

Relief Fund are insufficient to comply with
the requirements under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.).

TEXT OF AMENDMENTS
SA 4253. Mr. CRUZ submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:

SA 4256. Mr. BUDD submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:

At the appropriate place in division E, insert the following:
SEC. lll. None of the funds made available for obligation or expenditure by the District of Columbia government by this Act or
any other Act may be used to carry out title
IX of the Fiscal Year 1997 Budget Support
Act of 1996 (sec. 50–2209.01 et seq., D.C. Official Code).

SA 4254. Ms. CORTEZ MASTO submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by her to the bill H.R. 7148,
making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes;
which was ordered to lie on the table;
as follows:
On page 1235, between lines 21 and 22, insert
the following:
SEC. 555. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this division or
by Public Law 119–21, and none of the fees
collected by the Department of Homeland
Security, may be used by any component of
the Department of Homeland Security while
carrying out any civil immigration enforcement activity under the immigration laws
(as defined in section 101(17) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(17)))—
(1) to detain a citizen of the United States;
or
(2) to deport a citizen of the United States
from the United States.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SA 4255. Mr. BUDD submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
In title V of Division H, insert after section 554 the following:
SEC. 555.
(a) Subject to subsections (b) and (c), not
later than 5 business days after the date on
which the Administrator of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency designates
an application for an award under section 404
or 408 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C.
5170c, 5174) using amounts made available
under this Act as pending approval by the
Secretary of Homeland Security (referred to
in this section as the ‘‘Secretary’’), the Secretary shall obligate the amounts for that
application.
(b) The Secretary may withhold an obligation described in subsection (a) if, during the
5 business day-period following the date described in subsection (a), the Secretary submits to the Committee on Appropriations of
the Senate and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives a certification detailing specific and evidencebased findings of material fraud or legal ineligibility that preclude immediate obligation.
(c) Subsection (a) shall not apply during a
period in which the Secretary determines
that the amounts available in the Disaster

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

S383

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. llll. The Secretary of Health and
Human Services (in this section referred to
as the ‘‘Secretary’’) shall collect data relating to the amount of Federal and State expenditures under the Medicaid program established under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) that are attributable to costs incurred for providing
medical assistance for inpatient hospital
services, outpatient hospital services, and
for services received at a hospital emergency
room (without regard to whether such services are emergency services (as defined by
the Secretary)) related to marijuana use (as
defined by the Secretary). Not later than 1
year after the date of enactment of this division, the Secretary shall submit a report to
Congress that includes such data and recommendations for such legislation and administrative action as the Secretary determines appropriate.

SA 4257. Mr. CRUZ submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. ll. REPEAL OF COMPREHENSIVE POLICING AND JUSTICE REFORM AMENDMENT ACT OF 2022.

The Comprehensive Policing and Justice
Reform Amendment Act of 2022 (D.C. Law 24–
345) is repealed, and any provision of law
amended or repealed by that Act shall be restored or revived as if that Act had not been
enacted into law.

SA 4258. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On
page
1147,
line
24,
strike
‘‘$10,036,362,000’’ and insert ‘‘$9,551,362,000’’.

SA 4259. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1132, line 21, strike ‘‘$316,295,000’’
and insert ‘‘$387,795’’.
On page 1133, line 14, insert before the period at the end the following: ‘‘: Provided further, That notwithstanding the previous provisos, $42,900,000 shall be made available for
the Office of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties
and $28,600,000 shall be made available for the
Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman and such amounts shall be obligated to restore the staff levels set forth in
the Department of Homeland Security Ap-

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

propriations Act, 2024 (division C of Public
Law 118–47)’’.

SA 4260. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1201, strike lines 12 through 18 and
insert the following:
(f) No funds may be reprogrammed or
transferred to, from, or within the accounts
covering the expenses of U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement or U.S. Customs
and Border Protection.

SA 4261. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1235, between lines 21 and 22, insert
the following
SEC. 555. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this Act or by
any other Act may be used by the Department of Homeland Security to support immigration enforcement operations carried out
by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement or U.S. Customs and Border Protection
if any Department of Homeland Security employee fails to cooperate with an investigation by an appropriate State or local official
or agency relating to the use of force by any
employee of U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement or U.S. Customs and Border
Protection.

SA 4262. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1235, between lines 21 and 22, insert
the following:
SEC. 555. (a) The attorney general of a
State, or another authorized State officer,
alleging a violation of a use of force policy
that harms such State or its residents shall
have standing to bring a civil action against
the Secretary of Homeland Security on behalf of such State or the residents of such
State, as parens patriae, in an appropriate
district court of the United States to obtain
appropriate injunctive relief.
(b) The court shall advance on the docket
and expedite the disposition of a civil action
filed pursuant to subsection (a) to the greatest extent practicable.
(c) For purposes of subsection (a), a State
or its residents shall be considered to have
been harmed if the State or its residents experience harm, including financial harm in
excess of $100.

SA 4263. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1235, between lines 21 and 22, insert
the following:
SEC. 555. All of the terms, conditions, purposes, and amounts provided in the explanatory statement accompanying this division,
including the amounts for programs,

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.040

S29JAPT1

S384

projects, and activities beginning on page 118
of the explanatory statement, shall have the
force and effect of law, except that the language set forth in House Report 119–173 shall
carry no legal force and effect.

SA 4264. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in division H, insert the following:
SEC. ll. The Secretary of Homeland Security shall make publicly available on the
website of the Department of Homeland Security any request for reprogramming or
transfer of funds and any final spend plan for
the Department of Homeland Security and
any component of the Department for fiscal
year 2026, and for each fiscal year thereafter,
not later than 14 days after final agency action.

SA 4265. Mr. SCOTT of Florida submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by him to the bill H.R. 7148,
making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes;
which was ordered to lie on the table;
as follows:
At the appropriate place in the matter preceding division A, insert the following:
SEC. ll. STRIKE OF EARMARKS.

Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Act, none of the funds provided under
any division of this Act may be used for Congressionally Directed Spending projects.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SA 4266. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1176, after line 17, add the following:
SEC. 239. (a) In this section—
(1) the term ‘‘agency’’ means an Executive
agency (as defined in section 105 of title 5,
United States Code);
(2) the term ‘‘covered employee’’ means—
(A) a covered immigration officer (as defined in section 236(g)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended by section 2), whose official duties put the covered
employee at greater risk of being the target
of a threat, intimidation, harassment, stalking, or a similar action;
(B) a spouse, child, or parent of an employee described in subparagraph (A); and
(C) any other familial relative of such employee who has the same permanent residence as such employee;
(3) the term ‘‘privacy-enhancing services’’
means any software or hardware solution,
technical process, technique, or other technological means of mitigating privacy risks
arising from data processing, including by
eliminating, reducing, or suppressing personal information, including restricted personal information (as defined in section
119(b)(1) of title 18, United States Code).
(b) Section 236 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1226) is amended by
adding at the end the following:
‘‘(g) IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENT FOR IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL.—
‘‘(1) DEFINITIONS.—In this subsection:
‘‘(A) COVERED IMMIGRATION OFFICER.—The
term ‘covered immigration officer’ means—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘(i) any officer, agent, or employee of U.S.
Customs and Border Protection;
‘‘(ii) any officer, agent, or employee of U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement; and
‘‘(iii) any officer, agent, or individual authorized, deputized, or designated under Federal law, regulation, or agreement to perform immigration enforcement functions, including pursuant to section 287(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C.
1357(g)) or any other delegation or agreement
with the Department of Homeland Security.
‘‘(B) IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT FUNCTION.—The term ‘immigration enforcement
function’—
‘‘(i) means any activity that involves the
direct exercise of Federal immigration enforcement through public-facing actions, including a patrol, stop, arrest, search, interview to determine immigration status, raid,
checkpoint, or the service of a judicial or administrative warrant; and
‘‘(ii) does not include any covert, nonpublic
operation.
‘‘(2) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in
paragraph (3), any covered immigration officer who is conducting an immigration enforcement function and any Federal or nonFederal law enforcement officer who is providing direct support to such immigration
enforcement function shall visibly display—
‘‘(A) such covered immigration officer’s
last name and another individual identifier
that is unique to such individual;
‘‘(B) the name of the Federal law enforcement entity or other organization employing
such covered immigration officer; and
‘‘(C) the face of such covered immigration
officer.
‘‘(3) EXCEPTION.—The requirement under
paragraph (2) shall not apply to individuals
referred to in such paragraph who—
‘‘(A) are engaged in investigative activity
involving the use of an assumed name or
cover identity;
‘‘(B) are engaged in planned tactical operations (such as high-risk situations, responding to hostage incidents, terrorism response,
narcotics raids, hazardous surveillance, sniper incidents, armed suicidal persons, barricaded suspects, high-risk felony warrant
service, fugitives refusing to surrender, and
active shooter incidents) by specifically
trained law enforcement personnel to a highrisk situation that requires the application
of specialized lifesaving tools, tactics, and
capabilities which exceed those immediately
available to the officer or agent of the Department of Homeland Security who is conducting an immigration enforcement function and any Federal or non-Federal law enforcement officer who is providing direct
support to such immigration enforcement
function in the regular performance of the
officer’s or agent’s official duties; or
‘‘(C) are engaged in a law enforcement
function that necessitate the use of face coverings, as required under section 1960.10(b) of
title 29, Code of Federal Regulations.’’.
(c) Nothing in this section or in the amendment made by this section may be construed
to prohibit, restrain, or limit—
(1) the lawful investigation or reporting by
the press of any unlawful activity or misconduct alleged to have been committed by a
covered employee;
(2) the lawful disclosure of information relating to a covered employee or the immediate family of a covered employee regarding
matters of public concern; or
(3) information that the covered employee
or the employer of the covered employee voluntarily publishes on the internet after the
date of the enactment of this Act.

SA 4267. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making fur-

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

ther consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1176, after line 17, add the following:
SEC. 239. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to detain a child (as
defined in section 101(b)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(b)(1)))
or a primary caregiver of a child unless the
Secretary of Homeland Security demonstrates that it is unreasonable or not practicable to place such child or caregiver in a
community-based supervision program.

SA 4268. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1176, after line 17, add the following:
SEC. 239. (a) In this section, the term ‘‘sensitive location’’ includes any physical space
located within 1,000 feet of—
(1) any medical or mental healthcare facility, including any hospital, health care practitioner’s office, accredited health clinic,
vaccination or testing site, or emergent or
urgent care facility, or community health
center;
(2) any public or private school (including
preschools, primary schools, secondary
schools, and postsecondary schools (including colleges and universities)), any site of an
early childhood education program, any
other institution of learning, such as vocational or trade schools, and any other site
where individuals who are unemployed or underemployed may apply for or receive workforce training;
(3) any scholastic or education-related activity or event, including field trips and
interscholastic events;
(4) any school bus or school bus stop during
periods when school children are present on
the bus or at the stop;
(5) any recreational facility for children,
such as playgrounds and formal recreational
facilities;
(6) any child care focused facility, including child care centers, before or after school
care centers, foster care facilities, and group
homes for children;
(7) any location where disaster or emergency response and relief is being provided
by Federal, State, or local entities, such as
the distribution of emergency supplies, food,
and water; any place of temporary shelter;
any place along an evacuation route; and
any site where registration for disaster-related assistance or family reunification is
taking place;
(8) any location of any organization that—
(A) assists children, pregnant women, victims of crime or abuse, or individuals with
significant mental or physical disabilities,
including domestic violence shelters, child
advocacy centers, facilities that serve disabled persons, drug or alcohol counseling and
treatment facilities, rape crisis centers, supervised visitation centers, family justice
centers, victims’ services providers, and
community-based organizations providing
social services; or
(B) provides disaster or emergency social
services and assistance, or services for individuals experiencing homelessness, including
food banks, pantries, or other establishments
distributing food, and shelters;
(9) any church, synagogue, mosque, or
other place of worship or religious study,
such as buildings rented for the purpose of

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.043

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

religious services, or a temporary facility or
location where such activities are taking
place;
(10) any sites of a funeral, graveside ceremony, wedding, or any site where other religious or civil ceremonies or observances are
occurring;
(11) any site during the occurrence of a
public demonstration, such as a march,
rally, or parade;
(12) any Federal, State, or local courthouse, including the office of an individual’s
legal counsel or representative, and a probation office;
(13) any congressional district office;
(14) any Social Security office;
(15) any public assistance offices, including
locations where individuals may apply for or
receive unemployment compensation or report violations of labor and employment
laws;
(16) the indoor or outdoor premises of a department of motor vehicles;
(17) a polling place, including any building
or infrastructure where voting takes place
during an election;
(18) a labor union hall or any other unionoperated building or office where registered
applicants are referred in rotation to jobs;
(19) any public library; or
(20) any other locations specified by the
Secretary of Homeland Security.
(b) No Federal funds may be used by the
Department of Homeland Security to engage
in any immigration enforcement action, including any apprehension, arrest, interview,
request for identification, investigative stop,
search, or surveillance for the purposes of
immigration enforcement (including enforcement actions that are part of a joint case led
by another law enforcement agency), that
takes place at, is focused on or occurs within
1,000 feet of a sensitive location.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SA 4269. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1176, after line 17, add the following:
SEC. 239. (a)(1) The Secretary of Homeland
Security shall enhance the performance, professionalism, and integrity of immigration
enforcement officers and agents by establishing strengthened hiring and screening
standards for all newly hired officers and
agents.
(2) The standards required under paragraph
(1) shall, at a minimum, require that each
applicant—
(A) be at least 20 years of age at the time
of application and at least 21 years of age at
the start of the next scheduled basic training
academy;
(B) possess a high school diploma or equivalent credential at the time of application;
(C) possess authorization to live and work
in the United States, as demonstrated by
documentation sufficient to satisfy employment eligibility verification requirements
under Federal law;
(D) possess not fewer than 5 years of prior
law enforcement experience with a Federal,
State, local, Tribal, or territorial law enforcement agency;
(E) hold a bachelor’s degree from an accredited institution of higher education; and
(F) undergo comprehensive background investigations that include—
(i) criminal history checks;
(ii) reviews of prior law enforcement or
military service, including disciplinary
records and sustained complaints;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

S385

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

(iii) screening for any history of domestic
violence, sexual assault, or other violent
conduct;
(iv) drug use screening consistent with
Federal law;
(v) reviews for affiliations with terrorist
organizations, violent extremist groups, or
hate-based organizations;
(vi) reviews of publicly available social
media and online activity for evidence of
bias, extremism, discriminatory conduct, or
advocacy of violence; and
(vii) psychological suitability assessments
to ensure fitness for duty, sound judgment,
and the ability to safely interact with the
public.
(b)(1) The Secretary of Homeland Security
shall establish and enforce appearance standards applicable to immigration enforcement
officers and agents.
(2) The standards required under paragraph
(1) shall prohibit—
(A) any body markings that are vulgar, obscene, sexually explicit, gang-related, prejudicial, or otherwise reasonably likely to
bring discredit upon the Department of
Homeland Security or the law enforcement
profession;
(B) body markings located on or above the
collarbone; and
(C) body markings located on or below the
wrist bone, except that an officer or agent
may display one band-style marking on one
finger, not exceeding 8 millimeters in width.

SA 4270. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1176, after line 17, add the following:
SEC. 239. (a) The Secretary of Homeland
Security shall ensure each immigration enforcement officer or agent who interacts
with members of the public is equipped with
a body-worn camera.
(b) Except as provided under subsections
(c) and (d), an immigration enforcement officer or agent shall wear and activate a bodyworn camera, or a dash camera if the officer’s vehicle is equipped with such a camera,
while—
(1) responding to a call for service;
(2) entering any premises for the purpose of
enforcing the law or investigating possible
violations of law;
(3) conducting a welfare check, except for
motorist assistance; or
(4) engaging in any interaction with a
member of the public initiated by the officer
or agent, whether consensual or nonconsensual, for the purpose of enforcing the law or
investigating possible violations of law.
(c)(1) A camera need not be activated while
an immigration enforcement officer or agent
en route to a call for service, but shall be activated shortly before the officer or agent arrives at the scene.
(2) An officer or agent working in an undercover capacity is not required to wear or
activate a body-worn camera.
(d) An immigration enforcement officer or
agent may deactivate a body-worn camera—
(1) to avoid recording personal information
that is not related to an immigration case;
(2) while working on an unrelated assignment;
(3) during a prolonged break in an incident;
or
(4) during administrative, tactical, or management discussions when members of the
public are not present.
(e)(1) If an immigration enforcement officer or agent fails to activate a body-worn or

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

dash camera as required under this section,
or tampers with camera footage or operation
when activation is required—
(A) there shall be a permissive inference,
in any investigation or legal proceeding
other than a criminal prosecution of the officer or agent, that the missing footage would
have reflected misconduct; and
(B) any statements or conduct offered
through the officer or agent that were not
recorded and not otherwise documented shall
be subject to a rebuttable presumption of inadmissibility.
(2) This subsection shall not apply if—
(A) a body-worn camera or dash camera
malfunctions;
(B) the officer or agent to whom the camera was assigned was unaware of the malfunction or unable to correct it prior to the
incident; and
(C) the records of the agency demonstrate
that the officer or agent checked the camera’s functionality at the beginning of his or
her shift.
(f) In addition to any criminal liability—
(1) if an adjudicative body or final agency
determination finds that an officer or agent
intentionally failed to activate or tampered
with a camera, the employing agency shall
impose discipline upon the officer or agent,
up to and including termination, consistent
with applicable law;
(2) if the conduct of the officer or agent
was undertaken with the intent to conceal
unlawful or inappropriate actions or obstruct justice, the officer’s or agent’s certification or authority to perform enforcement
duties shall be suspended for not less than 1
year, subject to reinstatement only upon exoneration; and
(3) if such conduct occurred in an incident
resulting in the death or serious bodily injury of a civilian, the officer’s or agent’s certification or authority to perform enforcement duties shall be permanently revoked,
subject to reinstatement only upon exoneration.
(g) The Secretary of Homeland Security
shall establish and follow a retention schedule for body-worn and dash-camera recordings in accordance with applicable records
management requirements.
(h) Not later than 21 days after receiving a
complaint alleging misconduct by an immigration enforcement officer or agent, the Department of Homeland Security shall release
all unedited audio and video recordings of
the incident to the public, subject to privacy
protections and delayed release provisions
under subsection (i).
(i)(1) Recordings depicting death shall be
made available to a victim’s immediate family or lawful representative before being publicly released.
(2)(A) Recordings implicating substantial
privacy interests may be blurred to protect
such interests without removing any portion
of the recording.
(B) If blurring a recording is insufficient—
(i) the recording shall be released to affected individuals or their lawful representatives; and
(ii) the Department of Homeland Security
shall notify affected persons of their right to
waive the restrictions under this subsection.
(3) A recording of alleged misconduct may
be temporarily withheld if the release of
such recording would substantially interfere
with an ongoing investigation. Such recording shall be publicly released not later than
45 days after the allegation of misconduct,
accompanied by a written justification for
the delay.

SA 4271. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.043

S29JAPT1

S386

the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1176, after line 17, add the following:
SEC. 239. (a) The Secretary of Homeland
Security shall ensure that all Members of
Congress are given unrestricted access, without advance notice, to all immigration detention facilities used or operated by the Department of Homeland Security, including
ICE-operated, State-run, and privately operated or contracted facilities, regardless of
the source of funding for such facilities.
(b) Access to immigration detention facilities required under subsection (a) shall include—
(1) access to all of the areas in such facilities;
(2) the ability to speak privately with detained individuals and facility personnel;
and
(3) the ability to observe conditions of confinement and compliance with applicable
Federal law, regulations, and standards.
(c)(1) The operator of an immigration detention facility may not delay, condition, restrict, or deny access to such facility to a
Member of Congress on the basis of security
concerns, staffing limitations, operational
considerations, contractual arrangements, or
facility designation.
(2) Not later than 24 hours after discovering that a Member of Congress’ access to
an immigration detention facility was delayed or denied for any reason, the Secretary
of Homeland Security shall submit a detailed report identifying the reasons for such
delay and denial and describing the steps
that will be taken to prevent future delays
or denials to—
(A) the Committee on Appropriations of
the Senate;
(B) the Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs of the Senate;
(C) the Committee on the Judiciary of the
Senate;
(D) the Committee on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives;
(E) the Committee on Homeland Security
of the House of Representatives; and
(F) the Committee on the Judiciary of the
House of Representatives.

SA 4272. Mr. PAUL (for himself and
Mr. LEE) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the
bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; which was ordered to
lie on the table; as follows:

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

In title II of division B, under the heading
‘‘REFUGEE AND ENTRANT ASSISTANCE (INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)’’ under the heading
‘‘ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES’’, strike ‘‘$5,163,956,000’’ and all that follows through ‘‘sections 462 and 235.’’ and insert ‘‘$0.’’

SA 4273. Ms. COLLINS submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
her to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
(1) In section 2 in the matter preceding division A, strike the matter relating to division H and insert: ‘‘Division H—Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
(2) On page 4, strike lines 17 through 25.
(3) Beginning on page 1132, strike line 9 and
all that follows through ‘‘Sec. 554.’’ on page
1235, line 16, and insert:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

07:23 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘DIVISION H—FURTHER CONTINUING
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
‘‘SEC. 101. The Continuing Appropriations
Act, 2026 (division A of Public Law 119–37) is
amended by striking the date specified in
section 106(3) and inserting ‘February 13,
2026’.
‘‘SEC. 102. For the purposes of the Continuing Appropriations Act, 2026 (division A
of Public Law 119–37), the time covered by
such division shall be considered to include
the period which began on or about January
31, 2026, during which there occurred a lapse
in appropriations.
‘‘SEC. 103. Amounts made available in the
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2026 (division A of Public Law 119–37) and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026 for personnel
pay, allowances, and benefits in each department and agency shall be available for payments pursuant to subsection (c) of section
1341 of title 31, United States Code and such
payments shall be made.
‘‘SEC. 104. All obligations incurred and in
anticipation of the appropriations made and
authority granted by the Continuing Appropriations Act, 2026 (division A of Public Law
119–37) and by the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026 for the purposes of maintaining the essential level of activity to protect
life and property and bringing about orderly
termination of Government function, and for
purposes as otherwise authorized by law, are
hereby ratified and approved if otherwise in
accord with the provisions of such Act.
‘‘SEC. 105. ’’.
(4) On page 1235, strike lines 22 and 23 and
insert:
‘‘This division may be cited as the ‘Further
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2026’.’’.

SA 4274. Mrs. SHAHEEN submitted
an amendment intended to be proposed
by her to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place in title VII of division E, insert the following:
SEC. lll. LIMITATION ON USE OF FUNDS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—None of the funds appro-

priated or otherwise made available by this
Act or any other Act with respect to any fiscal year may be used to blockade, occupy,
annex, conduct military operations against,
or otherwise assert control over the sovereign territory of a member state of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
other than as authorized by that NATO
member state or the North Atlantic Council.
(b) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.— Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prevent the
United States from defending itself or an
ally from an armed attack or from a credible
threat of an imminent armed attack.

SA 4275. Mr. LEE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
DIVISION l—SAVE AMERICA ACT
SEC. l001. SHORT TITLE.

This division may be cited as the ‘‘Safeguard American Voter Eligibility Act’’ or
the ‘‘SAVE America Act’’.
SEC. l002. ENSURING ONLY CITIZENS ARE REGISTERED TO VOTE IN ELECTIONS
FOR FEDERAL OFFICE.
(a) DEFINITION OF DOCUMENTARY PROOF OF
UNITED STATES CITIZENSHIP.—Section 3 of

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

the National Voter Registration Act of 1993
(52 U.S.C. 20502) is amended—
(1) by striking ‘‘As used’’ and inserting ‘‘(a)
IN GENERAL.—As used’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(b) DOCUMENTARY PROOF OF UNITED
STATES CITIZENSHIP.—As used in this Act,
the term ‘documentary proof of United
States citizenship’ means, with respect to an
applicant for voter registration, any of the
following:
‘‘(1) A form of identification issued consistent with the requirements of the REAL
ID Act of 2005 that indicates the applicant is
a citizen of the United States.
‘‘(2) A valid United States passport.
‘‘(3) The applicant’s official United States
military identification card, together with a
United States military record of service
showing that the applicant’s place of birth
was in the United States.
‘‘(4) A valid government-issued photo identification card issued by a Federal, State or
Tribal government showing that the applicant’s place of birth was in the United
States.
‘‘(5) A valid government-issued photo identification card issued by a Federal, State or
Tribal government other than an identification described in paragraphs (1) through (4),
but only if presented together with one or
more of the following:
‘‘(A) A certified birth certificate issued by
a State, a unit of local government in a
State, or a Tribal government which—
‘‘(i) was issued by the State, unit of local
government, or Tribal government in which
the applicant was born;
‘‘(ii) was filed with the office responsible
for keeping vital records in the State;
‘‘(iii) includes the full name, date of birth,
and place of birth of the applicant;
‘‘(iv) lists the full names of one or both of
the parents of the applicant;
‘‘(v) has the signature of an individual who
is authorized to sign birth certificates on behalf of the State, unit of local government,
or Tribal government in which the applicant
was born;
‘‘(vi) includes the date that the certificate
was filed with the office responsible for keeping vital records in the State; and
‘‘(vii) has the seal of the State, unit of
local government, or Tribal government that
issued the birth certificate.
‘‘(B) An extract from a United States hospital Record of Birth created at the time of
the applicant’s birth which indicates that
the applicant’s place of birth was in the
United States.
‘‘(C) A final adoption decree showing the
applicant’s name and that the applicant’s
place of birth was in the United States.
‘‘(D) A Consular Report of Birth Abroad of
a citizen of the United States or a certification of the applicant’s Report of Birth of a
United States citizen issued by the Secretary
of State.
‘‘(E) A Naturalization Certificate or Certificate of Citizenship issued by the Secretary of Homeland Security or any other
document or method of proof of United
States citizenship issued by the Federal government pursuant to the Immigration and
Nationality Act.
‘‘(F) An American Indian Card issued by
the Department of Homeland Security with
the classification ‘KIC’.’’.
(b) APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS.—Section 4 of the National Voter Registration Act
of 1993 (52 U.S.C. 20503) is amended by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following:
‘‘(b) REQUIRING APPLICANTS TO PRESENT
DOCUMENTARY PROOF OF UNITED STATES CITIZENSHIP.—Under any method of voter registration in a State, the State shall not accept and process an application to register to

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.044

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

vote in an election for Federal office unless
the applicant presents documentary proof of
United States citizenship with the application.’’.
(c) REGISTRATION WITH APPLICATION FOR
MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVER’S LICENSE.—Section 5
of the National Voter Registration Act of
1993 (52 U.S.C. 20504) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ‘‘Each
State motor vehicle driver’s license application’’ and inserting ‘‘Subject to the requirements under section 8(j), each State motor
vehicle driver’s license application’’;
(2) in subsection (c)(1), by striking ‘‘Each
State shall include’’ and inserting ‘‘Subject
to the requirements under section 8(j), each
State shall include’’;
(3) in subsection (c)(2)(B)—
(A) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the
end;
(B) in clause (ii), by adding ‘‘and’’ at the
end; and
(C) by adding at the end the following new
clause:
‘‘(iii) verify that the applicant is a citizen
of the United States;’’;
(4) in subsection (c)(2)(C)(i), by striking
‘‘(including citizenship)’’ and inserting ‘‘, including the requirement that the applicant
provides documentary proof of United States
citizenship’’; and
(5) in subsection (c)(2)(D)(iii), by striking
‘‘; and’’ and inserting the following: ‘‘, other
than as evidence in a criminal proceeding or
immigration proceeding brought against an
applicant who knowingly attempts to register to vote and knowingly makes a false
declaration under penalty of perjury that the
applicant meets the eligibility requirements
to register to vote in an election for Federal
office; and’’.
(d) REQUIRING DOCUMENTARY PROOF OF
UNITED STATES CITIZENSHIP WITH NATIONAL
MAIL VOTER REGISTRATION FORM.—Section 6
of the National Voter Registration Act of
1993 (52 U.S.C. 20505) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a)(1)—
(A) by striking ‘‘Each State shall accept
and use’’ and inserting ‘‘Subject to the requirements under section 8(j), each State
shall accept and use’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘Federal Election Commission’’ and inserting ‘‘Election Assistance
Commission’’;
(2) in subsection (b), by adding at the end
the following: ‘‘The chief State election official of a State shall take such steps as may
be necessary to ensure that residents of the
State are aware of the requirement to provide documentary proof of United States
citizenship to register to vote in elections
for Federal office in the State.’’;
(3) in subsection (c)(1)—
(A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘and’’
at the end;
(B) in subparagraph (B) by striking the period at the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(C) by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
‘‘(C) the person did not provide documentary proof of United States citizenship when
registering to vote.’’; and
(4) by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
‘‘(e) ENSURING PROOF OF UNITED STATES
CITIZENSHIP.—
‘‘(1) PRESENTING PROOF OF UNITED STATES
CITIZENSHIP TO ELECTION OFFICIAL.—An applicant who submits the mail voter registration
application form prescribed by the Election
Assistance Commission pursuant to section
9(a)(2) or a form described in paragraph (1) or
(2) of subsection (a) shall not be registered to
vote in an election for Federal office unless—
‘‘(A) the applicant presents documentary
proof of United States citizenship in person
to the office of the appropriate election official not later than the deadline provided by

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

S387

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

State law for the receipt of a completed
voter registration application for the election; or
‘‘(B) in the case of a State which permits
an individual to register to vote in an election for Federal office at a polling place on
the day of the election and on any day when
voting, including early voting, is permitted
for the election, the applicant presents documentary proof of United States citizenship
to the appropriate election official at the
polling place not later than the date of the
election.
‘‘(2) NOTIFICATION OF REQUIREMENT.—Upon
receiving an otherwise completed mail voter
registration application form prescribed by
the Election Assistance Commission pursuant to section 9(a)(2) or a form described in
paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a), the appropriate election official shall transmit a
notice to the applicant of the requirement to
present documentary proof of United States
citizenship under this subsection, and shall
include in the notice instructions to enable
the applicant to meet the requirement.
‘‘(3) ACCESSIBILITY.—Each State shall, in
consultation with the Election Assistance
Commission, ensure that reasonable accommodations are made to allow an individual
with a disability who submits the mail voter
registration application form prescribed by
the Election Assistance Commission pursuant to section 9(a)(2) or a form described in
paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a) to
present documentary proof of United States
citizenship to the appropriate election official.’’.
(e) REQUIREMENTS FOR VOTER REGISTRATION
AGENCIES.—Section 7 of the National Voter
Registration Act of 1993 (52 U.S.C. 20506) is
amended—
(1) in subsection (a)—
(A) in paragraph (4)(A), by adding at the
end the following new clause:
‘‘(iv) Receipt of documentary proof of
United States citizenship of each applicant
to register to vote in elections for Federal
office in the State.’’; and
(B) in paragraph (6)—
(i) in subparagraph (A)(i)(I), by striking
‘‘(including citizenship)’’ and inserting ‘‘, including the requirement that the applicant
provides documentary proof of United States
citizenship’’; and
(ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and
(C) as subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; and
(iii) by inserting after subparagraph (A)
the following new subparagraph:
‘‘(B) ask the applicant the question, ‘Are
you a citizen of the United States?’ and if
the applicant answers in the affirmative require documentary proof of United States
citizenship prior to providing the form under
subparagraph (C);’’; and
(2) in subsection (c)(1), by inserting ‘‘who
are citizens of the United States’’ after ‘‘for
persons’’.
(f) REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO ADMINISTRATION OF VOTER REGISTRATION.—Section
8 of the National Voter Registration Act of
1993 (52 U.S.C. 20507) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a)—
(A) by striking ‘‘In the administration of
voter registration’’ and inserting ‘‘Subject to
the requirements of subsection (j), in the administration of voter registration’’; and
(B) in paragraph (3)—
(i) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘or’’ at
the end; and
(ii) by adding at the end the following new
subparagraphs:
‘‘(D) based on documentary proof or
verified information that the registrant is
not a United States citizen; or
‘‘(E) the registration otherwise fails to
comply with applicable State law;’’;

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(2) by redesignating subsection (j) as subsection (l); and
(3) by inserting after subsection (i) the following new subsections:
‘‘(j) ENSURING ONLY CITIZENS ARE REGISTERED TO VOTE.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—Notwithstanding any
other provision of this Act, a State may not
register an individual to vote in elections for
Federal office held in the State unless, at the
time the individual applies to register to
vote, the individual provides documentary
proof of United States citizenship.
‘‘(2) ADDITIONAL PROCESSES IN CERTAIN
CASES.—
‘‘(A) PROCESS FOR THOSE WITHOUT DOCUMENTARY PROOF.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—Subject to any relevant
guidance adopted by the Election Assistance
Commission, each State shall establish a
process under which an applicant who cannot
provide documentary proof of United States
citizenship under paragraph (1) may, if the
applicant signs an attestation under penalty
of perjury that the applicant is a citizen of
the United States and eligible to vote in
elections for Federal office, submit such
other evidence to the appropriate State or
local official demonstrating that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and
such official shall make a determination as
to whether the applicant has sufficiently established United States citizenship for purposes of registering to vote in elections for
Federal office in the State.
‘‘(ii) AFFIDAVIT REQUIREMENT.—If a State
or local official makes a determination
under clause (i) that an applicant has sufficiently established United States citizenship
for purposes of registering to vote in elections for Federal office in the State, such determination shall be accompanied by an affidavit developed under clause (iii) signed by
the official swearing or affirming the applicant sufficiently established United States
citizenship for purposes of registering to
vote.
‘‘(iii) DEVELOPMENT OF AFFIDAVIT BY THE
ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION.—The Election Assistance Commission shall develop a
uniform affidavit for use by State and local
officials under clause (ii), which shall—
‘‘(I) include an explanation of the minimum standards required for a State or local
official to register an applicant who cannot
provide documentary proof of United States
citizenship to vote in elections for Federal
office in the State; and
‘‘(II) require the official to explain the
basis for registering such applicant to vote
in such elections.
‘‘(B) PROCESS IN CASE OF CERTAIN DISCREPANCIES IN DOCUMENTATION.—Subject to any
relevant guidance adopted by the Election
Assistance Commission, each State shall establish a process under which an applicant
can provide such additional documentation
to the appropriate election official of the
State as may be necessary to establish that
the applicant is a citizen of the United
States in the event of a discrepancy with respect to the applicant’s documentary proof
of United States citizenship.
‘‘(3) STATE REQUIREMENTS.—Each State
shall take affirmative steps on an ongoing
basis to ensure that only United States citizens are registered to vote under the provisions of this Act, which shall include the establishment of a program described in paragraph (4) not later than 30 days after the
date of the enactment of this subsection.
‘‘(4) PROGRAM DESCRIBED.—A State may
meet the requirements of paragraph (3) by
establishing a program under which the
State identifies individuals who are not
United States citizens using information
supplied by one or more of the following
sources:

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.045

S29JAPT1

S388

‘‘(A) The Department of Homeland Security
through
the
Systematic
Alien
Verification for Entitlements (‘SAVE’) or
otherwise.
‘‘(B) The Social Security Administration
through the Social Security Number
Verification Service, or otherwise.
‘‘(C) State agencies that supply State identification cards or driver’s licenses where the
agency confirms the United States citizenship status of applicants.
‘‘(D) Other sources, including databases,
which provide confirmation of United States
citizenship status.
‘‘(5) AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—At the request of a
State election official (including a request
related to a process established by a State
under paragraph (2)(A) or (2)(B)), any head of
a Federal department or agency possessing
information relevant to determining the eligibility of an individual to vote in elections
for Federal office shall, not later than 24
hours after receipt of such request, provide
the official with such information as may be
necessary to enable the official to verify that
an applicant for voter registration in elections for Federal office held in the State or
a registrant on the official list of eligible
voters in elections for Federal office held in
the State is a citizen of the United States,
which shall include providing the official
with such batched information as may be requested by the official.
‘‘(B) USE OF SAVE SYSTEM.—The Secretary
of Homeland Security may respond to a request received under paragraph (1) by using
the system for the verification of immigration status under the applicable provisions of
section 1137 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1320b–7), as established pursuant to
section 121(c) of the Immigration Reform and
Control Act of 1986 (Public Law 99–603).
‘‘(C) SHARING OF INFORMATION.—The heads
of Federal departments and agencies shall
share information with each other with respect to an individual who is the subject of
a request received under paragraph (A) in
order to enable them to respond to the request.
‘‘(D) INVESTIGATION FOR PURPOSES OF REMOVAL.—The Secretary of Homeland Security shall conduct an investigation to determine whether to initiate removal proceedings under section 239 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1229) if it
is determined pursuant to subparagraph (A)
or (B) that an alien (as such term is defined
in section 101 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101)) is unlawfully
registered to vote in elections for Federal office.
‘‘(E) PROHIBITING FEES.—The head of a Federal department or agency may not charge a
fee for responding to a State’s request under
paragraph (A).

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

‘‘(k) REMOVAL OF NONCITIZENS FROM REGISTRATION ROLLS.—A State shall remove an
individual who is not a citizen of the United
States from the official list of eligible voters
for elections for Federal office held in the
State at any time upon receipt of documentation or verified information that a registrant is not a United States citizen.’’.
(g) CLARIFICATION OF AUTHORITY OF STATE
TO REMOVE NONCITIZENS FROM OFFICIAL LIST
OF ELIGIBLE VOTERS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 8(a)(4) of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (52
U.S.C. 20507(a)(4)) is amended—
(A) by striking ‘‘or’’ at the end of subparagraph (A);
(B) by adding ‘‘or’’ at the end of subparagraph (B); and
(C) by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘(C) documentary proof or verified information that the registrant is not a United
States citizen;’’.
AMENDMENT.—Section
(2)
CONFORMING
8(c)(2)(B)(i)
of
such
Act
(52
U.S.C.
20507(c)(2)(B)(i)) is amended by striking
‘‘(4)(A)’’ and inserting ‘‘(4)(A) or (C)’’.
(h) REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO FEDERAL MAIL VOTER REGISTRATION FORM.—
(1) CONTENTS OF MAIL VOTER REGISTRATION
FORM.—Section 9(b) of such Act (52 U.S.C.
20508(b)) is amended—
(A) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ‘‘(including citizenship)’’ and inserting ‘‘(including an explanation of what is required to
present documentary proof of United States
citizenship)’’;
(B) in paragraph (3), by striking ‘‘and’’ at
the end;
(C) in paragraph (4), by striking the period
at the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(D) by adding at the end the following new
paragraph:
‘‘(5) shall include a section, for use only by
a State or local election official, to record
the type of document the applicant presented as documentary proof of United
States citizenship, including the date of
issuance, the date of expiration (if any), the
office which issued the document, and any
unique identification number associated
with the document.’’.
(2) INFORMATION ON MAIL VOTER REGISTRATION FORM.—Section 9(b)(4) of such Act (52
U.S.C. 20508(b)(4)) is amended—
(A) by redesignating clauses (i) through
(iii) as subparagraphs (A) through (C), respectively; and
(B) in subparagraph (C) (as so redesignated
and as amended by paragraph (1)(C)), by
striking ‘‘; and’’ and inserting the following:
‘‘, other than as evidence in a criminal proceeding or immigration proceeding brought
against an applicant who attempts to register to vote and makes a false declaration
under penalty of perjury that the applicant
meets the eligibility requirements to register to vote in an election for Federal office;
and’’.
(i) PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION.—Section
11(b)(1) of the National Voter Registration
Act of 1993 (52 U.S.C. 20510(b)(1)) is amended
by striking ‘‘a violation of this Act’’ and inserting ‘‘a violation of this Act, including
the act of an election official who registers
an applicant to vote in an election for Federal office who fails to present documentary
proof of United States citizenship,’’.
(j) CRIMINAL PENALTIES.—Section 12(2) of
such Act (52 U.S.C. 20511(2)) is amended—
(1) by striking ‘‘or’’ at the end of subparagraph (A);
(2) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as
subparagraph (D); and
(3) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the
following new subparagraphs:
‘‘(B) in the case of an officer or employee
of the executive branch, providing material
assistance to a noncitizen in attempting to
register to vote or vote in an election for
Federal office;
‘‘(C) registering an applicant to vote in an
election for Federal office who fails to
present documentary proof of United States
citizenship; or’’.
(k) SPECIAL RULE FOR STATES NOT REQUIRING VOTER REGISTRATION.—Section 4 of the
National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (52
U.S.C. 20503), as amended by subsection (b),
is amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(c) SPECIAL RULE FOR STATES NOT REQUIRING VOTER REGISTRATION.—In the case of a
State or jurisdiction that does not require
voter registration as a requirement to vote
in an election for Federal office on or after
the date of the enactment of this subsection,
the State or jurisdiction shall be deemed to

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

meet the requirements of this Act if the
State or jurisdiction establishes a system for
confirming the citizenship of individuals voting in an election for Federal office prior to
the first day for voting with respect to such
election and provides such confirmation of
citizenship status for each eligible voter to
election officials at the polling places during
the voting period.’’.
(l) ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION GUIDANCE.—Not later than 10 days after the date
of the enactment of this Act, the Election
Assistance Commission shall adopt and
transmit to the chief State election official
of each State guidance with respect to the
implementation of the requirements under
the National Voter Registration Act of 1993
(52 U.S.C. 20501 et seq.), as amended by this
section.
(m) INAPPLICABILITY OF PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT.—Subchapter I of chapter 35 of title
44 (commonly referred to as the ‘‘Paperwork
Reduction Act’’) shall not apply with respect
to the development or modification of voter
registration materials under the National
Voter Registration Act of 1993 (52 U.S.C.
20501 et seq.), as amended by this section, including the development or modification of
any voter registration application forms.
(n) DUTY OF SECRETARY OF HOMELAND SECURITY TO NOTIFY ELECTION OFFICIALS OF
NATURALIZATION.—Upon receiving information that an individual has become a naturalized citizen of the United States, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall promptly
provide notice of such information to the appropriate chief election official of the State
in which such individual is domiciled.
(o) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION REGARDING PROVISIONAL BALLOTS.—Nothing in this section
or in any amendment made by this section
may be construed to supercede, restrict, or
otherwise affect the ability of an individual
to cast a provisional ballot in an election for
Federal office or to have the ballot counted
in the election if the individual is verified as
a citizen of the United States pursuant to
section 8(j) of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (as added by subsection (f)).
(p) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION REGARDING EFFECT ON STATE EXEMPTIONS FROM OTHER
FEDERAL LAWS.—Nothing in this section or
in any amendment made by this section may
be construed to affect the exemption of a
State from any requirement of any Federal
law other than the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (52 U.S.C. 20501 et seq.).
(q) EFFECTIVE DATE.—This section and the
amendments made by this section shall take
effect on the date of the enactment of this
section, and shall apply with respect to applications for voter registration which are
submitted on or after such date.
SEC. l003. PHOTO VOTER IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED FOR VOTING IN A FEDERAL
ELECTION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Each individual voting in

an election for Federal office shall present
an eligible photo identification document.
(b) PRESENTATION REQUIREMENTS.—
(1) IN-PERSON VOTING.—In the case of an individual who votes in-person, the eligible
photo identification document shall—
(A) be a tangible (not digital) document;
and
(B) be presented at the time of voting.
(2) ABSENTEE VOTING.—In the case of an individual voting by absentee ballot, the individual shall include a copy of the eligible
photo identification document—
(A) with the request for an absentee ballot;
and
(B) with the submission of the absentee
ballot.
(c) ELIGIBLE PHOTO IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT.—For purposes of this section:
(1) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘‘eligible photo
identification document’’ means any document which—

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.045

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

(A) is issued by an authority described in
paragraph (2); and
(B) meets the requirements of paragraph
(3).
(2) ISSUING AUTHORITY.—The following are
authorities described in this paragraph:
(A) A State agency responsible for issuing
State motor vehicle drivers’ licenses.
(B) A State or local election office.
(C) A Native tribal government.
(D) The Department of State.
(E) The Department of War.
(F) A branch of the Armed Forces.
(3) REQUIREMENTS.—A document meets the
requirements of this paragraph if the document contains—
(A) a photograph of the individual identified on the document;
(B) an indication on the front of the document that the individual identified on the
document is a United States citizen; and
(C) either—
(i) an identification number issues by the
entity described in paragraph (2)(A); or
(ii) the last four digits of the social security number of the individual identified on
the document.
(4) USE OF ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTATION.—
(A) USE OF ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTATION.—A
document which fails to meet the requirements of paragraph (3)(B) shall not fail to be
treated as an eligible photo identification
document if the document is presented together with another identification document
that indicates the individual is a United
States citizen.
(B) STATES USING SAVE SYSTEM.—
(i) IN GENERAL.—The requirements of paragraph (3)(B) shall not apply to an individual—
(I) who votes in a State or jurisdiction
which meets the requirements of clause (ii);
and
(II) who registered to vote in such State or
jurisdiction before the most recent date on
which the State or jurisdiction last submitted its voter registration rolls to the Department of Homeland Security as provided
in clause (ii)(I).
(ii) REQUIREMENTS.—The requirements of
this clause are met if—
(I) the State or jurisdiction has submitted
its voter registration list to the Department
of Homeland Security through the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements
(SAVE) program not less frequently than
quarterly since June 1, 2025, for purposes of
identifying ineligible registrations and noncitizens; and
(II) the State or jurisdiction indicates in
each voter record on its voter rolls whether
the voter has been verified as a United
States citizen based on the information provided by the Department of Homeland Security under subclause (I), and the date of such
verification.
(iii) SPECIAL RULE FOR STATES NOT REQUIRING VOTER REGISTRATION.—In the case of a
State or jurisdiction that does not require
voter registration as a requirement to vote
in an election for Federal office on or after
the date of the enactment of this Act—
(I) clause (i)(ii) shall not apply; and
(II) the State or jurisdiction shall be
deemed to meet the requirements of clause
(ii) if the State or jurisdiction establishes a
system for confirming the citizenship of individuals voting in an election for Federal
office prior to the first day of the period described in section 3 with respect to such election and provides such confirmation of citizenship status for each eligible voter to election officials at the polling places during the
voting period.
AMENDMENT.—Section
(d)
CONFORMING
303(b) of the Help America Vote Act of 2002
(52 U.S.C. 21083(b)) is amended by striking all
that precedes paragraph (4).

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

S389

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

(e) EFFECTIVE DATE.—Each State and jurisdiction shall be required to comply with the
requirements of this section with respect to
all elections for Federal office occurring on
and after the date of the enactment of this
section.

SA 4276. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1176, after line 17, add the following:
SEC. 239. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law and except as provided
under section 287(a)(2) of the Immigration
and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1357(a)(2)), no
funds made available to the Department of
Homeland Security by this Act or by any
other Act may be used by any officer or employee to make a civil immigration arrest
without—
(1) a judicially enforceable warrant issued
by a Federal magistrate or Article III judge;
or
(2) a civil administrative warrant that
complies with the requirements described in
subsection (b).
(b) To meet the requirements described in
this subsection, a civil administrative warrant shall—
(1) be served on the recipient with the accompanying documentation described in
paragraph (3) at the time the warrant is
issued;
(2) be issued concurrently with or based on
a previously-existing charging document or
conclusive evidence of an existing removal
order;
(3) accurately document the probable cause
of the recipient’s lack of lawful immigration
status; and
(4) be approved by an immigration judge or
a supervising officer not later than 24 hours
before it is executed.

SA 4277. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
Beginning on page 1198, strike line 23 and
all that follows through page 1201, line 19,
and insert the following:
SEC. 503. (a) None of the funds provided by
this Act, or by any prior appropriations Act,
to the components in, or transferred to, the
Department of Homeland Security that remain available for obligation or expenditure
during fiscal year 2026, or provided from any
accounts in the Treasury of the United
States derived by the collection of fees available to the components funded by this Act or
from Public Law 119–21 shall be available for
obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming of funds that—
(1) creates or eliminates a program,
project, or activity, or increases funds for
any program, project, or activity for which
funds have been denied or restricted by the
Congress;
(2) contracts out any function or activity
presently performed by Federal employees or
any new function or activity proposed to be
performed by Federal employees in the
President’s budget proposal for fiscal year
2026 for the Department of Homeland Security;
(3) augments funding for existing programs, projects, or activities in excess of
$1,000,000 or 1 percent, whichever is less;

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(4) reduces funding for any program,
project, or activity, or numbers of personnel,
by 5 percent or more; or
(5) results from any general savings from a
reduction in personnel that would result in a
change in funding levels for programs,
projects, or activities approved by the Congress.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply if the
Committee on Appropriations of the Senate
and the Committee on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives are notified at
least 30 days in advance of such reprogramming.
(c) Up to 5 percent of any appropriation
made available by this Act for fiscal year
2026 for the Department of Homeland Security or provided by any prior appropriations
Act may be transferred between such appropriations if the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives are notified at least 30 days in advance
of such transfer. None of these appropriations, except as otherwise specifically provided, may be increased by more than 1 percent by such transfer.
(d) Notwithstanding subsections (a), (b),
and (c), funds may not be reprogrammed
within or transferred between appropriations—
(1) based upon an initial notification provided after June 15, 2026, except in extraordinary circumstances that imminently
threaten the safety of human life or the protection of property by a natural disaster or
congressional authorized drug interdiction
carried out by the United States Coast
Guard;
(2) to increase or decrease funding for
grant programs; or
(3) to create a program, project, or activity
described in subsection (a)(1), including any
new function or requirement within any program, project, or activity that has not been
approved by Congress.
(e) The notification thresholds and procedures set forth in subsections (a), (b), (c), and
(d) shall apply to any use of deobligated balances of funds provided to the Department of
Homeland Security in a prior appropriations
Act or funds provided under Public Law 119–
21 that remain available for obligation during the 3-year period ending on September
30, 2029.
(f) Funds may not be reprogrammed or
transferred to, from, or within U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement or U.S. Customs and Border Protection.

SA 4278. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1161, strike lines 7 through 12.

SA 4279. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1176, after line 17, add the following:
SEC. 239. No funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act or by any
other Act may be used to carry out any civil
arrest or apprehension of any noncitizen, including immigration enforcement actions
authorized under section 287 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1357),
without a judicial warrant issued by a Federal district court or magistrate judge.

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.045

S29JAPT1

S390

SA 4280. Mr. MURPHY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1133, line 14, insert before the period at the end the following: ‘‘: Provided further, That notwithstanding the previous provisos, $42,964,000 shall be made available for
the Office of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties
and $28,641,000 shall be made available for the
Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman and such amounts shall be obligated to restore the staff levels set forth in
the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2024 (division C of Public
Law 118–47)’’.

SA 4281. Mr. BLUMENTHAL submitted an amendment intended to be
proposed by him to the bill H.R. 7148,
making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes;
which was ordered to lie on the table;
as follows:
On page 1235, between lines 21 and 22, insert
the following:
SEC. 555. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available to the Department
of Homeland Security by this division or by
Public Law 119–21, and none of the fees collected by the Department of Homeland Security, may be used to arrest or detain any
United States citizen unless such action is
explicitly authorized under paragraph (4) or
(5) of section 287(a) of the Immigration and
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1357(a)).

SA 4282. Mr. BLUMENTHAL (for
himself and Ms. HIRONO) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1176, after line 17, add the following:
LIMITING IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS AT SENSITIVE LOCATIONS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 287 of the Immi-

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC.

239.

gration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1357) is
amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(i)(1) In order to ensure individuals’ access to sensitive locations, this subsection
shall apply to any enforcement action by—
‘‘(A) officers or agents of the Department
of Homeland Security, including officers and
agents of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement and U.S. Customs and Border Protection; and
‘‘(B) any individual designated to perform
immigration enforcement functions pursuant to a written agreement described in subsection (g).
‘‘(2)(A) An enforcement action may not
take place, be focused on a location, or
occur, within 1,000 feet of a sensitive location, except under exigent circumstances.
‘‘(B) If an immigration enforcement action
is taking place under exigent circumstances,
and the exigent circumstances permitting
the enforcement action cease, the enforcement action shall be discontinued until such
exigent circumstances reemerge.
‘‘(C) If an individual referred to in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) is not certain as to whether exigent circumstances
exist, the individual—
‘‘(i) shall cease the enforcement action immediately;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘(ii) shall consult with his or her supervisor in real time regarding the existence of
exigent circumstances; and
‘‘(iii) may not continue the enforcement
action until the individual’s supervisor affirmatively confirms the existence of exigent
circumstances.
‘‘(3)(A) When proceeding with an enforcement action at or near a sensitive location,
individuals referred to in subparagraph (A)
or (B) of paragraph (1) shall make every effort—
‘‘(i) to conduct themselves as discreetly as
possible, consistent with officer and public
safety;
‘‘(ii) to limit the time spent at the sensitive location; and
‘‘(iii) to limit the enforcement action to
the person or persons for whom prior approval was obtained.
‘‘(B) If, in the course of an enforcement action that is not initiated at or focused on a
sensitive location, individuals referred to in
subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) are
led to or near a sensitive location, and no
clear exigent circumstance with respect to
the sensitive location exists, such individuals shall—
‘‘(i) cease before taking any further enforcement action;
‘‘(ii) conduct themselves in a discreet manner;
‘‘(iii) maintain surveillance; and
‘‘(iv) in the event that uncertainty exists
about
the
existence
of
exigent
circumstances, immediately consult their supervisor in order to determine whether such
enforcement action should be discontinued
pursuant to paragraph (2)(C).
‘‘(C) This subsection shall not apply to the
transportation of an individual apprehended
at or near a land or sea border to a hospital
or health care provider for the purpose of
providing such individual medical care.
‘‘(D) This subsection shall not apply to a
rare premeditated arrest operation, undertaken with the prior written approval of an
appropriate authorizing official, involving
the targeted arrest of a terrorist suspect, an
individual who poses a clear threat to national security, or an individual who poses
an extraordinary danger to public safety.
‘‘(4) If an enforcement action is carried out
in violation of this subsection—
‘‘(A) no information resulting from the enforcement action may be entered into the
record or received into evidence in a removal
proceeding resulting from the enforcement
action; and
‘‘(B) the alien who is the subject of such removal proceeding may file a motion for the
immediate termination of the removal proceeding.
‘‘(5)(A) Each official specified in subparagraph (B) shall ensure that the employees
under the supervision of such official receive
annual training in compliance with the requirements of this subsection, section 239,
and section 384 of the Illegal Immigration
Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of
1996 (8 U.S.C. 1367).
‘‘(B) The officials specified in this subparagraph are the following:
‘‘(i) The Chief Counsel of U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement.
‘‘(ii) The Field Office Directors of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
‘‘(iii) Each Special Agent in Charge of U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
‘‘(iv) Each Chief Patrol Agent of U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
‘‘(v) The Director of Field Operations of
U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
‘‘(vi) The Director of Air and Marine Operations of U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
‘‘(vii) The Internal Affairs Special Agent in
Charge of U.S. Customs and Border Protection.

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(6)(A) Not later than 30 days after any enforcement action is taken at a sensitive location by any individual referred to in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1), the
Secretary of Homeland Security shall provide a report to both the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Homeland
Security and the Office for Civil Rights and
Civil Liberties of the Department of Homeland Security for each such enforcement action, which shall contain—
‘‘(i) the date, State, and local political subdivision (such as city, town, or county) in
which each enforcement action occurred;
‘‘(ii) the specific sensitive location site
where the enforcement action occurred;
‘‘(iii) the type of enforcement action that
occurred;
‘‘(iv) the specific department, agency, and
officers responsible for the enforcement action;
‘‘(v) a thorough description of the circumstances which purportedly justified the
enforcement action, including either—
‘‘(I) a clear description of the exigent circumstances involved; or
‘‘(II) a certified copy of the written approval for the immigration arrest that was
signed by an appropriate authorizing officer,
along with a clear description of the specific
and rare threat which justified the premeditated arrest at this sensitive location;
‘‘(vi) a description of the intended target of
the enforcement action;
‘‘(vii) the number of individuals, if any, arrested or taken into custody through the enforcement action;
‘‘(viii) the number of collateral arrests, if
any, from the enforcement action and the
reasons for each such arrest; and
‘‘(ix) a certification of whether a supervisor was contacted prior to, during, or after
each such enforcement action.
‘‘(B) An appropriate committee of Congress
may, at any time, request and successfully
receive a confidential or redacted copy of
any of the individual reports described in
subparagraph (A).
‘‘(7)(A) The Director of U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement and the Commissioner for U.S. Customs and Border Protection shall each submit an annual report to
the appropriate committees of Congress that
describes the enforcement actions undertaken by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement or U.S. Customs and Border Protection, as applicable, during the preceding
fiscal year that were covered by this subsection.
‘‘(B) Each report submitted pursuant to
subparagraph (A) shall include—
‘‘(i) the number of enforcement actions at
or focused on a sensitive location;
‘‘(ii) the number of enforcement actions
where officers or agents were subsequently
led to or near a sensitive location;
‘‘(iii) the date, site, State, and local political subdivision (such as city, town, or county) in which each enforcement action covered by clause (i) or (ii) occurred;
‘‘(iv) the component of the agency responsible for each such enforcement action;
‘‘(v) a description of the intended target of
each such enforcement action;
‘‘(vi) the number of individuals, if any, arrested or taken into custody through each
such enforcement action;
‘‘(vii) the number of collateral arrests, if
any, from each such enforcement action and
the reasons for each such arrest; and
‘‘(viii) a certification of whether the location administrator was contacted prior to,
during, or after each such enforcement action.
‘‘(8)(A) The Office of the Inspector General
of the Department of Homeland Security
shall submit an annual report to the appropriate committees of Congress regarding the

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.046

S29JAPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

complaints of enforcement actions taken in
sensitive locations by U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement and U.S. Customs and
Border Protection during the preceding year
that were covered by this subsection.
‘‘(B) Each report submitted pursuant to
subparagraph (A) shall include—
‘‘(i) the number of complaints of enforcement actions reported at, or focused on, a
sensitive location;
‘‘(ii) the reported date, site, State, and
local political subdivision (such as city,
town, or county) in which each enforcement
action referred to in clause (i) occurred;
‘‘(iii) the reported agency responsible for
each such enforcement action;
‘‘(iv) a description of the intended target of
each such enforcement action;
‘‘(v) the reported number of individuals, if
any, arrested or taken into custody through
each such enforcement action;
‘‘(vi) the reported number of collateral arrests, if any, from each such enforcement action, and the reasons for each such arrest;
and
‘‘(vii) if available, a certification of whether the location administrator was contacted
prior to, during, or after each such enforcement action.
‘‘(9) In this subsection:
‘‘(A) The term ‘appropriate authorizing official’ means—
‘‘(i) in the case of officers and agents of
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement—
‘‘(I) the Assistant Director of Operations,
Homeland Security Investigations;
‘‘(II) the Executive Associate Director of
Homeland Security Investigations;
‘‘(III) the Assistant Director for Field Operations, Enforcement, and Removal Operations;
‘‘(IV) the Executive Associate Director for
Field Operations, Enforcement, and Removal
Operations; or
‘‘(V) any other individual who is determined to be an appropriate authorizing official by the Secretary of Homeland Security;
and
‘‘(ii) in the case of officers and agents of
U.S. Customs and Border Protection—
‘‘(I) a Chief Patrol Agent;
‘‘(II) the Director of Field Operations;
‘‘(III) the Director of Air and Marine Operations;
‘‘(IV) the Internal Affairs Special Agent in
Charge; or
‘‘(V) any other individual who is determined to be an appropriate authorizing official by the Secretary of Homeland Security;
and
‘‘(iii) in the case of all other individuals referred to in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1), an official determined under rules
promulgated by the Secretary of Homeland
Security not later than 90 days after the date
of the enactment of the Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026.
‘‘(B) The term ‘appropriate committees of
Congress’ means—
‘‘(i) the Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs of the Senate;
‘‘(ii) the Committee on the Judiciary of the
Senate;
‘‘(iii) the Committee on Appropriations of
the Senate;
‘‘(iv) the Committee on Homeland Security
of the House of Representatives;
‘‘(v) the Committee on the Judiciary of the
House of Representatives; and
‘‘(vi) the Committee on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives.
‘‘(C) The term ‘early childhood education
program’ has the meaning given such term
in section 103(8) of the Higher Education Act
of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1003(8)).
‘‘(D) The term ‘enforcement action’—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

S391

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

‘‘(i) means an apprehension, arrest, interview, request for identification, search, or
surveillance for the purposes of immigration
enforcement; and
‘‘(ii) includes an enforcement action at, or
focused on, a sensitive location that is part
of a joint case led by another law enforcement agency.
‘‘(E) The term ‘exigent circumstances’
means a situation involving—
‘‘(i) the imminent risk of death, violence,
or physical harm to any person, including a
situation implicating terrorism or the national security of the United States in some
other manner;
‘‘(ii) the immediate arrest or hot pursuit of
an individual presenting an imminent danger
to public safety, including the imminent risk
of death, violence, or physical harm to a person;
‘‘(iii) a rare, premeditated arrest operation
described in paragraph (3)(D), undertaken
with the prior written approval of an appropriate authorizing official, involving the targeted arrest of a terrorist suspect, an individual who poses a clear threat to national
security, or an individual who poses an extraordinary danger to public safety;
‘‘(iv) a direct threat to national security;
or
‘‘(v) the imminent risk of destruction of
evidence that is material to an ongoing
criminal case.
‘‘(F) The term ‘sensitive location’ includes
all of the physical space located within 1,000
feet of—
‘‘(i) any medical or mental healthcare facility, including any hospital, health care
practitioner’s office, accredited health clinic, vaccination or testing site, or emergent
or urgent care facility, or community health
center;
‘‘(ii) any public or private school (including preschools, primary schools, secondary
schools, and postsecondary schools (including colleges and universities)), any site of an
early childhood education program, any
other institution of learning, such as vocational or trade schools, and any other site
where individuals who are unemployed or underemployed may apply for or receive workforce training;
‘‘(iii) any scholastic or education-related
activity or event, including field trips and
interscholastic events;
‘‘(iv) any school bus or school bus stop during periods when school children are present
on the bus or at the stop;
‘‘(v) any recreational facility for children,
such as playgrounds and formal recreational
facilities;
‘‘(vi) any child care focused facility, including child care centers, before or after
school care centers, foster care facilities,
and group homes for children;
‘‘(vii) any location where disaster or emergency response and relief is being provided
by Federal, State, or local entities, such as
the distribution of emergency supplies, food,
and water; any place of temporary shelter;
any place along an evacuation route; and
any site where registration for disaster-related assistance or family reunification is
taking place;
‘‘(viii) any location of any organization
that—
‘‘(I) assists children, pregnant women, victims of crime or abuse, or individuals with
significant mental or physical disabilities,
including domestic violence shelters, child
advocacy centers, facilities that serve disabled persons, drug or alcohol counseling and
treatment facilities, rape crisis centers, supervised visitation centers, family justice
centers, victims’ services providers, and
community-based organizations providing
social services; or

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(II) provides disaster or emergency social
services and assistance, or services for individuals experiencing homelessness, including
food banks, pantries, or other establishments
distributing food, and shelters;
‘‘(ix) any church, synagogue, mosque, or
other place of worship or religious study,
such as buildings rented for the purpose of
religious services, or a temporary facility or
location where such activities are taking
place;
‘‘(x) any sites of a funeral, graveside ceremony, wedding, or any site where other religious or civil ceremonies or observances are
occurring;
‘‘(xi) any site during the occurrence of a
public demonstration, such as a march,
rally, or parade;
‘‘(xii) any Federal, State, or local courthouse, including the office of an individual’s
legal counsel or representative, and a probation office;
‘‘(xiii) any congressional district office;
‘‘(xiv) any Social Security office;
‘‘(xv) any public assistance offices, including locations where individuals may apply
for or receive unemployment compensation
or report violations of labor and employment
laws;
‘‘(xvi) the indoor or outdoor premises of a
department of motor vehicles;
‘‘(xvii) a polling place, including any building or infrastructure where voting takes
place during an election;
‘‘(xviii) a labor union hall or any other
union-operated building or office where registered applicants are referred in rotation to
jobs;
‘‘(xix) any public library; or
‘‘(xx) any other locations specified by the
Secretary of Homeland Security for purposes
of this subsection.
‘‘(G) The term ‘supervisor’ means an official determined under rules promulgated by
the Secretary of Homeland Security pursuant to section 239(c) of the Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act,
2026.’’.
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendment
made by subsection (a) shall take effect on
the date that is 90 days after the date of the
enactment of this Act.
(c) RULEMAKING.—Not later than 90 days
after the date of the enactment of this Act,
the Secretary of Homeland Security shall
promulgate regulations to carry out the
amendment made by subsection (a).

SA 4283. Mr. BLUMENTHAL (for
himself and Ms. HIRONO) submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
On page 1235, between lines 21 and 22, insert
the following:
SEC. 555. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this division or
by Public Law 119–21, and none of the fees
collected by the Department of Homeland
Security, may be used by any component of
the Department of Homeland Security for
any operation involving the entry into a private residence solely on the basis of an administrative warrant.

SA 4284. Mr. BENNET submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
After section 194 of title I of division D, insert the following:

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.047

S29JAPT1

S392

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

SEC. lll. (a) Not later than 120 days
after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Secretary of Transportation shall issue a notice of funding opportunity for each program
described in subsection (c) using any
amounts made available in title VIII of division J of the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58; 135 Stat. 1412)
for each program described in subsection (c)
that are unobligated and have not been committed to any existing grantees.
(b) In making awards for each program described in subsection (c), the Secretary of
Transportation shall first prioritize any applicant that had a previously awarded grant
withdrawn, canceled, or terminated after December 15, 2025.
(c) A program referred to in subsections (a)
and (b) is—
(1) the consolidated rail infrastructure and
safety improvements grant program under
section 22907 of title 49, United States Code;
(2) the Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation Grant Program
under section 25005 of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (23 U.S.C. 502 note;
Public Law 117–58);
(3) the local and regional project assistance program under section 6702 of title 49,
United States Code; and
(4) grants to States or localities under the
twenty-second proviso in paragraph (2) in the
matter under the heading ‘‘HIGHWAY INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMS’’ under the heading
‘‘FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION’’ under
the heading ‘‘DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION’’ in title VIII of division J of
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(Public Law 117–58; 135 Stat. 1425).
(d) Amounts repurposed pursuant to this
section shall continue to be treated as
amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5 (137 Stat. 16).

SA 4285. Mr. SANDERS submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:

SEC. llll. REPEAL OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR
U.S. IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS
ENFORCEMENT.

Sections 90003 and 100052 of Public Law 119–
21 (139 Stat. 358, 387) (commonly known as
the ‘‘One Big Beautiful Bill Act’’) are repealed and the unobligated balances of
amounts made available under those sections
(as in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act) are rescinded.

SA 4286. Mr. LEE submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
In title III of division F, under ‘‘BILATERAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE’’, strike the
heading ‘‘UNITED STATES AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FOUNDATION’’ and everything that follows under such heading.

SA 4287. Mr. MERKLEY submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. lll. PROHIBITION ON LAST-MINUTE RESCISSIONS.

Notwithstanding any provision of the Impoundment Control Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 681
et seq.), a special message transmitted under
section 1012 or 1013 of such Act may not propose to rescind or defer any budget authority
that expires on or before the date that is 90
days after the date on which such special
message is transmitted.
f

They have the approval of the Majority
and Minority Leaders.
Pursuant to Rule XXVI, paragraph
5(a), of the Standing Rules of the Senate, the following committees are authorized to meet during today’s session
of the Senate:
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, NUTRITION, AND
FORESTRY

The Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry is authorized to
meet during the session of the Senate
on Thursday, January 29, 2026, at 10:30
a.m., to conduct a business meeting.
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Committee on Armed Services is
authorized to meet in executive session
during the session of the Senate on
Thursday, January 29, 2026.
COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND
TRANSPORTATION

The
Committee
on
Commerce,
Science, and Transportation is authorized to meet during the session of the
Senate on Thursday, January 29, 2026,
at 10 a.m., to conduct a subcommittee
hearing.
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS

The Committee on Foreign Relations
is authorized to meet during the session of the Senate on Thursday, January 29, 2026, at 9:30 a.m., to conduct a
business meeting.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON AGING

The Special Committee on Aging is
authorized to meet during the session
of the Senate on Thursday, January 29,
2026, at 9:30 a.m., to conduct a hearing.
SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE

AUTHORITY FOR COMMITTEES TO
MEET
Mrs. CAPITO. Mr. President, I have
six requests for committees to meet
during today’s session of the Senate.

The Select Committee on Intelligence is authorized to meet during
the session of the Senate on Thursday,
January 29, 2026, at 10 a.m., to conduct
an open hearing on a nomination.

h
FOREIGN TRAVEL FINANCIAL REPORTS

In accordance with the appropriate provisions of law, the Secretary of the Senate herewith submits the following reports for standing committees of the Senate, certain joint committees of the Congress, delegations and groups, and select
and special committees of the Senate, relating to expenses incurred in the performance of authorized foreign travel:
CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE, UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Name and country

Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

CODEL Hagerty—Cancelled
Delegation Expenses: **
Japan ............................................................................................................................................................
Senator John Hoeven:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Joshua Carter:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses **
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................

Yen .......................................................

................................

................................

12,732.70

12,732.70

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

672.00
................................

................................
1,612.80

................................
................................

672.00
1,612.80

US Dollar ..............................................

818.00

................................

................................

818.00

Canadian Dollar ...................................

................................

................................

1,419.42

1,419.42

Total .........................................................................................................................................................

...............................................................

1,490.00

1,612.80

14,152.12

17,254.92

* Note: All values are United States Dollar Equivalent.
** Delegation Expenses include payments and reimbursements to the Department of State, under the authority of Sec. 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended by Sec. 22 of P.L. 95–384, and S. Res. 179 agreed to May
25, 1977.
SENATOR SUSAN COLLINS,
Chairman, Committee on Appropriations, Jan. 22, 2026.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.049

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

S393

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE, UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

380.00
................................

................................
13,720.80

................................
................................

380.00
13,720.80

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

313.00
386.00
................................

................................
................................
18,457.53

................................
................................
................................

313.00
386.00
18,457.53

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

285.71
413.29
................................

................................
................................
18,845.69

................................
................................
................................

285.71
413.29
18,845.69

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Name and country

Senator Joni Ernst:
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Senator Joni Ernst:
Bulgaria ........................................................................................................................................................
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Caden Waterstradt:
Bulgaria ........................................................................................................................................................
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Bulgaria ........................................................................................................................................................
Senator Kevin Cramer:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Senator Angus King, Jr.:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Senator Mike Rounds:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Senator Jeanne Shaheen:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Jeffrey Bennett:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Andrew Braun:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Abigail Kane:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Colby Kuhns:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Adam Barker:
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Maggie Cooper:
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
Adam Barker:
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Maggie Cooper:
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
Kristina Belcourt:
Cyprus ..........................................................................................................................................................
Italy ..............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Jonathan Epstein:
Cyprus ..........................................................................................................................................................
Italy ..............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Cyprus ..........................................................................................................................................................
Italy ..............................................................................................................................................................
Levi Brunt:
United Kingdom ............................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Marty Fromuth:
United Kingdom ............................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Katie Karam:
United Kingdom ............................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Bradley Patout:
United Kingdom ............................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Kaitlyn Romaine:
United Kingdom ............................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Adam Trull:
United Kingdom ............................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
United Kingdom ............................................................................................................................................
Maureen Fromuth:
Jordan ...........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Eric Trager:
Jordan ...........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Jordan ...........................................................................................................................................................
Katie Karam:
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Adam Trull:
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Jonathan Epstein:
Romania .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Katie Karam:
Romania .......................................................................................................................................................
Spain ............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Kaitlyn Romaine:
Romania .......................................................................................................................................................
Spain ............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Adam Trull:
Romania .......................................................................................................................................................

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Bulgarian Lev .......................................

................................

................................

1,666.20

1,666.20

US Dollar ..............................................

392.00

................................

................................

392.00

US Dollar ..............................................

506.81

................................

................................

506.81

US Dollar ..............................................

763.62

................................

................................

763.62

Canadian Dollar ...................................

256.81

................................

................................

256.81

US Dollar ..............................................

466.35

................................

................................

466.35

US Dollar ..............................................

574.09

................................

................................

574.09

US Dollar ..............................................

414.00

................................

................................

414.00

US Dollar ..............................................

392.00

................................

................................

392.00

Canadian Dollar ...................................

................................

................................

6,193.81

6,193.81

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

861.22
................................

................................
15,364.33

................................
................................

861.22
15,364.33

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

450.61
................................

................................
15,364.33

................................
................................

450.61
15,364.33

Euro ......................................................

................................

................................

2,451.57

2,451.57

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,063.20
................................

................................
14,602.43

................................
................................

1,063.20
14,602.43

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

915.31
................................

................................
14,602.43

................................
................................

915.31
14,602.43

Euro ......................................................

................................

................................

2,518.17

2,518.17

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

700.23
555.01
................................

................................
................................
14,265.73

................................
................................
................................

700.23
555.01
14,265.73

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

712.47
420.03
................................

................................
................................
14,265.73

................................
................................
................................

712.47
420.03
14,265.73

Euro ......................................................
Euro ......................................................

................................
................................

................................
................................

186.66
186.65

186.66
186.65

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

941.00
................................

................................
8,171.23

................................
................................

941.00
8,171.23

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,134.23
................................

................................
8,171.23

................................
................................

1,134.23
8,171.23

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

469.00
................................

................................
8,728.00

................................
................................

469.00
8,728.00

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

938.00
................................

................................
8,171.23

................................
................................

938.00
8,171.23

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

938.00
................................

................................
8,170.03

................................
................................

938.00
8,170.03

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

193.00
................................

................................
8,203.00

................................
................................

193.00
8,203.00

Pound Sterling ......................................

................................

................................

7,030.00

7,030.00

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,048.86
................................

................................
6,340.61

................................
................................

1,048.86
6,340.61

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

732.19
................................

7.87
6,340.61

................................
................................

740.06
6,340.61

Jordanian Dinar ....................................

................................

................................

1,037.82

1,037.82

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,050.19
................................

................................
10,442.03

................................
................................

1,050.19
10,442.03

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

456.00
................................

................................
4,895.13

................................
................................

456.00
4,895.13

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

239.84
................................

................................
14,725.00

................................
................................

239.84
14,725.00

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

369.34
507.34
................................

................................
................................
14,036.33

................................
................................
................................

369.34
507.34
14,036.33

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

369.34
507.34
................................

................................
................................
14,036.33

................................
................................
................................

369.34
507.34
14,036.33

US Dollar ..............................................

177.00

................................

................................

177.00

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.004

S29JAPT1

S394

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE, UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025—Continued
Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name and country

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

Spain ............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Romania .......................................................................................................................................................
Spain ............................................................................................................................................................
Michael Urena:
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

180.00
................................

................................
14,036.33

................................
................................

180.00
14,036.33

Romanian Leu ......................................
Euro ......................................................

................................
................................

................................
................................

767.82
323.14

767.82
323.14

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,064.00
885.00
352.00
................................

................................
................................
................................
13,300.43

................................
................................
................................
................................

1,064.00
885.00
352.00
13,300.43

Euro ......................................................
Euro ......................................................
Zloty ......................................................

................................
................................
................................

................................
................................
................................

726.85
1,896.81
551.12

726.85
1,896.81
551.12

Total .........................................................................................................................................................

...............................................................

23,773.43

287,264.39

25,536.62

336,574.44

* Note: All values are United States Dollar Equivalent.
** Delegation expenses include payments and reimbursements to the Department of State under authority of Sec. 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended by Sec. 22 of P.L. 95–384, and S. Res. 179 agreed to May 25,

1977.
SENATOR ROGER WICKER,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services, Jan. 26, 2026.

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

New Israeli Sheqel ...............................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,398.00
................................

................................
14,109.00

................................
................................

1,398.00
14,109.00

New Israeli Sheqel ...............................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,316.25
................................

................................
7,788.31

................................
................................

1,316.25
7,788.31

New Israeli Sheqel ...............................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,306.25
................................

................................
14,696.31

................................
................................

1,306.25
14,696.31

................................
................................

1,305.01
14,696.31

Name and country

Senator Lindsey Graham:
Israel ............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Ryan Geary:
Israel ............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Taylor Reidy:
Israel ............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Aaron Strickland:
Israel ............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Israel ............................................................................................................................................................

New Israeli Sheqel ...............................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,305.01
................................

................................
14,696.31

New Israeli Sheqel ...............................

................................

................................

11,547.22

11,547.22

Total .........................................................................................................................................................

...............................................................

5,325.51

51,289.93

11,547.22

68,162.66

* Note: All values are United States Dollar Equivalent.
** Delegation expenses include payments and reimbursements to the Department of State, under authority of Sec. 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended by Section 22 of P.L. 95–384, and S. Res. 179 agreed to May 25,

1977.
SENATOR LINDSEY GRAHAM,
Chairman, Committee on the Budget, Jan. 23, 2026.

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE, UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON CONGRESSIONAL-EXECUTIVE COMMISSION ON CHINA FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. Dollar ............................................
Yen .......................................................
NTD .......................................................

................................
1,493.73
881.54

5,938.63
................................
................................

................................
................................
................................

5,938.63
1,493.73
881.54

Name and country

Piero Tozzi:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Japan ............................................................................................................................................................
Taiwan ..........................................................................................................................................................
Andrew Hartnett:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Japan ............................................................................................................................................................
Taiwan ..........................................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: *
Japan ............................................................................................................................................................
Taiwan ..........................................................................................................................................................

U.S. Dollar ............................................
Yen .......................................................
NTD .......................................................

................................
1,493.72
881.53

6,655.53
................................
................................

................................
................................
................................

6,655.53
1,493.72
881.53

Yen .......................................................
NTD .......................................................

................................
................................

................................
914.66

428.87
1,519.92

428.87
2,434.58

Total .........................................................................................................................................................

...............................................................

4,750.52

13,508.82

1,948.79

20,208.13

* Delegation expenses include official expenses reimbursed to the Department of State, under the authority of Sec. 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended by Sec. 22 of P.L. 95–384, and S. Res. 179 agreed to May 25,

1977.
HON. CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH,
Co-chairman, Committee on Congressional-Executive Commission on China,
Jan. 21, 2026.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE, UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON U.S. COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name and country

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

Kyle Parker: 1
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
France ...........................................................................................................................................................
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................
Rachel Bauman:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................

Dollar ....................................................
Euro ......................................................
Zloty ......................................................

................................
................................
................................

70.00
................................
................................

................................
................................
................................

70.00
................................
................................

Dollar ....................................................

................................

105.00

................................

105.00

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.004

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

S395

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE, UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON U.S. COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025—Continued
Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name and country

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

France ...........................................................................................................................................................
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................
Janice Helwig:
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................
Fleur Cowan:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................
Jordan Warlick:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................
Shannon Simrell:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................
Bakhti Nishanov:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................
Everett Price: 2
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Italy ..............................................................................................................................................................
Everett Price:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Turkey ...........................................................................................................................................................
Fleur Cowan:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Turkey ...........................................................................................................................................................
Bakhti Nishanov:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Turkey ...........................................................................................................................................................
Everett Price: 3
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Austria ..........................................................................................................................................................
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
Alanna Marguiles:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
Lithuania ......................................................................................................................................................
Austria ..........................................................................................................................................................
Fleur Cowan:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Lithuania ......................................................................................................................................................
Austria ..........................................................................................................................................................
Janice Helwig:
Kyrgyzstan ....................................................................................................................................................
Rachel Bauman:
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Kyrgyzstan ....................................................................................................................................................
Janice Helwig:
Austria ..........................................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: * **
France ...........................................................................................................................................................
Poland ..........................................................................................................................................................
Italy ..............................................................................................................................................................
Turkey ...........................................................................................................................................................
Austria ..........................................................................................................................................................
Belgium ........................................................................................................................................................
Lithuania ......................................................................................................................................................
Kyrgyzstan ....................................................................................................................................................
Austria ..........................................................................................................................................................

Euro ......................................................
Zloty ......................................................

................................
................................

................................
................................

................................
................................

................................
................................

Zloty ......................................................

................................

95.00

................................

95.00

Dollar ....................................................
Zloty ......................................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

Dollar ....................................................
Zloty ......................................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

Dollar ....................................................
Zloty ......................................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

Dollar ....................................................
Zloty ......................................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

Dollar ....................................................
Euro ......................................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

................................
................................

35.00
................................

Dollar ....................................................
Turkish Lira ..........................................

................................
1,714.12

10,176.01
................................

................................
................................

10,176.01
1,714.12

Dollar ....................................................
Turkish Lira ..........................................

................................
1,714.12

7,789.83
................................

................................
................................

7,789.83
1,714.12

Dollar ....................................................
Turkish Lira ..........................................

................................
1,714.12

7,738.43
................................

................................
................................

7,738.43
1,714.12

Dollar ....................................................
Euro ......................................................
Euro ......................................................

................................
................................
................................

35.00
................................
................................

................................
................................
................................

35.00
................................
................................

Dollar ....................................................
Euro ......................................................
Euro ......................................................
Euro ......................................................

................................
958.22
870.82
1,573.91

12,463.63
................................
................................
................................

................................
................................
................................
................................

12,463.63
958.22
870.82
1,573.91

Dollar ....................................................
Euro ......................................................
Euro ......................................................

................................
870.81
1,573.92

2,812.23
................................
................................

................................
................................
................................

2,812.23
870.81
1,573.92

Kyrgyz Som ...........................................

2,064.00

4,774.83

................................

6,838.83

Dollar ....................................................
Kyrgyz Som ...........................................

................................
2,064.00

4,774.83
................................

................................
................................

4,774.83
2,064.00

Euro ......................................................

32,306.00

................................

................................

32,306.00

Euro ......................................................
Zloty ......................................................
Euro ......................................................
Turkish Lira ..........................................
Euro ......................................................
Euro ......................................................
Euro ......................................................
Kyrgyz Som ...........................................
Euro ......................................................

................................
................................
................................
................................
................................
................................
................................
................................
................................

................................
................................
................................
................................
................................
................................
................................
................................
................................

................................
7,231.66
................................
19.60
308.41
................................
731.29
1,400.70
................................

................................
7,231.66
................................
19.60
308.41
................................
731.29
1,400.70
................................

Totals .......................................................................................................................................................

...............................................................

47,424.04

51,009.79

9,691.66

108,125.49

1 Staffdel Parker to France and Poland was canceled due to a lapse in government funding.
2 Staffdel Price to Italy was canceled due to a lapse in government funding.
3 Everett Price canceled travel to Austria and Belgium due to medical reasons.
* Cancellation fees go toward delegation expenses.
** Delegation expenses include payments and reimbursements to the Department of State under the authority of Sec. 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended by Section 22 of P.L. 95–384, and S. Res. 179 agreed to May
25, 1977.
SENATOR ROGER F. WICKER,
Chairman, Committee on U.S. Commission on Security and Cooperation in
Europe, Jan. 23, 2026.

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON DEMOCRATIC LEADER FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Name and country

Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

CODEL Schumer—Cancelled
Delegation Expenses: **
Japan ............................................................................................................................................................
Chris Homan:
Norway ..........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................

Yen .......................................................

................................

................................

13,148.87

13,148.87

Norwegian Krone ..................................
US Dollar ..............................................

739.88
................................

................................
5,794.13

................................
................................

739.88
5,794.13

Total .........................................................................................................................................................

...............................................................

739.88

5,794.13

13,148.87

19,682.88

* Note: All values are United States Dollar Equivalent.
** Delegation expenses include payments and reimbursements to the Department of State under authority of Sec. 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended by Section 22 of P.L. 95–384, and S. Res. 179 agreed to May 25,
1977.
SENATOR CHARLES SCHUMER,
Democratic Leader, Jan. 15, 2026.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.004

S29JAPT1

S396

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON ENERGY & NATURAL RESOURCES FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

369.63
847.27
................................

................................
................................
10,668.04

................................
................................
................................

369.63
847.27
10,668.04

Name and country

Senator Steve Daines:
Qatar ............................................................................................................................................................
United Arab Emirates ...................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Darin Thacker:
Qatar ............................................................................................................................................................
United Arab Emirates ...................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Qatar ............................................................................................................................................................
United Arab Emirates ...................................................................................................................................

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

372.05
849.69
................................

................................
................................
24,646.91

................................
................................
................................

372.05
849.69
24,646.91

Qatari Rial ............................................
UAE Dirham ..........................................

................................
................................

................................
................................

439.00
671.37

439.00
671.37

Total .........................................................................................................................................................

...............................................................

2,438.64

35,314.95

1,110.37

38,863.96

*Note: All values are United States Dollar Equivalent.
**Delegation expenses include payments and reimbursements to the Department of State under authority of Sec. 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended by Section 22 of P.L. 95–384, and S. Res. 179 agreed to May 25,
1977.
SENATOR MIKE LEE,
Chairman, Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, Dec. 18, 2025.

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON FINANCE FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025

Name and country

Name of currency

Senator Peter Welch:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Philip Mcdaniel:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Total .........................................................................................................................................................

Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

Canadian Dollar ...................................

776.00

................................

................................

Canadian Dollar ...................................

724.28

................................

................................

776.00
724.28

Canadian Dollar ...................................

................................

................................

1,419.40

1,419.40

...............................................................

1,500.28

................................

1,419.40

2,919.68

* Note: All values are United States Dollar Equivalent.
** Delegation expenses include payments and reimbursements to the Department of State under authority of Sec. 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended by Section 22 of P.L. 95–384, and S. Res. 179 agreed to May 25,
1977.
SENATOR MICHAEL CRAPO,
Chairman, Committee on Finance, Jan. 7, 2026.

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

Name of currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,640.00
................................

................................
8,933.41

................................
................................

1,640.00
8,933.41

New Israeli Sheqel ...............................

................................

................................

2,014.63

2,014.63

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

528.98
................................

................................
7,655.50

................................
................................

528.98
7,655.50

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

530.96
................................

................................
13,255.53

................................
................................

530.96
13,255.53

Euro ......................................................

................................

................................

3,398.92

3,398.92

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,651.24
................................

................................
9,888.63

................................
................................

1,651.24
9,888.63

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,651.24
................................

................................
11,705.03

................................
................................

1,651.24
11,705.03

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Name and country

Roy Awabdeh:
Israel ............................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Israel ............................................................................................................................................................
Senator John Barrasso:
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Charles Ziegler:
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Germany .......................................................................................................................................................
Brian Cullen:
Thailand .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Leonidas Kehagias:
Thailand .......................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Thailand .......................................................................................................................................................
Senator Steve Daines:
Bahrain .........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Darin Thacker:
Bahrain .........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Bahrain .........................................................................................................................................................
United Arab Emirates ...................................................................................................................................
Naz Durakoglu:
Colombia ......................................................................................................................................................
Ecuador ........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Guy Mentel:
Colombia ......................................................................................................................................................
Ecuador ........................................................................................................................................................
United States ...............................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Colombia ......................................................................................................................................................
Ecuador ........................................................................................................................................................
Senator Christopher Coons:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Brendan Duff:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Amy English:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Baht ......................................................

................................

................................

234.04

234.04

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

451.34
................................

................................
23,107.03

................................
................................

451.34
23,107.03

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

451.34
................................

................................
20,933.33

................................
................................

451.34
20,933.33

Bahraini Dinar ......................................
UAE Dirham ..........................................

................................
................................

................................
................................

592.86
643.96

592.86
643.96

Colombian Peso ....................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,850.41
560.50
................................

................................
................................
4,600.54

................................
................................
................................

1,850.41
560.50
4,600.54

US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................
US Dollar ..............................................

1,861.22
560.50
................................

................................
................................
4,525.59

................................
................................
................................

1,861.22
560.50
4,525.59

Colombian Peso ....................................
US Dollar ..............................................

................................
................................

................................
................................

6,861.82
2,078.16

6,861.82
2,078.16

US Dollar ..............................................

773.50

................................

................................

773.50

US Dollar ..............................................

682.50

................................

................................

682.50

US Dollar ..............................................

757.50

................................

................................

757.50

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.004

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

S397

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS FOR FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE U.S. SENATE UNDER AUTHORITY OF SEC. 22, P.L. 95–384—22
U.S.C. 1754(b), COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS FOR TRAVEL FROM OCT. 1 TO DEC. 31, 2025—Continued

Name and country

Name of currency

Margaret Flynn Sapia:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Guy Mentel:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Christopher Socha:
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Delegation Expenses: **
Canada .........................................................................................................................................................
Total .........................................................................................................................................................

Per diem

Transportation

Miscellaneous

Total

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency

US Dollar ..............................................

682.50

................................

................................

682.50

US Dollar ..............................................

796.03

................................

................................

796.03

US Dollar ..............................................

915.50

................................

................................

915.50

Canadian Dollar ...................................

................................

................................

4,372.74

4,372.74

...............................................................

16,345.26

104,604.59

20,197.13

141,146.98

* Note: All values are United States Dollar Equivalent.
** Delegation expenses include payments and reimbursements to the Department of State under authority of Sec. 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended by Section 22 of P.L. 95–384, and S. Res. 179 agreed to May 25,
1977.
SENATOR JAMES E. RISCH,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relations, Jan. 22, 2026.

RESOLUTIONS SUBMITTED TODAY
Mr. THUNE. I ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to the en
bloc consideration of the following resolutions, which are at the desk: S. Res.
592, S. Res. 593, S. Res. 594.
There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the resolutions
en bloc.
Mr. THUNE. I ask unanimous consent that the resolutions be agreed to,
the preambles be agreed to, and the
motions to reconsider be considered
made and laid upon the table, all en
bloc.
The resolutions were agreed to.
The preambles were agreed to.
(The resolutions, with their preambles, are printed in today’s RECORD
under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
f

ORDERS FOR FRIDAY, JANUARY
30, 2026
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that when the Senate completes its business today, it
stand adjourned until 11 a.m., Friday,
January 30; that following the prayer
and pledge, the Journal of proceedings
be approved to date, the morning hour
be deemed expired, the time for the two
leaders be reserved for their use later
in the day, morning business be closed,
and the Senate resume consideration of
the motion to proceed to Calendar No.
302, H.R. 7148.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

NOMINATIONS
Executive nominations received by
the Senate:
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL TRADE
COMMISSION
BRETT DOYLE, OF CONNECTICUT, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMIS-

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
TROY EDGAR, OF CALIFORNIA, TO BE AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA TO THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR.

UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL TRADE
COMMISSION
DAVID FOLEY, JR., OF VIRGINIA, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMISSION FOR A TERM EXPIRING JUNE 16, 2032, VICE AMY
KARPEL, TERM EXPIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
FRANK GARCIA, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE AN ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF STATE (AFRICAN AFFAIRS), VICE MARY
CATHERINE PHEE.

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FOUNDATION
FRANK GARCIA, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE A MEMBER OF THE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
FOUNDATION FOR A TERM EXPIRING SEPTEMBER 22, 2031,
VICE MORGAN W. DAVIS, TERM EXPIRED.

TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY
ARTHUR GRAHAM, OF FLORIDA, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE TENNESSEE VALLEY
AUTHORITY FOR A TERM EXPIRING MAY 18, 2031. (REAPPOINTMENT)

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
MELISSA HOLYOAK, OF UTAH, TO BE UNITED STATES
ATTORNEY FOR THE DISTRICT OF UTAH FOR THE TERM
OF FOUR YEARS, VICE TRINA A. HIGGINS.

FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION
DAVID LACERTE, OF LOUISIANA, TO BE A MEMBER OF
THE FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION FOR
A TERM EXPIRING JUNE 30, 2031. (REAPPOINTMENT)

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
COLIN MCDONALD, OF CALIFORNIA, TO BE AN ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL, VICE TODD SUNHWAE KIM.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
MICHAEL VANCE, OF VIRGINIA, TO BE AN ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF STATE (INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH),
VICE BRETT M. HOLMGREN, RESIGNED.

NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION
DOUGLAS WEAVER, OF MARYLAND, TO BE A MEMBER
OF THE NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION FOR THE
TERM OF FIVE YEARS EXPIRING JUNE 30, 2031. (REAPPOINTMENT)

THE JUDICIARY

ADJOURNMENT UNTIL 11 A.M.
TOMORROW
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, if there is
no further business to come before the
Senate, I ask that it stand adjourned
under the previous order.
There being no objection, the Senate,
at 11:18 p.m., adjourned until Friday,
January 30, 2026, at 11 a.m.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

SION FOR A TERM EXPIRING DECEMBER 16, 2030, VICE
RHONDA K. SCHMIDTLEIN, TERM EXPIRED.

Jkt 069060

ANDREW B. DAVIS, OF TEXAS, TO BE UNITED STATES
DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF
TEXAS, VICE EARL LEROY YEAKEL III, RETIRED.
SHARON E. GOODIE, OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, TO
BE AN ASSOCIATE JUDGE OF THE SUPERIOR COURT OF
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FOR THE TERM OF FIFTEEN
YEARS, VICE ANTHONY C. EPSTEIN, RETIRED.
JOHN THOMAS SHEPHERD, OF ARKANSAS, TO BE
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE WESTERN
DISTRICT OF ARKANSAS, VICE SUSAN OWENS HICKEY,
RETIRING.
ANNA ST. JOHN, OF LOUISIANA, TO BE UNITED STATES
DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF LOUISIANA, VICE SARAH S. VANCE, RETIRED.
CHRISTOPHER R. WOLFE, OF TEXAS, TO BE UNITED
STATES DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT
OF TEXAS, VICE DAVID CAMPOS GUADERRAMA, RETIRED.

IN THE AIR FORCE
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE RESERVE OF THE AIR FORCE TO THE GRADE INDICATED UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 12203:

To be major general
BRIG. GEN. MICHELLE L. WAGNER

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 9801

IN THE ARMY
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY
JUDGE ADVOCATE GENERAL’S CORPS UNDER TITLE 10,
U.S.C., SECTIONS 624 AND 7064:

To be major
JESSICA A. ADLER
JENEKWA S. AGAPE
SAUNGHUN J. ANN
ONITSED A. ARREGUI
JOSHUA A. BAKER
SIMON A. BARTA
PHILIP R. BEDFORD
SARA E. BENNETT
GISELE S. BIGRAS
MATTHEW S. BOSAKOWSKI
MELISSA R. BOX
HAYLEY J. BOYD
LEYLA Z. BRAMMER
MICHAEL B. BRINKLEY
JOSHUA D. BRITE
JAKOB R. BROOKS
MATTHEW W. BROWN
PHILLIP M. BROWN
JOHN A. BRUNNER–BROWN
AMBER L. BUNCH
PARKER M. BUSH
NICHOLAS R. CALE
ANTIONETTE C. CARRADINE
KATE E. COLLINS
MARK A. CORNMAN
PETER J. COUTO
ELI M. CREIGHTON
RUDOLPH P. DAMBECK
JAMES R. DANIELL III
SANA H. DANIELL
SHELBY L. DECKERT
DIANA H. DEQUATTRO
BRYAN E. DOLIN
CONNOR A. DOYLE
THOMAS D. EVANS
ERIC A. FENTON
SHANNON J. FIELDS
ABIGAIL V. GILL
JORDAN A. GREEN
STUART A. HAMM, JR.
ANDY H. HARVEY
JESSICA K. HAYASHIDA
JUSTIN B. HAYES
KENNETH L. HENLEY
BRENT K. HIGGINS
MEGAN C. HOLT
JON C. HOPE
KRYSTIN E. HUSZ
JESSICA J. JACKSON
JORI A. JASPER
ANDRES R. JIMENEZ
NOAH D. JOHNSON
RENEE S. JUST
DAVID J. KIM
JAISY KIM
CONNOR B. KOHLSCHEEN
JOHNATHAN A. LARKIN
ZACHARY R. LARSON
ERIN N. LECLAIRSTEPANEK
LEIGH A. LEDUC
EMILY J. LESSIN
BRENDA LIN
CAITLIN T. LINCOLN
MATTHEW N. LONG
SAMANTHA M. LUBIN
GABRIELLE R. LUCERO
MATTHEW D. MANGRU
JOHN R. MCMAHON
AARON C. MEYER
ANDREW W. MOORE
MICHAEL W. MOORE, JR.
BRIANNA K. MORLOCK
AMANDA D. NARANJO
BRANDY F. NELSON
JACOB C. NELSON
BRANDEN R. NETHKEN
AVERY L. ORY
JOSHUA J. PALDINO
BRENNA N. PARISH

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.004

S29JAPT1

S398

THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY
NURSE CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 624 AND
7064:

To be major
DERIEK D. FRANCE

IN THE COAST GUARD
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE UNITED STATES COAST GUARD TO THE GRADE INDICATED UNDER TITLE 14 U.S.C., SECTION 2121(E), INCLUDING THOSE RESERVE OFFICERS WHO ARE TO BE APPOINTED AS PERMANENT COMMISSIONED OFFICERS
PURSUANT TO TITLE 14 U.S.C., SECTION 2101:

To be lieutenant commander

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

DOUGLAS H. PARTRIDGE
AMANDA L. PERRY
BREANNE K. PHAN
JASON B. REEVES
JOSEPH A. ROMAN
RACHEL M. ROSE
SEAN P. ROWLAND
HOPE L. SALVUCCI
JAGUAR H. SASMITO
NICHOLAS A. SCHAFFER
CONNOR J. SCHARFF
JOHN P. SCHELLMAN
NICHOLAS R. SCHIELDS
ROBERT M. SCHRACK
DARREN SINGH
ROBERT H. SMITH
LOUIS S. STEINER
JOSEPH N. STRZEMPKO
ASIA J. THIGPEN
MAURICE Q. THURMAN
PHILIP J. TONSETH
THOMAS C. TURNER
YVETTE C. TYSON
ALEXANDER P. VANSCOY
KENNETH E. VOET
CODY J. WAAGNER
HEATHER L. WAAGNER
JACOB K. WATTS
ANTHONY R. WILLIAMSON
JOSHIAH A. WILSON
CORINA M. WYNN
EVAN W. ZALENSKI
JACOB R. ZENT
0003671139

EDWARD J. ABMA
KIRA R. ADAMS
DAVID P. AHMADIAN
DAVIS T. ALEXANDER
ANTHONY W. ALGER
VICTOR M. ALMA
KENT H. ALTOBELLI
GAY L. AMORES
MATTHEW J. ANDREOLI
ALIZA B. ANGUS
ABNER Y. AYALA
PHILLIP J. AZZARI
LIAM V. BACON
CODY T. BAIR
JUSTIN W. BAKER
ROBERT M. BAKER
JACOB G. BALCHIKONIS
DANIEL C. BANKE
COLLIN A. BATCHELOR
KATHERINE M. BEINE
AARON D. BENSON
AMANDA G. BENSON
ANDREW J. BICHLMEIER
RONALD Z. BLEWETT
MAGEN G. BLOCH
BRANDON W. BOOKS
GLEB V. BOROVOK
MICHAEL A. BOSCH
JASON L. BOUCHER
CAMERON C. BOX
JAKOBI G. BRADFORD
HEATH A. BREWER
VICTOR L. BROSKEY
BLAKE D. BROSTROM
CASEY L. BRUTUS
JONATHAN E. BULLOCK
MARCUS J. CALKINS
CRAIG J. CAMPBELL
DAVID M. CAMPBELL
HANNAH CANNON–MCCRAE
TIMOTHY J. CARDENAS
TYLER S. CARLSGAARD
KYLE P. CAROSOTTO
RYAN J. CARPENTER
CHELSEA W. CARR
GERALD M. CARR
JAMES M. CARZOLI
BRETT A. CASTELLAT
PETER S. CHAMBERS
KEITH J. CHARTERS
HAYDEN E. CHERRY
AUSTIN J. CLARK
KYLE S. CLAUSEN
CHARLES R. CLEMMER
LAWRENCE V. COFFEY
FRANCISCO R. COLOMBRANA
CHRISTOPHER S. COMBELLICK
AVIERRE J. CONNER
DAVID E. COOPER
SHANE P. CORBETT
NATALIE R. CORDES
DRURY R. CORLEY
WILLIAM T. COX III
SAMUEL L. CRENSHAW

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

BRYANT J. CRESPO
BLAISE C. CURTIS
JUSTIN B. DADLANI
CLARA E. DAHILL-BAUE
MENGHAN S. DAI
HELENA B. DANIEL
DREW R. DANIELS
SARAH S. DAVIS
CHRISTOPHER M. DEANE
SERGIO F. DEFREITAS
EILEEN E. DELEO
JULIE N. DELESANDRI
HANNAH T. DELGUERCIO
MATTHEW J. DEVLIN
LUKE M. DEWHIRST
JOSHUA E. DIAZ
DIMITRI G. DIMTROFF
JARRETT J. DIXON
PATRICK R. DIXON
MICHAEL L. DOUGALL
KEVIN J. DOVE II
KATHLEEN K. DOWNS
MORGAN E. DREISS
JOHN D. DUNAWAY III
CHRISTOPHER M. DUNTON
SULLI E. EDWARDS
CHARLES T. EHRET
CRYSTAL M. ESCALANTE
TANNER A. EVANS
SHANO A. EZZELL, JR.
MATTHEW R. FANN
MIRANDA E. FAY
MICHAEL P. FINLEY
SASHA M. FLAHERTY
SERGIO E. FLETES, JR.
DIANA M. FLORES
BRENDAN A. FLYNN
ROBERT W. FORD
RUTH A. FORD
MEGHAN M. FORNARO
MALEENA X. FRAZIER
KELLEN A. FRENCH
ROBERT J. FROEMBLING
CARL G. FUHS
GRACIELA A. FULLER
ALEXANDER R. GAGNE
JESS M. GALLANT
CHELSEA J. GARCIA
NOEL L. GARCIA
JAMES H. GARDNER
JONATHAN J. GARDNER
STEVEN M. GELETY
ZACHARY K. GEORGIA
CORY J. GEYER
RAMON H. GILDOMINGUEZ
RYAN A. GILBERT
CARLIE L. GILLIGAN
JUSTIN P. GOFF
FRANK R. GOOCH III
ANDREW J. GRADY
WHITNEY H. GRAHAM
DEVIN C. GREENWELL
SHELBY K. GRISWOLD
JORDAN D. GROFF
SETH W. GROSS
LUKAS N. GROVES
MARK J. GUENTERT
RYAN P. GUINEE
JACOB M. HADDEN
CARA L. HAHN
JENNIFER H. HALEY
COTY B. HALL
TRACY D. HAM II
KERRY J. HAMBY
ALEXANDER J. HAMMAC
FABIAN D. HANDY II
ERIC J. HARRIS, JR.
NATHANIEL D. HARTT
QUINN K. HATHCOCK
KENNETH L. HAWKINS, JR.
ADAM P. HAWORTH
JUSTIN J. HERBERT
CHRISTOPHER J. HESS
BRIAN K. HOLCOMBE
MATTHEW G. HOLLINGSWORTH
MITCHELL E. HOLLOWAY
KEITH R. HOLMES
JORDAN A. HOPSON
MATTHEW L. HUBBARD
CHRISTOPHER J. HUMPHREY
JULIA I. HUNLEY
KENNETH M. IRSIK
CONNOR W. IVES
KYLE R. JACKSON
JOSHUA A. JANNEY
KARRIE A. JEFFRIES
JEH C. JOHNSON, JR.
RACHEL B. JOHNSON
FLOR N. JOSEPH
EDWARD C. JOYCE
WILLIAM C. JOYNER
ERIC J. JUBACK
TYLER R. JUSTUS
COLIN T. KELLY
NATASHA M. KENNEY
SEAN M. KILLIAN
JOSHUA G. KING
EMILY R. KINGSLEY
WILLIAM E. KLEIN
JASON M. KNISS
DANIEL S. KOBS
GRETCHEN M. KRAUSE
NIKOLIA M. KRUGER
SEAN S. KSHIMETSKI
SARAH A. KUKICH
EDWIN J. KUSTER II
LAUREN P. LABELLE

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 9801

JORDAN S. LACHOWSKY
ANNA A. LAMACCHIO
ALYSSIA LAMONACA
EDWARD L. LAZOWSKI
JASON S. LEE
JONATHAN LESIEUR
CHARLES W. LESPERANCE
KYLE S. LEVY
NICHOLAS M. LITCHFIELD
BANNING S. LOBMEYER
NICHOLAS P. LODOVICI
JORDAN J. LONG
MICHAEL E. LONG
JUSTIN R. LOVELL
WILLIAM K. LOWE
KEVIN F. LOWERY
MONICA R. LUEBKE
MIRANDA A. LUNA
CHAD B. LYMAN
MEGAN M. MAHONEY
CHARLES B. MAJEWSKI
RYAN J. MAJOR
NICHOLAS C. MANDOZZI
PAMELA J. MANNS
MORGAN K. MANVILLE
NIKOLAY G. MARKOV
BRYAN J. MAROT
JAKE T. MARTIN
JESSICA M. MARTIN
JOHN P. MARTIN
CARLOS A. MARTINEZ
ROBERT S. MARX
WILLIAM B. MASON IV
BRYCE M. MATAKAS
NOEL T. MATEO
NATHANIEL D. MATTHEWS
DAVID M. MATTSON
WILLIAM P. MAXAM III
SEAN A. MAZER
CHRISTOPHER M. MCCARTHY
JACLYN M. MCELLIGOTT
THOMAS J. MCENTEE
MICHAEL B. MCGEE
JORDAN R. MCGEE DAVILA
ROBERT W. MCKENNA
DAVID W. MCKINLEY
KATRINA E. MCLEOD
BRADLEY T. MCNELL
EVA M. MCNELL
TAYLOR G. MECHAM
MOIRA H. MEEK
CHRISTINA M. MELANCON
FLORENCIA K. MENDEZ-KIELY
ASHLEY W. MEYER
IAN J. MEYER
ANNA W. MICHAEL
JOSEPH B. MILLER
JUSTIN C. MILLER
MILES J. MILLER
BRIAN T. MILLS
LUKE J. MILYARD
ANTON W. MOHAMMED
DEVIN M. MONTEIRO
RICHARD R. MOORE
JOSHUA MOOYA
JOSHUA J. MORROW
STEPHANIE R. MOTTA
JACOB T. MULLINS
CORY J. MURALLO
SARA S. MURALLO
KATHERINE A. MURRAY
MATTHEW P. NAYLOR
DAYRA NAZARIO
PEYTON M.C. NEDLEY
DANIEL H. NELSON
KEVIN NG
KATHERINE D. NIELSEN
VINCENT J. NITOPI
KYLE J. NOLAN
JOEL C. NORTON
PHILIP A. O’NEIL
MATTHEW J. ORGILL
JONATHAN P. ORTHMAN
LIAM C. OTTO
JEFFREY E. OVERCASH
JAMES A. OWNBEY
NICHOLAS C. PAISKER
GIANFRANCO D. PALOMBA
MEGHAN E. PALOMBA
MICHAEL J. PALOMBA
DAVID N. PARKER
HOLLIE L. PARRISH
CHRISTOPHER J. PAYNE
GINGER O. PENA
CAMERON A. PERRY
SUZANNA M. PETERS
CHELLSEY A. PHILLIPS CANLAS
KYLE D. PHILLIPS
VICTORIA V. PHOENIX
CAITLIN E. PIKER
SARA I. PISARSKI
JACOB C. PITKIN
FERNANDO E. PLA
SAM POLLARD, JR.
STEVEN K. POPE
TEVIN L. PORTER–PERRY
SARAH A. PORZILLO
TRAVIS J. POULOS
MICHAEL A. PRAY
BRANDON M. PROUT
CARTER P. PROVOST
MICHAEL B. PURCELL
CARLOS M. QUINTERO
BENJAMIN C. RACZ
LAURA M. RAMBO
STEPHEN J. RATASKY
JACOB J. RATH

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.009

S29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:15 Jan 30, 2026

S399

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

JUSTIN T. REBHOLZ
BRANDON R. REED
BRYAN K. REED
PETER J. REEVE
STEPHANIE C. REGIS
ROBERT P. RENFROW
JOAQUIN I. REYESCARRENO
DAVID N. REZA
NICHOLAS R. RIGGINS
ERIC J. RILEY
JAMES A. RIMMELE
EARL A. ROBERTS
JOHN M. RODDY, JR.
VICTORIA M. RODDY
ALEXANDER R. RODGERS
BRIANNA L. RODGERS
LISA S. ROGERS
JONATHAN D. ROTH
AMANDA C. ROY
CASEY A. RUDE
JAMES R. RUONA
MEGAN P. SACKETT
ABIGAIL A. SADLER
BRITTANY M. SAGARDIA
TAYLOR H. SALZBERG
TIMOTHY D. SARGENT
ALYSSA C. SATO
LAWRENCE J. SCHAD
BRENT M. SCHIFFER
GREGORY T. SCHMIDT
FREDERICK M. SCOTT V
BRYAN E. SCOTT
RACHEL M. SEAMAN
ALLEN J. SHAW
MAXIMILLIAN S. SHERNO
MEGAN P. SIDERS
DAVID M. SIMMONS

HAYLEY C. SMITH
GEOFF R. SNYDER
KENNETH J. SNYDER
CORY H. SONNEGA
SYDNEY C. SONNEGA
HANNAH M. SPHAR
DUSTIN E. STACKHOUSE
JENNIFER O. STEIN
BRADY L. STEPAN
IEVGEN V. STEPANCHUK
JARED M. STEVENS
SEAN A. STICKNEY
JODY K. STIGER
DAVID W. STROJNY
BRADLEY C. SUCIU
KAROLINA SULLIVAN
BONNY A. SUSKI
EVAN P. SUTTON
KYLE J. SWANNEY
HOLDEN S. TAKAHASHI
DANIELLE P. TAYLOR
LINDSEY M. TAYLOR
CALEB J. TEACHOUT
GIACOMO TERRIZZI III
LONDEN J. THOMAS
DAVID M. TIRADOTOLOSA
CONNIE S. TOBLER
JORDYN C. TOLEFREE
MEGAN M. TOOMEY
BERTRAND L. TOONE
MICHAEL D. TORGESEN
ORLANDO TORRES
KATHRYN E. TORSELLA
JACQUELYN Y. TOUSIGNANT
JOHN L. TRAUTWEIN
BRANDON W. TUCKER
DAVID TURAY

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 4637

SAMUEL J. TURK
KYLE S. UNGER
SAVANNA L. VANDEHEI
PHILLIP H. VANDERWEIT
ZACHARY W. VELASQUEZ
GREGORY M. VELLIKY
DEREK J. VICTORY
MARIA F. VILLANUEVA
ANGELA–RUTH A. VU
MARC A. WAGNER
KYLE K. WALKER
LIAM T. WALMSLEY
JAMES M. WALSH
THOMAS J. WALSH
EVAN M. WARD
JAMES A. WEAVER
ZACHARY W. WEEKS
WESTLEY G. WELLS
JEANETTE M. WHEATLEY
CHLOE A. WHITAKER
DANIEL A. WHITAKER
JEREMY J. WHITE
JOHN S. WHITE
KYLE N. WIFORD
MATTHEW T. WILLIAMS
MORGAN D. WILLIAMS
CHARLES J. WOLFF
EDWARD J. WRIGHT IV
JESSICA S. WRIGHT
LUCY M. WRIGHT
TAYLOR A. WRIGHT
KATHERINE B. YOHO
MATTHEW D. YOUNG
DOUGLAS J. ZIMMERMAN
MARK B. ZINDERMAN
DEVON D. ZYCH

Sfmt 9801

E:\CR\FM\A29JA6.015

S29JAPT1

Thursday, January 29, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate
Chamber Action
Routine Proceedings, pages S357–S399
Measures Introduced: Thirty-two bills and four
resolutions were introduced, as follows: S.
3721–3752, S.J. Res. 104, and S. Res. 592–594.
Pages S376–78

Measures Passed:
International Year of the Woman Farmer: Senate agreed to S. Res. 592, supporting the designation
of 2026 as the ‘‘International Year of the Woman
Farmer’’ to recognize and honor the critical role of
women in agriculture.
Page S397
2025 Potomac River Mid-Air Collision Victims:
Senate agreed to S. Res. 593, honoring the victims
of the 2025 Potomac River mid-air collision.
Page S397

National Catholic Schools Week: Senate agreed to
S. Res. 594, supporting the contributions of Catholic
schools in the United States and celebrating the
52nd annual National Catholic Schools Week.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Page S397

Measures Considered:
Consolidated Appropriations Act—Agreement:
Senate continued consideration of the motion to proceed to consideration of H.R. 7148, making further
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026.
Pages S357–73
During consideration of this measure today, Senate
also took the following action:
By 45 yeas to 55 nays (Vote No. 13), three-fifths
of those Senators duly chosen and sworn, not having
voted in the affirmative, Senate rejected the motion
to close further debate on the motion to proceed to
Page S361
consideration of the bill.
Subsequently, Senator Thune entered a motion to
reconsider the vote by which cloture was not invoked on the motion to proceed to consideration of
the bill.
Page S361
A unanimous-consent agreement was reached providing for further consideration of the motion to
proceed to consideration of the bill at approximately
11 a.m., on Friday, January 30, 2026.
Page S397

Nominations Received: Senate received the following nominations:
Brett Doyle, of Connecticut, to be a Member of
the United States International Trade Commission
for a term expiring December 16, 2030.
Andrew B. Davis, of Texas, to be United States
District Judge for the Western District of Texas.
Troy Edgar, of California, to be Ambassador to
the Republic of El Salvador.
Sharon E. Goodie, of the District of Columbia, to
be an Associate Judge of the Superior Court of the
District of Columbia for the term of fifteen years.
David Foley, Jr., of Virginia, to be a Member of
the United States International Trade Commission
for a term expiring June 16, 2032.
John Thomas Shepherd, of Arkansas, to be United
States District Judge for the Western District of Arkansas.
Frank Garcia, of Virginia, to be an Assistant Secretary of State (African Affairs).
Anna St. John, of Louisiana, to be United States
District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana.
Frank Garcia, of Virginia, to be a Member of the
Board of Directors of the African Development
Foundation for a term expiring September 22, 2031.
Christopher R. Wolfe, of Texas, to be United
States District Judge for the Western District of
Texas.
Arthur Graham, of Florida, to be a Member of the
Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority
for a term expiring May 18, 2031.
Melissa Holyoak, of Utah, to be United States Attorney for the District of Utah for the term of four
years.
David LaCerte, of Louisiana, to be a Member of
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission for a
term expiring June 30, 2031.
Colin McDonald, of California, to be an Assistant
Attorney General.
Michael Vance, of Virginia, to be an Assistant
Secretary of State (Intelligence and Research).
Douglas Weaver, of Maryland, to be a Member of
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for the term of
five years expiring June 30, 2031.
1 Air Force nomination in the rank of general.
D127

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:06 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D29JA6.REC

D29JAPT1

D128

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Routine lists in the Army, and Coast Guard.
Pages S397–99

Executive Reports of Committees:
Pages S375–76
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages S378–79
Statements on Introduced Bills/Resolutions:
Pages S379–82

Amendments Submitted:
Pages S382–92
Authorities for Committees to Meet:
Page S392
Record Votes: One record vote was taken today.
(Total—13)
Page S361
Adjournment: Senate convened at 10:30 a.m. and
adjourned at 11:18 p.m., until 11 a.m. on Friday,
January 30, 2026. (For Senate’s program, see the remarks of the Majority Leader in today’s Record on
page S397.)

Committee Meetings

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

(Committees not listed did not meet)

BUSINESS MEETING
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry: Committee ordered favorably reported an original bill entitled, ‘‘Digital Commodity Intermediaries Act’’.
BUSINESS MEETING
Committee on Armed Services: Committee ordered favorably reported 432 military nominations in the Army,
Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Space Force.
COAST GUARD FORCE LAYDOWN
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation: Subcommittee on Coast Guard, Maritime, and Fisheries
concluded a hearing to examine assessing Coast
Guard force laydown on the heels of historic investment, after receiving testimony from Admiral Kevin
E. Lunday, Commandant, United States Coast
Guard, Department of Homeland Security.
BUSINESS MEETING
Committee on Foreign Relations: Committee ordered favorably reported the following business items:
H.R. 260, to require a strategy to oppose financial
or material support by foreign countries and nongovernmental organizations to the Taliban, with
amendments;
S. 2904, to impose sanctions with respect to the
shadow fleet of the Russian Federation, with an
amendment in the nature of a substitute;
S. 2722, to promote the energy security of Taiwan, with an amendment in the nature of a substitute;
S. 3496, to establish and implement a multi-year
Legal Gold and Mining Partnership Strategy to re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:06 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

January 29, 2026

duce the negative environmental and social impacts
of illicit gold mining in the Western Hemisphere,
with an amendment in the nature of a substitute;
S. 2222, to enhance the security, resilience, and
protection of undersea communication cables vital to
Taiwan’s national security, economic stability, and
defense, particularly in countering gray zone tactics
employed by the People’s Republic of China, with
an amendment in the nature of a substitute;
S. 3249, to enhance United States Government
strategic coordination of the security, installation,
maintenance, and repair of international subsea fiberoptic cables, with an amendment in the nature of a
substitute;
S. 3360, to require a report on internet freedom
in Iran, with an amendment in the nature of a substitute;
S. 1216, to support Taiwan’s international space,
with an amendment in the nature of a substitute;
S. 1369, to support the execution of bilateral
agreements concerning illicit transnational maritime
activity and to authorize the President to impose
sanctions with respect to illegal, unreported, or unregulated fishing and the sale, supply, purchase, or
transfer of endangered species, with an amendment
in the nature of a substitute;
S. 2236, to establish a comprehensive United
States Government initiative to build the capacity of
young leaders and entrepreneurs in Africa; and
The nominations of Frank Weiland, of the District of Columbia, to be an Assistant Secretary
(International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs), Jennifer Wicks McNamara, of Virginia, to be
Ambassador to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam,
Eric Meyer, of California, to be Ambassador to the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Gregory
LoGerfo, of Massachusetts, to be Coordinator for
Counterterrorism, with the rank and status of Ambassador at Large, all of the Department of State.
NOMINATION
Select Committee on Intelligence: Committee concluded a
hearing to examine the nomination of Lieutenant
General Joshua M. Rudd, USA, to be Director of the
National Security Agency, after the nominee testified
and answered questions in his own behalf.
DRUG LABELING
Special Committee on Aging: Committee concluded a
hearing to examine truth in drug labeling, after receiving testimony from John V. Gray, The Ohio
State University Fisher College of Business, Columbus; Michael Ganio, American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Bethesda, Maryland; Stephen W.
Schondelmeyer, University of Minnesota College of
Pharmacy PRIME Institute Center for Infectious

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D29JA6.REC

D29JAPT1

January 29, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

D129

Disease Research and Policy, Minneapolis; and Stephen Colvill, Duke-Margolis Institute for Health
Policy, Washington, D.C.

h

House of Representatives
Chamber Action
The House was not in session today. The House
will meet in Pro Forma session at 10:30 a.m. on Friday, January 30, 2026.

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR FRIDAY,
JANUARY 30, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
No meetings/hearings scheduled.

Committee Meetings

House

No hearings were held.

No hearings are scheduled.

Joint Meetings

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

No joint committee meetings were held.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:06 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D29JA6.REC

D29JAPT1

D130

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

11 a.m., Friday, January 30

10:30 a.m., Friday, January 30

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Friday: Senate will continue consideration
of the motion to proceed to consideration of H.R. 7148,
Consolidated Appropriations Act.
Roll call votes are possible during Friday’s session of
the Senate.

Program for Friday: House will meet in Pro Forma session at 10:30 a.m.

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

January 30, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:06 Jan 30, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D29JA6.REC

D29JAPT1

