UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, MONDAY, JANUARY 5, 2026

No. 2

House of Representatives
The House was not in session today. Its next meeting will be held on Tuesday, January 6, 2026, at 6:30 p.m.

Senate
MONDAY, JANUARY 5, 2026
The Senate met at 3 p.m. and was
called to order by the President pro
tempore (Mr. GRASSLEY).
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
Eternal God, we thank You for a new
year with all its hurdles, hardships,
and hopes. We pause to express our
gratitude, for You have been better to
us than we deserve. Lord, You have
been bread for our hunger, water for
our thirst, and hope for our times of
despair. Guide our lawmakers during
these turbulent times until Your will is
done on Earth, even as it is done in
Heaven. Give them wisdom to discern
sanity from derangement, truth from
falsehood, and light from darkness.
We pray in Your marvelous Name.
Amen.
f

and staff of the rules and precedents regarding proper decorum in debate in
the Senate Chamber.
Rule XIX, paragraph 2 reads:
No Senator in debate shall, directly or indirectly, by any form of words impute to another Senator or to other Senators any conduct or motive unworthy or unbecoming a
Senator.

In addition, the precedents of the
Senate require Senators, when addressing each other, to do so in the third
person and through the Chair.
Senators shall address and refer to
one another using proper titles such as
‘‘the Senator from Iowa,’’ ‘‘the chairman,’’ or ‘‘the majority leader,’’ and
refrain from using first names and
other monikers.
f

RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
BUDD). Under the previous order, the
leadership time is reserved.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The President pro tempore led the
Pledge of Allegiance, as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

SECOND SESSION OF THE 119TH
CONGRESS
The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Today
being the formal convening of the 2nd
session of the 119th Congress, in my capacity as President pro tempore of the
Senate, I wish to remind all Senators

MORNING BUSINESS
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate will be
in a period of morning business, with
Senators permitted to speak therein
for up to 10 minutes each.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Iowa.
f

HEALTHCARE
Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President,
Happy New Year. Congress has a full
plate of issues to work on this year. I
look forward to rolling up my sleeves

and continuing my work for the people
of Iowa this year, as I always do.
One issue that is on my mind is lowering healthcare costs, expanding access to high-quality care, and supporting research and innovation. The
U.S. healthcare needs more reform and
accountability, but we don’t need to
turn it into a socialized, governmentrun healthcare system.
I would like to point out another example, as I have before, of how socialized medicine fails patients. Recently,
a Canadian woman named Jolene Van
Alstine made headlines because of Canada’s socialized single-payer healthcare
system.
Jolene can’t access a healthcare specialist to get the lifesaving surgery
that she needs. Jolene has a rare disease, and she needs surgery. Yet there
is not a surgeon available in her province to perform that surgery. You
would think she would look elsewhere
in Canada to get the surgery, but she
can’t do that. Jolene must get permission from a local specialist first due to
government rules running the socialized healthcare system in Canada.
Yet getting an appointment with a
specialist isn’t possible because no one
is accepting new patients. Now she is
considering ‘‘medical assistance in
dying’’ because Canada’s healthcare
system doesn’t have a surgeon or a specialist that she needs to get that lifesaving care.
American conservative radio commentator Glenn Beck has offered to
cover the patient’s travel expenses to
America if an American surgeon is able
to perform the surgery. I sure hope

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S3

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.000

S05JAPT1

S4

someone will step up to help Jolene in
this way.
So Canada does, however, have an alternative healthcare system. It is
called the United States of America, if
the patient can afford to come here and
pay for the services. I have highlighted
before how Canadians’ cancer patients
are coming to America for treatment.
Socialized medicine leads to longer
wait times and scarce resources. Let
this be another reminder of socialized
medicine’s failures.
I yield the floor.
f

RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY
LEADER
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority leader is recognized.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

SENATE AGENDA
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, 2025 was
a historically busy year here in the
U.S. Senate: the longest session period
in more than 15 years; the greatest
number of votes in half a century;
many, many, many hours in session,
substantially exceeding the average of
the past 78 years.
What do we have to show for all of
that? More than 400 Presidential nominees confirmed, far exceeding the totals of the first year of President
Trump’s first term and of President
Biden’s; repeal of a number of burdensome Biden rules and regulations, including multiple rules that would have
driven up prices for American families
and businesses; legislation to combat
the fentanyl epidemic; to keep criminal illegal immigrants off our streets;
to create the first U.S. Federal framework for stablecoins and ensure U.S.
leadership in financial innovation; and
first and foremost, of course, we passed
the Working Families Tax Cut and the
rest of our landmark legislation.
January 1 was this past Thursday. If
Democrats had their way, Americans
would have been facing a big tax hike
at the start of this year. Instead,
thanks to the Working Families Tax
Cut, Americans will continue to pay
the lower tax rates Republicans passed
in 2017. And that is not all.
In addition to making permanent the
tax relief we passed in 2017, Republicans have added a number of new tax
relief measures to ensure that Americans can keep more of their hardearned money. We further increased
the standard deduction. We further increased the child tax credit and indexed it to inflation so that its value
will never go down. We added a new
bonus deduction for seniors, no tax on
tips and overtime, and the list goes on.
Thanks to our legislation, Americans
will be able to keep more of their hardearned money permanently, and that is
not all our legislation did. Our once-ina-generation legislation also invested
in our national security, in a more secure border, and safer streets.
We repealed Democrats’ natural gas
tax and took steps to unleash Amer-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

ican energy production to ensure
Americans have a stable and affordable
energy supply and more.
Our goal for 2025 was more money in
Americans’ pockets, new opportunities,
and safer streets. We are accomplishing
that with the Working Families Tax
Cuts and the rest of our landmark legislation, and we will continue to expand on that work in 2026.
There are a number of bills that I
would like the Senate to take up, including ROAD to Housing—legislation
that addresses housing affordability
and availability—and market structure
legislation that builds on the success of
the GENIUS Act and provides longoverdue clarity on digital asset regulation.
Our first item of business, though, is
appropriations. We still have work to
do to get as many full-year appropriations bills as possible across the finish
line for fiscal year 2026. I made it very
clear when I became majority leader
that I wanted to get the Senate back to
regular-order appropriations, and we
made a strong start last year, passing
three appropriations bills with robust
bipartisan margins before the August
work period—the first time that we
have passed an appropriations bill that
early since 2018.
Unfortunately, Democrats then chose
to shut down the government, which
seriously delayed our appropriations
work. But we got right back to it after
Democrats finally agreed to reopen the
government, and we were able to get
those three appropriations bills signed
into law by the President this fall.
Now we have another bipartisan, bicameral package of three bills that was
released today and is ready to move
through the House and the Senate.
That will be the priority as soon as
this package comes over from the
House, and Senators can expect continued work on appropriations for the remainder of January.
We have a January 30 deadline to
fund the government, and nobody
should want a repeat of the recent
Democrat shutdown at the end of this
month. So let’s get the rest of this
year’s appropriations bills done so we
can turn our attention to our other responsibilities and to getting the next
fiscal year’s appropriations bills done
in a timely fashion.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

RECOGNITION OF THE MINORITY
LEADER
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
Democratic leader is recognized.

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

VENEZUELA
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, early
Saturday morning, as we all know,
U.S. forces apprehended Venezuelan
President Nicolas Maduro and his wife.
Both of them are now in U.S. custody.
First, I will say this: Maduro is a tyrant. Nobody mourns what has happened to him. Under his watch, the
people of Venezuela have suffered immensely. But now the crucial question
is, What comes next for Venezuela and,
more importantly, for the United
States?
Nobody really seems to know. The
administration’s story keeps changing
by the hour. Even after Secretary
Rubio spent all day Sunday trying to
clean up Trump’s mess, the President
went right back to repeat that the
United States will now apparently run
Venezuela for a while.
On and on and on. No plan. No clarity. Only chaos.
Ironically and dangerously, the chaos
Donald Trump has engendered in Venezuela leads him on, in his mind, to
think he should try the same thing in
Colombia, in Iran, and even in Greenland.
But the danger in Venezuela is only
beginning. Donald Trump has opened a
Pandora’s box, and things can get out
of hand very quickly. And if Donald
Trump tries to do to Colombia and
Greenland what he did to Venezuela,
the disasters and consequences could
compound exponentially, as bad as
Venezuela alone is going to be. Whenever our country has gotten involved in
this kind of regime change and nation
building, American families pay the
price in blood and in treasure. That is
what happened in Iraq, for instance.
The American people did not sign up
for this kind of military adventurism
when they voted for Donald Trump.
They wanted a President focused on
America first, focused on lowering the
cost of living, lowering healthcare
costs, lowering grocery prices. Just
like Donald Trump broke his promise
to release the Epstein files, he is now
breaking his promise to end American
involvement in the endless wars.
I warn my Republican colleagues:
The backlash from the MAGA base on
the war in Venezuela will be swift,
fierce, and thunderous, just like it was
with the Epstein files. And if the Republicans go along with Donald Trump
on Venezuela, Americans will pay the
price in blood and in treasure, while
Republicans could very well pay the
price politically.
In the meantime, the next step for
Congress is clear: We must stop
Trump’s folly by invoking the War
Powers Act. Later this week, I will join
Senator KAINE, Senator SCHIFF, and
Senator PAUL in forcing a vote on our
War Powers Resolution, a bipartisan
measure that will affirm Congress’s authority on matters of war and peace
when it comes to Venezuela. If there
was ever a time for Republicans to step
up to the plate and stand up not just
for the authority of Congress but for

E:\CR\FM\G05JA6.001

S05JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 5, 2026

our national security, our safety, that
time is now.
Separately, this afternoon, leaders of
the House and Senate will meet with
senior administration officials to ask
questions about what is going on in
Venezuela—try to get to the bottom of
it—and what the plan is moving forward. An all-Senators briefing is also
being organized for later this week. I
demanded these briefings immediately
after the strike on Saturday.
The administration owes Congress
and the American people some pretty
basic answers to many important questions—most importantly: What the hell
does Donald Trump mean when he says
the United States now intends to ‘‘run’’
Venezuela? Does this mean we are now
in the business of nation building Venezuela? Are we going to put troops on
the ground? How many? Where? And
how much will it cost? How long will
this go on? These questions should be
answered to the Congress and, more
importantly, to the American people
before the administration attempts
anything akin to so-called running
Venezuela.
Frankly, we also know why Senator
Rubio misled Congress so blatantly
over the past 4 months. On three occasions, I asked Rubio whether or not the
administration was seeking regime
change in Venezuela. Three times the
answer was no. We never really believed him in the first place, to be candid. But if Secretary Rubio wasn’t
straight with us about Venezuela, what
else is he not being straight with us
about now? What else is he not being
straight with the American people
about now? For example, is an attack
on Colombia now on the table? What
about Iran or Greenland?
How is any of this putting America
first? The simple answer is that it is
not.
If you are a family of four in New
York and your healthcare premiums
just doubled on January 1, what are
you supposed to think when you read
in the paper that Donald Trump is
spending billions attacking Venezuela?
If you are struggling to keep a roof
over your head, if you are falling behind on your mortgage payment, what
are you supposed to think when Donald
Trump says we are going to ‘‘run’’ Venezuela for a while?
The American people did not sign up
for another round of endless wars. They
want Donald Trump to focus on the
problems here at home: on healthcare,
on housing, on energy, on groceries.
But Donald Trump’s promise to keep
us out of foreign entanglements is now
as worthless as his promise to release
the Epstein files.
He promises his base one thing on the
campaign trail and does the exact opposite once he is in office, and it is the
American people who will pay the
price.
f

COST OF LIVING
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, now,
on cost of living, if Donald Trump re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

S5

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

fuses to focus on the one thing Americans want most, which is to lower the
cost of living, Democrats are happy to
do it for them. As we begin 2026, Democrats enter the new year on our front
foot. The cost of living will remain the
No. 1 focus for this week, this month,
this year, and beyond.
The tip of the spear for so many people when it comes to costs, of course, is
healthcare. It is now January 5, 2026.
For tens of millions of people, the reality of sky-high premiums has now
been locked in, thanks to Republicans
who let the ACA premium tax credits
expire last year. Millions more no
longer have healthcare at all. Many
others have switched to lower quality
plans and can no longer see the doctors
they have gone to for years and years
and years or afford the medicines that
their children have been taking to cure
deadly diseases. Parents without insurance now don’t know what to do if
their kids get sick.
Every Democrat in the Senate voted
to extend the premium tax credits at
the end of last year. And a number of
Republicans—a small number, unfortunately, of Republicans—in both Chambers say they want to do it. But instead
of listening to the vast majority of
Americans who want these tax credits
rendered, Leader THUNE and Speaker
JOHNSON have sided with rightwing extremists who are happy to see these
credits die. The result: higher premiums, more uninsured Americans,
greater uncertainty for the people back
home—especially people, actually, in
the red States.
Democrats will not relent on the
issue of the cost of living, of how difficult it is for Americans to pay the
bills for things they need. The topic is
not going to go away anytime soon. In
fact, it will only grow in intensity over
the year.
But, as everyone knows, healthcare
is not the only part of the story when
it comes to lowering the cost of living.
In the coming weeks and months,
Democrats will lay out cleanly and
comprehensively how we can lower
costs for the American people on a
number
of
different
topics—from
health to housing, to groceries, to
childcare, to energy costs, and beyond.
In the coming weeks, for example, I
will work with a number of my colleagues, including Senator WARREN, on
the many options we have to help
Americans pay for housing. We also
need to look at lowering grocery costs.
We need to end Donald Trump’s destructive tariffs. We need to help families afford daycare. These are the
things that Americans care about, not
invading Venezuela, not attacking Colombia, or dreaming of invading Greenland.
The Democrats are focused on the
things that matter to the American
people, and we will focus on these like
a laser—the high cost of living; affordability. Just like Democrats are dialed
in on healthcare and brought the Nation’s attention to this important

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 6333

issue, we are also focusing on costs as
they relate to housing and groceries
and energy and childcare and so much
more.
We show the contrast that, while
Donald Trump and Republicans are
spending all of their time on foreign
wars, on ballrooms, on private jets,
Democrats are the ones focused on
helping people pay the bills for the
things they need every day to live their
lives decently.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Mr. MARSHALL. Madam President, I
ask unanimous consent that the order
for the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mrs.
BRITT). Without objection, it is so ordered.
The Senator from Kansas.
f

NATIONAL EARTHQUAKE HAZARDS
REDUCTION
PROGRAM
REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2025
Mr. MARSHALL. Madam President, I
ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to immediate consideration of Calendar No. 183, S. 320.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the bill by title.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
A bill (S. 320) to reauthorize the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977, and for
other purposes.

There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the bill, which
was reported from the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation with an amendment to strike all
after the enacting clause and insert the
part printed in italic, as follows:
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program Reauthorization Act of 2025’’.
SEC. 2. MODIFICATION OF FINDINGS.

Section 2 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7701) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)—
(A) by striking ‘‘50 States, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,’’ and inserting ‘‘States
and Tribal jurisdictions’’;
(B) by striking ‘‘of them’’ and inserting
‘‘States’’;
(C) by striking ‘‘Tennessee,,’’ and inserting ‘‘,
Tennessee,’’; and
(D) by striking ‘‘A large portion of the population of the United States lives in areas vulnerable to earthquake hazards’’ and inserting ‘‘Almost half of the United States population resides in areas that are at risk or experiencing a
damaging earthquake during the 50-year period
beginning on the date of the enactment of the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program Reauthorization Act of 2025’’;
(2) in paragraph (2)—
(A) by inserting after the first sentence the
following: ‘‘A 2023 report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the United
States Geological Survey (FEMA P–366) estimates the annualized earthquake losses to the
national building stock is $14,700,000,000 per
year and the total economic exposure to earthquake losses (buildings and contents) across the
nation is $107,800,000,000,000.’’; and

E:\CR\FM\G05JA6.003

S05JAPT1

S6

(B) in the third sentence—
(i) by striking ‘‘and construction’’ and inserting ‘‘, construction, evaluation, and retrofitting’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘and (E)’’ and inserting the
following: ‘‘(E) inventories of buildings and infrastructure with high seismic risk, especially
those that are critical to community resilience,
(F) programs that require or incentivize replacement or retrofit of existing buildings and infrastructure with high seismic risk, especially those
that are critical to community resilience, and
(G)’’;
(3) in paragraph (3), by inserting ‘‘Tribal,’’
after ‘‘local,’’;
(4) in paragraph (4), by striking ‘‘could provide’’ and all that follows through the period at
the end and inserting ‘‘is necessary to provide
the scientific understanding needed to improve
and expand the earthquake early warning system.’’;
(5) in paragraph (8), by striking ‘‘cave-ins’’
and inserting ‘‘collapse’’;
(6) in paragraph (9)—
(A) in the first sentence, by striking ‘‘and
local’’ and inserting ‘‘local, and Tribal government’’;
(B) in the second sentence, by striking ‘‘transfer knowledge and information to’’ and inserting ‘‘exchange knowledge and information between’’; and
(C) in the third sentence, by striking ‘‘specifications, criteria’’ and inserting ‘‘guidelines,
codes, standards’’;
(7) in paragraph (12)—
(A) in the second sentence—
(i) by striking ‘‘When earthquakes occur, the
built environment is generally’’ and inserting
‘‘Relatively newer buildings and infrastructure
have generally been’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘and is’’ and inserting ‘‘when
earthquakes occur, but most are’’; and
(B) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘In
addition, buildings and infrastructure built to
older codes and standards may pose significant
risk of injury, loss of life, or irreparable damage.
A 2021 report submitted to Congress pursuant to
section 8(b), as amended by section 5 of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
Reauthorization Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–
307), by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (FEMA P2090/NST SP–1254)
provides recommendations for improving postearthquake functional recovery time of the built
environment to support community resilience
goals and many of these recommendations still
need to be implemented.’’; and
(8) in paragraph (13)—
(A) in the first sentence, by inserting ‘‘in
2011’’ after ‘‘a study’’;
(B) in the second sentence, by inserting ‘‘(in
2011 dollars)’’ after ‘‘$300,000,000’’; and
(C) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘The
cost of actual seismic retrofits to reduce known
risks is not included in such valuation.’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 3. MODIFICATION OF PURPOSE.

Section 3 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7702) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)—
(A) by striking ‘‘and local’’ and inserting ‘‘,
local, and Tribal government’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘locations and structures’’ and
inserting ‘‘buildings and infrastructure’’;
(2) in paragraph (2)—
(A) by striking ‘‘and construction’’ and inserting ‘‘, construction, evaluation, and retrofitting’’; and
(B) by inserting ‘‘housing and care facilities
for vulnerable populations,’’ after ‘‘occupancy
buildings,’’; and
(3) in paragraph (4)—
(A) by striking ‘‘and local’’ and inserting ‘‘,
local, and Tribal government’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘encourage consideration of’’
and inserting ‘‘incorporate’’.
SEC. 4. MODIFICATION OF DEFINITIONS.

Section 4 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7703) is amended—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

(1) in paragraph (3), by inserting ‘‘, including
secondary effects such as earthquake-caused
tsunamis’’ after ‘‘earthquakes’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(11) The term ‘Tribal government’ has the
meaning given the term ‘tribal government’ in
section 421 of the Congressional Budget Act of
1974 (2 U.S.C. 658).
‘‘(12) The term ‘functional recovery’ means a
post-earthquake performance state in which a
building or lifeline infrastructure system is
maintained, or restored, to safely and adequately support the basic intended functions associated with the pre-earthquake use or occupancy of a building, or the pre-earthquake service level of a lifeline infrastructure system.
‘‘(13) The term ‘earthquake forecast’ means a
statement of probabilities that 1 or more earthquakes within a clearly specified magnitude
range may occur within a specified time interval
and geographic region.’’.
SEC. 5. IMPROVEMENTS TO NATIONAL EARTHQUAKE HAZARDS REDUCTION PROGRAM.
(a) PROGRAM ACTIVITIES.—Subsection (a)(2) of

section 5 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7704) is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (B)—
(A) in the matter before clause (i)—
(i) by striking ‘‘and local’’ and inserting
‘‘local, and Tribal’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘and constructing’’ and inserting ‘‘, designing, constructing, evaluating, and
retrofitting’’;
(B) by amending clause (ii) to read as follows:
‘‘(ii) development of standards, guidelines,
and voluntary standards, guidelines, and consensus codes for earthquake hazards reduction
for buildings, structures, and lifeline infrastructure, including post-earthquake recovery-based
performance objectives that address reoccupancy and downtime of community-prioritized
buildings, structures, and services provided by
lifeline infrastructure;’’;
(C) in clause (iii), by striking ‘‘and hazards
reduction; and’’ and inserting ‘‘functional recovery, and other hazards reduction topics;’’;
(D) in clause (iv)—
(i) by inserting ‘‘and maintaining’’ after
‘‘publishing’’;
(ii) by inserting ‘‘in coordination with the National Tsunami Hazards Mitigation Program,
tsunami susceptibility,’’ after ‘‘liquefaction susceptibility,’’; and
(iii) by striking ‘‘; and’’ and inserting a semicolon; and
(E) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(v) subject to the availability of funds, development of best practices and guidelines to create
an inventory of and conduct seismic performance evaluations of buildings, structures, and
lifeline infrastructure with high seismic risk, especially those that are critical to community resilience; and
‘‘(vi) subject to the availability of funds, the
provision of technical assistance upon request
by a State, local, or Tribal government regarding—
‘‘(I) the creation of an inventory of buildings,
structures, and lifeline infrastructure;
‘‘(II) the performance of seismic performance
evaluations; and
‘‘(III) cost-effective best practices for retrofitting existing buildings, structures, and lifeline
infrastructure.’’;
(2) in subparagraph (C), by striking ‘‘; and’’
and inserting a semicolon;
(3) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E); and
(4) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the
following:
‘‘(D) improve the understanding of—
‘‘(i) the multiple hazards associated with
earthquakes, including liquefaction, tsunamis,
landslides, and structural fires; and
‘‘(ii) potential mitigation measures for such
hazards; and’’.
(b) DUTIES OF INTERAGENCY COORDINATING
COMMITTEE ON EARTHQUAKE HAZARDS REDUC-

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 6333

TION.—Subsection (a)(3)(D)(ii) of such section is

amended—
(1) in subclause (V), by inserting ‘‘and associated secondary hazards’’ before the period at
the end; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(VIII) Coordinating with the Chair of the
Federal Communications Commission on the
timely broadcasting of emergency alerts generated by the earthquake early warning system.’’.
(c) BIENNIAL REPORT.—Subsection (a)(4)(A) of
such section is amended by striking ‘‘under
paragraph (3)(D)(i)(I)’’ each place it appears
and inserting ‘‘under paragraph (3)(D)(ii)(I)’’.
(d)
ADVISORY
COMMITTEE.—Subsection
(a)(5)(A) of such section is amended—
(1) by inserting ‘‘the Chair of the Scientific
Earthquake Studies Advisory Committee and’’
after ‘‘including’’; and
(2) by striking ‘‘and local government’’ and
inserting ‘‘, local, and Tribal governments’’.
(e) LEAD AGENCY FOR RESPONSIBILITIES OF
PROGRAM AGENCIES.—Subsection (b)(1) of such
section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘and
local’’ and all that follows through the semicolon at the end and inserting the following:
‘‘local, and Tribal governments, national standards and model building code organizations, architects and engineers, and others with a role in
planning, designing, constructing, evaluating,
and retrofitting buildings and lifeline infrastructure;’’;
(2) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and
(D) as subparagraphs (F) and (G), respectively;
and
(3) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the
following:
‘‘(C) improve the understanding of earthquake-caused fires and support the development
of engineering tools and construction methods
that mitigate the risk of fire following earthquakes;
‘‘(D) develop, in coordination with the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, best practices and guidelines for a
State, local, or Tribal government to create an
inventory of buildings, structures, or lifeline infrastructure that are critical to community resilience or otherwise have high seismic risk;
‘‘(E) provide, in coordination with the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, technical assistance to a State, local, or
Tribal government requesting such assistance
with respect to the creation of an inventory of
buildings, structures, or lifeline infrastructure;’’.
(f) RESPONSIBILITIES OF FEDERAL EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT AGENCY.—Subsection (b)(2) of
such section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (A)—
(A) in clause (i)—
(i) by inserting ‘‘and Tribal governments’’
after ‘‘States’’;
(ii) by inserting ‘‘and performance evaluations’’ after ‘‘safety inspections’’; and
(iii) by inserting ‘‘and improve post-earthquake functional recovery’’ after ‘‘seismic safety’’;
(B) in clause (ii), by inserting ‘‘, including
Tribal entities,’’ after ‘‘appropriate audiences’’;
(C) in clause (iii)—
(i) by striking ‘‘of seismic resistant’’ and inserting ‘‘to all appropriate audiences, including
Tribal governments, of’’; and
(ii) by inserting ‘‘that enhance seismic safety,
improve post-earthquake functional recovery,
and reduce losses from earthquakes’’ after ‘‘and
lifeline infrastructure’’;
(D) in clause (iv)—
(i) in striking ‘‘and local’’ and inserting ‘‘,
local, and Tribal’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘; and’’ and inserting a semicolon;
(E) by redesignating clause (v) as clause (vi);
and
(F) by inserting after clause (iv) the following:

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.002

S05JAPT1

January 5, 2026

‘‘(v) shall provide technical assistance to
State, local, or Tribal governmental entities in
the creation of evacuation plans in the event of
an earthquake, landslide, tsunami, or other
earthquake-related hazard; and’’; and
(2) in subparagraph (B)—
(A) in the subparagraph heading, by inserting
‘‘AND TRIBAL’’ after ‘‘STATE’’;
(B) in the matter before clause (i), by inserting
‘‘or Tribal government’’ after ‘‘State’’; and
(C) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘safety’’ and inserting ‘‘performance, community resilience, or
public awareness’’.
(g) RESPONSIBILITIES OF UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.—Subsection (b)(3) of such section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘and
local’’ and inserting ‘‘, local, and Tribal’’;
(2) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ‘‘, the
Chair of the Federal Communications Commission,’’ after ‘‘Agency’’;
(3) by redesignating subparagraphs (D)
through (K) as subparagraphs (I) through (P),
respectively;
(4) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the
following:
‘‘(D) coordinate with the Administrator of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency on data sharing and
resource allocation to support a timely response
to oceanic earthquakes and tsunamis;
‘‘(E) in consultation with the Chair of the
Federal Communications Commission, ensure
that earthquake alerts and early warnings are
broadcast as rapidly and reliably as possible, in
the predominant languages in the affected region, to ensure maximum warning time for nearby persons;
‘‘(F) expand the earthquake early warning
system within and to additional high risk hazard areas, including making improvements as
practicable to improve detection and increase
the time between warning messages and perceptible ground motion;
‘‘(G) coordinating with affected State and
Tribal governments on earthquake early warning system improvements;
‘‘(H) issue earthquake forecasts, when appropriate, for aftershocks associated with significant earthquakes in the United States;’’;
(5) in subparagraph (I), as redesignated by
paragraph (3), by inserting ‘‘the Chair of the
Federal Communications Commission,’’ after
‘‘Agency,’’;
(6) in subparagraph (L), as redesignated by
paragraph (3), by striking ‘‘; and’’ and inserting
a semicolon;
(7) in subparagraph (M), as redesignated by
paragraph (3), by striking the period at the end
and inserting a semicolon; and
(8) in subparagraph (O), as redesignated by
paragraph (3), by inserting ‘‘maps of natural
hazards associated with earthquakes and’’ after
‘‘including’’.
(h) RESPONSIBILITIES OF NATIONAL SCIENCE
FOUNDATION.—Subsection (b)(4)(A) of such section is amended—
(1) in clause (iii), by inserting ‘‘including updated tsunami and liquefaction risk maps,’’
after ‘‘maps,’’; and
(2) in clause (vii), by striking ‘‘Historically
Black Colleges and Universities and those serving large proportions of Hispanics, Native Americans, Asian-Pacific Americans, and other
underrepresented populations’’ and inserting
‘‘institutions described in section 371(a) of the
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C.
1067q(a))’’.
DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC.

6.

SEISMIC PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.

PROPERTY

Section 947 of the Cranston-Gonzales National
Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 7704a) is
amended—
(1) in subsection (a), by striking ‘‘safety’’ both
places it appears and inserting ‘‘performance’’;
and
(2) in subsection (b), by striking ‘‘shake-related property damage’’ and inserting ‘‘seismic-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

S7

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

related property damage to improve the postearthquake functional recovery time’’.
SEC. 7. SEISMIC STANDARDS.

Section 8 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7705b) is amended—
(1) in subsection (b), by striking ‘‘under paragraph (1)’’ and inserting ‘‘under subsection
(a)’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(c) IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS.—Each Program agency, as part of their
Program responsibilities, shall implement, within the Program activities authorized by this Act,
the applicable recommendations in the report
submitted pursuant to subsection (b) to improve
the performance of the built environment in
terms of post-earthquake reoccupancy and functional recovery time.
‘‘(d) BIENNIAL REPORTS.—
‘‘(1) BIENNIAL REPORTS TO INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE.—No later than September 30, 2025, and not less frequently than
once every 2 years thereafter, each Program
agency shall submit to the Interagency Coordinating Committee a report on activities and
progress made to support, promote, or advance
the implementation of the recommendations included in the report submitted pursuant to subsection (b).
‘‘(2) INCLUSION IN BIENNIAL REPORTS OF INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE.—The Interagency Coordinating Committee shall include
the information received under paragraph (1) in
each biennial report submitted under section
5(a)(4), including consideration of a prioritized
work plan to coordinate activities among the
Program agencies and the necessary Program
budget to fully implement the recommendations
described in paragraph (1).’’.
SEC. 8. IMPROVEMENTS TO POST-EARTHQUAKE
INVESTIGATIONS PROGRAM.

Section 11 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7705e) is amended, in
the matter before paragraph (1)—
(1) in the first sentence, by inserting ‘‘domestic and international’’ after ‘‘investigate
major’’; and
(2) in the fifth sentence, by inserting ‘‘Federal
Emergency Management’’ before ‘‘Agency’’.
SEC. 9. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
(a) GENERAL AUTHORIZATION FOR PROGRAM.—

Subsection (a)(8) of section 12 of the Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7706)
is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ‘‘, and’’
and inserting a comma; and
(2) by inserting after subparagraph (J) the following:
‘‘(K) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2024,
‘‘(L) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2025,
‘‘(M) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2026,
‘‘(N) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2027, and
‘‘(O) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2028,’’.
(b) UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.—
Subsection (b)(2) of such section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ‘‘; and’’
and inserting a semicolon;
(2) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period
at the end and inserting a semicolon; and
(3) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(K) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2024, of which
not less than $36,000,000 shall be made available
for completion of the Advanced National Seismic
System established under section 13;
‘‘(L) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2025, of which
not less than $36,000,000 shall be made available
for completion of the Advanced National Seismic
System established under section 13;
‘‘(M) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2026, of which
not less than $36,000,000 shall be made available
for completion of the Advanced National Seismic
System established under section 13;
‘‘(N) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2027, of which
not less than $36,000,000 shall be made available
for completion of the Advanced National Seismic
System established under section 13; and
‘‘(O) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2028, of which
not less than $36,000,000 shall be made available

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

for completion of the Advanced National Seismic
System established under section 13.’’.
(c) NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION.—Subsection (c)(2) of such section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ‘‘, and’’
and inserting a comma;
(2) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period
at the end and inserting a comma; and
(3) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(K) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2024,
‘‘(L) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2025,
‘‘(M) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2026,
‘‘(N) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2027, and
‘‘(O) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2028.’’.
(d) NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND
TECHNOLOGY.—Subsection (d)(2) of such section
is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ‘‘, and’’
and inserting a comma;
(2) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period
at the end and inserting a comma; and
(3) by inserting after subparagraph (J) the following:
‘‘(K) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2024,
‘‘(L) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2025,
‘‘(M) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2026,
‘‘(N) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2027, and
‘‘(O) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2028,’’.

Mr. MARSHALL. I ask unanimous
consent that the Scott of Florida
amendment at the desk to the committee-reported substitute amendment
be considered and agreed to, the committee-reported
substitute
amendment, as amended, be considered and
agreed to, the bill, as amended, be considered read a third time and passed
and that the motion to reconsider be
considered made and laid upon the
table.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The amendment (No. 4148) was agreed
to, as follows:
(Purpose: To control funding for the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program)
At the end, add the following:
SEC. 10. FUNDING CONTROLS.

Section 12 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7706), as amended by section 9, is further amended by adding
at the end the following:
‘‘(e) FUNDING.—Funds used by an agency to
carry out this Act may, as provided in advance in appropriations Acts, only come
from amounts authorized to be appropriated
to that agency.
‘‘(f) DEFICIT REDUCTION.—Any amount appropriated to an account of a Federal agency
for the Federal agency to carry out a responsibility under this Act that is cancelled pursuant to section 1552(a) of title 31, United
States Code, shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury and be applied to
deficit reduction.’’.

The committee-reported amendment,
in the nature of a substitute, as amended, was agreed to.
The bill (S. 320), as amended, was ordered to be engrossed for a third reading, was read the third time, and
passed as follows:
S. 320
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program Reauthorization Act of 2025’’.
SEC. 2. MODIFICATION OF FINDINGS.

Section 2 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7701) is amended—

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.002

S05JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S8

(1) in paragraph (1)—
(A) by striking ‘‘50 States, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,’’ and inserting
‘‘States and Tribal jurisdictions’’;
(B) by striking ‘‘of them’’ and inserting
‘‘States’’;
(C) by striking ‘‘Tennessee,,’’ and inserting
‘‘, Tennessee,’’; and
(D) by striking ‘‘A large portion of the population of the United States lives in areas
vulnerable to earthquake hazards’’ and inserting ‘‘Almost half of the United States
population resides in areas that are at risk
or experiencing a damaging earthquake during the 50-year period beginning on the date
of the enactment of the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program Reauthorization
Act of 2025’’;
(2) in paragraph (2)—
(A) by inserting after the first sentence the
following: ‘‘A 2023 report by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the
United States Geological Survey (FEMA P–
366) estimates the annualized earthquake
losses to the national building stock is
$14,700,000,000 per year and the total economic exposure to earthquake losses (buildings and contents) across the nation is
$107,800,000,000,000.’’; and
(B) in the third sentence—
(i) by striking ‘‘and construction’’ and inserting ‘‘, construction, evaluation, and retrofitting’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘and (E)’’ and inserting the
following: ‘‘(E) inventories of buildings and
infrastructure with high seismic risk, especially those that are critical to community
resilience, (F) programs that require or
incentivize replacement or retrofit of existing buildings and infrastructure with high
seismic risk, especially those that are critical to community resilience, and (G)’’;
(3) in paragraph (3), by inserting ‘‘Tribal,’’
after ‘‘local,’’;
(4) in paragraph (4), by striking ‘‘could provide’’ and all that follows through the period
at the end and inserting ‘‘is necessary to provide the scientific understanding needed to
improve and expand the earthquake early
warning system.’’;
(5) in paragraph (8), by striking ‘‘cave-ins’’
and inserting ‘‘collapse’’;
(6) in paragraph (9)—
(A) in the first sentence, by striking ‘‘and
local’’ and inserting ‘‘local, and Tribal government’’;
(B) in the second sentence, by striking
‘‘transfer knowledge and information to’’
and inserting ‘‘exchange knowledge and information between’’; and
(C) in the third sentence, by striking
‘‘specifications, criteria’’ and inserting
‘‘guidelines, codes, standards’’;
(7) in paragraph (12)—
(A) in the second sentence—
(i) by striking ‘‘When earthquakes occur,
the built environment is generally’’ and inserting ‘‘Relatively newer buildings and infrastructure have generally been’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘and is’’ and inserting
‘‘when earthquakes occur, but most are’’;
and
(B) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘In
addition, buildings and infrastructure built
to older codes and standards may pose significant risk of injury, loss of life, or irreparable damage. A 2021 report submitted to
Congress pursuant to section 8(b), as amended by section 5 of the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program Reauthorization
Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–307), by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (FEMA P2090/NST SP–1254) provides
recommendations for improving post-earthquake functional recovery time of the built
environment to support community resil-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

ience goals and many of these recommendations still need to be implemented.’’; and
(8) in paragraph (13)—
(A) in the first sentence, by inserting ‘‘in
2011’’ after ‘‘a study’’;
(B) in the second sentence, by inserting
‘‘(in 2011 dollars)’’ after ‘‘$300,000,000’’; and
(C) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘The cost of actual seismic retrofits to reduce known risks is not included in such
valuation.’’.
SEC. 3. MODIFICATION OF PURPOSE.

Section 3 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7702) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)—
(A) by striking ‘‘and local’’ and inserting
‘‘, local, and Tribal government’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘locations and structures’’
and inserting ‘‘buildings and infrastructure’’;
(2) in paragraph (2)—
(A) by striking ‘‘and construction’’ and inserting ‘‘, construction, evaluation, and retrofitting’’; and
(B) by inserting ‘‘housing and care facilities for vulnerable populations,’’ after ‘‘occupancy buildings,’’; and
(3) in paragraph (4)—
(A) by striking ‘‘and local’’ and inserting
‘‘, local, and Tribal government’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘encourage consideration
of’’ and inserting ‘‘incorporate’’.
SEC. 4. MODIFICATION OF DEFINITIONS.

Section 4 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7703) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (3), by inserting ‘‘, including secondary effects such as earthquakecaused tsunamis’’ after ‘‘earthquakes’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(11) The term ‘Tribal government’ has the
meaning given the term ‘tribal government’
in section 421 of the Congressional Budget
Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 658).
‘‘(12) The term ‘functional recovery’ means
a post-earthquake performance state in
which a building or lifeline infrastructure
system is maintained, or restored, to safely
and adequately support the basic intended
functions associated with the pre-earthquake
use or occupancy of a building, or the preearthquake service level of a lifeline infrastructure system.
‘‘(13) The term ‘earthquake forecast’ means
a statement of probabilities that 1 or more
earthquakes within a clearly specified magnitude range may occur within a specified
time interval and geographic region.’’.
SEC. 5. IMPROVEMENTS TO NATIONAL EARTHQUAKE HAZARDS REDUCTION PROGRAM.
(a) PROGRAM ACTIVITIES.—Subsection (a)(2)

of section 5 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7704) is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (B)—
(A) in the matter before clause (i)—
(i) by striking ‘‘and local’’ and inserting
‘‘local, and Tribal’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘and constructing’’ and inserting ‘‘, designing, constructing, evaluating, and retrofitting’’;
(B) by amending clause (ii) to read as follows:
‘‘(ii) development of standards, guidelines,
and voluntary standards, guidelines, and
consensus codes for earthquake hazards reduction for buildings, structures, and lifeline
infrastructure, including post-earthquake recovery-based performance objectives that address reoccupancy and downtime of community-prioritized buildings, structures, and
services provided by lifeline infrastructure;’’;
(C) in clause (iii), by striking ‘‘and hazards
reduction; and’’ and inserting ‘‘functional recovery, and other hazards reduction topics;’’;
(D) in clause (iv)—

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(i) by inserting ‘‘and maintaining’’ after
‘‘publishing’’;
(ii) by inserting ‘‘in coordination with the
National Tsunami Hazards Mitigation Program, tsunami susceptibility,’’ after ‘‘liquefaction susceptibility,’’; and
(iii) by striking ‘‘; and’’ and inserting a
semicolon; and
(E) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(v) subject to the availability of funds, development of best practices and guidelines to
create an inventory of and conduct seismic
performance evaluations of buildings, structures, and lifeline infrastructure with high
seismic risk, especially those that are critical to community resilience; and
‘‘(vi) subject to the availability of funds,
the provision of technical assistance upon request by a State, local, or Tribal government
regarding—
‘‘(I) the creation of an inventory of buildings, structures, and lifeline infrastructure;
‘‘(II) the performance of seismic performance evaluations; and
‘‘(III) cost-effective best practices for retrofitting existing buildings, structures, and
lifeline infrastructure.’’;
(2) in subparagraph (C), by striking ‘‘; and’’
and inserting a semicolon;
(3) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as
subparagraph (E); and
(4) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the
following:
‘‘(D) improve the understanding of—
‘‘(i) the multiple hazards associated with
earthquakes,
including
liquefaction,
tsunamis, landslides, and structural fires;
and
‘‘(ii) potential mitigation measures for
such hazards; and’’.
(b) DUTIES OF INTERAGENCY COORDINATING
COMMITTEE ON EARTHQUAKE HAZARDS REDUCTION.—Subsection (a)(3)(D)(ii) of such section
is amended—
(1) in subclause (V), by inserting ‘‘and associated secondary hazards’’ before the period
at the end; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(VIII) Coordinating with the Chair of the
Federal Communications Commission on the
timely broadcasting of emergency alerts
generated by the earthquake early warning
system.’’.
(c) BIENNIAL REPORT.—Subsection (a)(4)(A)
of such section is amended by striking
‘‘under paragraph (3)(D)(i)(I)’’ each place it
appears and inserting ‘‘under paragraph
(3)(D)(ii)(I)’’.
COMMITTEE.—Subsection
(d)
ADVISORY
(a)(5)(A) of such section is amended—
(1) by inserting ‘‘the Chair of the Scientific
Earthquake Studies Advisory Committee
and’’ after ‘‘including’’; and
(2) by striking ‘‘and local government’’ and
inserting ‘‘, local, and Tribal governments’’.
(e) LEAD AGENCY FOR RESPONSIBILITIES OF
PROGRAM AGENCIES.—Subsection (b)(1) of
such section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘and
local’’ and all that follows through the semicolon at the end and inserting the following:
‘‘local, and Tribal governments, national
standards and model building code organizations, architects and engineers, and others
with a role in planning, designing, constructing, evaluating, and retrofitting buildings and lifeline infrastructure;’’;
(2) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and
(D) as subparagraphs (F) and (G), respectively; and
(3) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the
following:
‘‘(C) improve the understanding of earthquake-caused fires and support the development of engineering tools and construction
methods that mitigate the risk of fire following earthquakes;

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.003

S05JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 5, 2026

‘‘(D) develop, in coordination with the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, best practices and guidelines for a State, local, or Tribal government
to create an inventory of buildings, structures, or lifeline infrastructure that are critical to community resilience or otherwise
have high seismic risk;
‘‘(E) provide, in coordination with the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, technical assistance to a
State, local, or Tribal government requesting such assistance with respect to the creation of an inventory of buildings, structures, or lifeline infrastructure;’’.
(f) RESPONSIBILITIES OF FEDERAL EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT AGENCY.—Subsection
(b)(2) of such section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (A)—
(A) in clause (i)—
(i) by inserting ‘‘and Tribal governments’’
after ‘‘States’’;
(ii) by inserting ‘‘and performance evaluations’’ after ‘‘safety inspections’’; and
(iii) by inserting ‘‘and improve post-earthquake functional recovery’’ after ‘‘seismic
safety’’;
(B) in clause (ii), by inserting ‘‘, including
Tribal entities,’’ after ‘‘appropriate audiences’’;
(C) in clause (iii)—
(i) by striking ‘‘of seismic resistant’’ and
inserting ‘‘to all appropriate audiences, including Tribal governments, of’’; and
(ii) by inserting ‘‘that enhance seismic
safety, improve post-earthquake functional
recovery, and reduce losses from earthquakes’’ after ‘‘and lifeline infrastructure’’;
(D) in clause (iv)—
(i) in striking ‘‘and local’’ and inserting ‘‘,
local, and Tribal’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘; and’’ and inserting a
semicolon;
(E) by redesignating clause (v) as clause
(vi); and
(F) by inserting after clause (iv) the following:
‘‘(v) shall provide technical assistance to
State, local, or Tribal governmental entities
in the creation of evacuation plans in the
event of an earthquake, landslide, tsunami,
or other earthquake-related hazard; and’’;
and
(2) in subparagraph (B)—
(A) in the subparagraph heading, by inserting ‘‘AND TRIBAL’’ after ‘‘STATE’’;
(B) in the matter before clause (i), by inserting ‘‘or Tribal government’’ after
‘‘State’’; and
(C) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘safety’’ and
inserting ‘‘performance, community resilience, or public awareness’’.
(g) RESPONSIBILITIES OF UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.—Subsection (b)(3) of such
section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘and
local’’ and inserting ‘‘, local, and Tribal’’;
(2) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ‘‘, the
Chair of the Federal Communications Commission,’’ after ‘‘Agency’’;
(3) by redesignating subparagraphs (D)
through (K) as subparagraphs (I) through (P),
respectively;
(4) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the
following:
‘‘(D) coordinate with the Administrator of
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Administrator of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency on
data sharing and resource allocation to support a timely response to oceanic earthquakes and tsunamis;
‘‘(E) in consultation with the Chair of the
Federal Communications Commission, ensure that earthquake alerts and early warnings are broadcast as rapidly and reliably as
possible, in the predominant languages in

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

S9

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

the affected region, to ensure maximum
warning time for nearby persons;
‘‘(F) expand the earthquake early warning
system within and to additional high risk
hazard areas, including making improvements as practicable to improve detection
and increase the time between warning messages and perceptible ground motion;
‘‘(G) coordinating with affected State and
Tribal governments on earthquake early
warning system improvements;
‘‘(H) issue earthquake forecasts, when appropriate, for aftershocks associated with
significant earthquakes in the United
States;’’;
(5) in subparagraph (I), as redesignated by
paragraph (3), by inserting ‘‘the Chair of the
Federal Communications Commission,’’ after
‘‘Agency,’’;
(6) in subparagraph (L), as redesignated by
paragraph (3), by striking ‘‘; and’’ and inserting a semicolon;
(7) in subparagraph (M), as redesignated by
paragraph (3), by striking the period at the
end and inserting a semicolon; and
(8) in subparagraph (O), as redesignated by
paragraph (3), by inserting ‘‘maps of natural
hazards associated with earthquakes and’’
after ‘‘including’’.
(h) RESPONSIBILITIES OF NATIONAL SCIENCE
FOUNDATION.—Subsection (b)(4)(A) of such
section is amended—
(1) in clause (iii), by inserting ‘‘including
updated tsunami and liquefaction risk
maps,’’ after ‘‘maps,’’; and
(2) in clause (vii), by striking ‘‘Historically
Black Colleges and Universities and those
serving large proportions of Hispanics, Native Americans, Asian-Pacific Americans,
and other underrepresented populations’’ and
inserting ‘‘institutions described in section
371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20
U.S.C. 1067q(a))’’.
SEC.

6.

SEISMIC PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.

PROPERTY

Section 947 of the Cranston-Gonzales National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C.
7704a) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a), by striking ‘‘safety’’
both places it appears and inserting ‘‘performance’’; and
(2) in subsection (b), by striking ‘‘shake-related property damage’’ and inserting ‘‘seismic-related property damage to improve the
post-earthquake functional recovery time’’.
SEC. 7. SEISMIC STANDARDS.

Section 8 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7705b) is
amended—
(1) in subsection (b), by striking ‘‘under
paragraph (1)’’ and inserting ‘‘under subsection (a)’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(c) IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS.—Each Program agency, as part of
their Program responsibilities, shall implement, within the Program activities authorized by this Act, the applicable recommendations in the report submitted pursuant to
subsection (b) to improve the performance of
the built environment in terms of postearthquake reoccupancy and functional recovery time.
‘‘(d) BIENNIAL REPORTS.—
‘‘(1) BIENNIAL REPORTS TO INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE.—No later than September 30, 2025, and not less frequently than
once every 2 years thereafter, each Program
agency shall submit to the Interagency Coordinating Committee a report on activities
and progress made to support, promote, or
advance the implementation of the recommendations included in the report submitted pursuant to subsection (b).
‘‘(2) INCLUSION IN BIENNIAL REPORTS OF
INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE.—The
Interagency Coordinating Committee shall

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

include the information received under paragraph (1) in each biennial report submitted
under section 5(a)(4), including consideration
of a prioritized work plan to coordinate activities among the Program agencies and the
necessary Program budget to fully implement the recommendations described in
paragraph (1).’’.
SEC. 8. IMPROVEMENTS TO POST-EARTHQUAKE
INVESTIGATIONS PROGRAM.

Section 11 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7705e) is amended, in the matter before paragraph (1)—
(1) in the first sentence, by inserting ‘‘domestic and international’’ after ‘‘investigate
major’’; and
(2) in the fifth sentence, by inserting ‘‘Federal Emergency Management’’ before ‘‘Agency’’.
SEC. 9. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
(a) GENERAL AUTHORIZATION FOR PROGRAM.—Subsection (a)(8) of section 12 of the

Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977
(42 U.S.C. 7706) is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ‘‘, and’’
and inserting a comma; and
(2) by inserting after subparagraph (J) the
following:
‘‘(K) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2024,
‘‘(L) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2025,
‘‘(M) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2026,
‘‘(N) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2027, and
‘‘(O) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2028,’’.
(b) UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.—
Subsection (b)(2) of such section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ‘‘; and’’
and inserting a semicolon;
(2) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon;
and
(3) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(K) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2024, of which
not less than $36,000,000 shall be made available for completion of the Advanced National Seismic System established under section 13;
‘‘(L) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2025, of which
not less than $36,000,000 shall be made available for completion of the Advanced National Seismic System established under section 13;
‘‘(M) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2026, of
which not less than $36,000,000 shall be made
available for completion of the Advanced National Seismic System established under section 13;
‘‘(N) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2027, of which
not less than $36,000,000 shall be made available for completion of the Advanced National Seismic System established under section 13; and
‘‘(O) $92,427,000 for fiscal year 2028, of which
not less than $36,000,000 shall be made available for completion of the Advanced National Seismic System established under section 13.’’.
(c) NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION.—Subsection (c)(2) of such section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ‘‘, and’’
and inserting a comma;
(2) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period at the end and inserting a comma; and
(3) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(K) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2024,
‘‘(L) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2025,
‘‘(M) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2026,
‘‘(N) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2027, and
‘‘(O) $54,000,000 for fiscal year 2028.’’.
(d) NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND
TECHNOLOGY.—Subsection (d)(2) of such section is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ‘‘, and’’
and inserting a comma;
(2) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period at the end and inserting a comma; and
(3) by inserting after subparagraph (J) the
following:

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.003

S05JAPT1

S10
‘‘(K) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2024,
‘‘(L) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2025,
‘‘(M) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2026,
‘‘(N) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2027, and
‘‘(O) $5,900,000 for fiscal year 2028,’’.
SEC. 10. FUNDING CONTROLS.

Section 12 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7706), as amended by section 9, is further amended by adding
at the end the following:
‘‘(e) FUNDING.—Funds used by an agency to
carry out this Act may, as provided in advance in appropriations Acts, only come
from amounts authorized to be appropriated
to that agency.
‘‘(f) DEFICIT REDUCTION.—Any amount appropriated to an account of a Federal agency
for the Federal agency to carry out a responsibility under this Act that is cancelled pursuant to section 1552(a) of title 31, United
States Code, shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury and be applied to
deficit reduction.’’.
f

NATIONAL LANDSLIDE PREPAREDNESS
ACT
REAUTHORIZATION
ACT OF 2025
Mr. MARSHALL. Madam President, I
ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to the immediate consideration of Calendar No. 249, S. 1626.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the bill by title.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
A bill (S. 1626) to reauthorize the National
Landslide Preparedness Act, and for other
purposes.

There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the bill, which
was reported from the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation with an amendment as follows:
(The part of the bill intended to be
stricken is in boldfaced brackets and
the part of the bill intended to be inserted is in italic.)
S. 1626
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘National
Landslide Preparedness Act Reauthorization
Act of 2025’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 2. CERTAIN DEFINITIONS UNDER FLOOD
LEVEL OBSERVATION, OPERATIONS,
AND DECISION SUPPORT ACT.
(a) DEFINITIONS.—Section 12(a) of the Flood

Level Observation, Operations, and Decision
Support Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(a)) is amended—
(1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2)
as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively; and
(2) by inserting before paragraph (4) (as so
redesignated) the following:
‘‘(1) ATMOSPHERIC RIVER.—The term ‘atmospheric river’ means a transient corridor
of strong water vapor in the atmosphere
that—
‘‘(A) produces significant quantities of rain
or snow; and
‘‘(B) may be primarily beneficial to the
water supply or hazardous due to flooding.
‘‘(2) ATMOSPHERIC RIVER FLOODING EVENT.—
The term ‘atmospheric river flooding event’
means an atmospheric river that—
‘‘(A) results in flooding of rivers and
streams or other hazards to human life,
property, or the economy; and
‘‘(B) is of particular concern to human
health, property, and the economy, as determined by the Secretary of Commerce.
‘‘(3) EXTREME PRECIPITATION EVENT.—The
term ‘extreme precipitation event’ means

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

precipitation quantities exceeding the 5-year
annual recurrence interval for a specific location.’’.
(b) REQUIREMENTS.—Section 12(d)(1) of the
Flood Level Observation, Operations, and
Decision Support Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(d)(1)) is
amended by inserting ‘‘, such as precipitation resulting from hurricanes, atmospheric
river flooding events, and extreme precipitation events’’ before the period at the end.
øSEC. 3. REAUTHORIZATION OF NATIONAL LANDSLIDE PREPAREDNESS ACT.
ø(a) DEFINITIONS.—Section 2 of the Na-

tional Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3101) is amended—
ø(1) by redesignating paragraphs (4)
through (11) as paragraphs (7), (8), (10), (11),
(13), (14), (15), and (16), respectively;
ø(2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
ø‘‘(4) ATMOSPHERIC RIVER.—The term ‘atmospheric river’ has the meaning given the
term in section 12(a) of the Flood Level Observation, Operations, and Decision Support
Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(a)).
RIVER
FLOODING
ø‘‘(5)
ATMOSPHERIC
EVENT.—The term ‘atmospheric river flooding event’ has the meaning given the term in
section 12(a) of the Flood Level Observation,
Operations, and Decision Support Act (15
U.S.C. 9707(a)).
ø‘‘(6) EXTREME PRECIPITATION EVENT.—The
term ‘extreme precipitation event’ has the
meaning given the term in section 12(a) of
the Flood Level Observation, Operations, and
Decision Support Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(a)).’’;
ø(3) by inserting after paragraph (8), as so
redesignated, the following:
ø‘‘(9) INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.—
The term ‘institution of higher education’
has the meaning given the term in section
101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20
U.S.C. 1001(a)).’’;
ø(4) by inserting after paragraph (11), as so
redesignated, the following:
ø‘‘(12) NATIVE HAWAIIAN ORGANIZATION.—
The term ‘Native Hawaiian organization’ has
the meaning given the term in section 6207 of
the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7517), except that the
term includes the Department of Hawaiian
Home Lands and the Office of Hawaiian Affairs.’’; and
ø(5) by adding at the end the following:
ø‘‘(17) TRIBAL ORGANIZATION.—The term
‘Tribal organization’ has the meaning given
the term in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act
(25 U.S.C. 5304).’’.
ø(b) NATIONAL LANDSLIDE HAZARDS REDUCTION PROGRAM.—
ø(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—Section 3(a)(3) of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102(a)(3)) is amended by striking
‘‘protect’’ and inserting ‘‘contribute to protecting’’.
ACTIVITIES.—Section
ø(2)
PROGRAM
3(b)(1)(C)(ii) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(1)(C)(ii)) is
amended by striking ‘‘implement’’ and inserting ‘‘disseminate’’.
ø(3) NATIONAL STRATEGY.—Section 3(b)(2) of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102(b)(2)) is amended—
ø(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A)
through (C) as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately;
ø(B) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as
so redesignated), by striking ‘‘Not later
than’’ and inserting the following:
ø‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than’’; and
ø(C) by adding at the end the following:
ø‘‘(B) ASSESSMENT.—For purposes of the
first national strategy published after the
date of enactment of the National Landslide
Preparedness Act Reauthorization Act of
2025 under subparagraph (A), the Secretary,
in consultation with the Secretary of Com-

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

merce, shall include an assessment of the
risks that atmospheric river flooding events
and extreme precipitation events pose to the
safety of life and property in the United
States with respect to landslide hazards.’’.
ø(4) NATIONAL LANDSLIDE HAZARDS DATABASE.—Section 3(b)(3) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(3)) is
amended—
ø(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (C)
and (D) as subparagraphs (D) and (E), respectively; and
ø(B) by inserting after subparagraph (B)
the following:
ø‘‘(C) the identification of areas in need of
additional hazard risk assessment, including
areas that may be at risk due to—
ø‘‘(i) hydrology or changes in hydrology
that may include erosion, drought, or other
characteristics that could impact landslide
risk;
ø‘‘(ii) atmospheric river flooding events
and extreme precipitation events, as identified by the Secretary of Commerce and the
Secretary;
ø‘‘(iii) geologic activity, such as volcanic
eruptions, earthquakes, or tsunamis; or
ø‘‘(iv) data-poor areas or hazards with poor
monitoring that could contribute to increased landslide risk;’’.
ø(5) LANDSLIDE HAZARD AND RISK PREPAREDNESS FOR COMMUNITIES.—Section 3(b)(4) of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102(b)(4)) is amended—
ø(A) in the matter preceding subparagraph
(A), by inserting ‘‘Native Hawaiian organizations and other stakeholders, as appropriate,’’ before ‘‘and Indian tribes’’;
ø(B) in subparagraph (A)—
ø(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ‘‘local, and Tribal governments and
decisionmakers’’ and inserting ‘‘and local
governments, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, Native Hawaiian organizations, and
other decisionmakers’’;
ø(ii) by striking clause (iii) and inserting
the following:
ø‘‘(iii) health and safety with respect to
landslides;’’;
ø(iii) by redesignating clause (iv) as clause
(v); and
ø(iv) by inserting after clause (iii) the following:
ø‘‘(iv) reducing losses from landslides, including the threats caused by atmospheric
rivers and other extreme precipitation
events; and’’; and
ø(C) in subparagraph (B)—
ø(i) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘local, and
Tribal officials’’ and inserting ‘‘and local officials, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations,
and Native Hawaiian organizations’’; and
ø(ii) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘local, and
Tribal emergency managers’’ and inserting
‘‘and local emergency managers and emergency managers of Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian organizations’’.
ø(6) DEBRIS FLOW EARLY WARNING SYSTEM.—
Section 3(b)(5) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(5)) is amended—
ø(A) in subparagraph (B), by striking
‘‘State, territorial, local, and Tribal governments’’ and inserting ‘‘State, territorial, and
local governments, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian organizations’’;
ø(B) by redesignating subparagraphs (A)
through (C) as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately;
ø(C) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as
so redesignated), by striking ‘‘In carrying
out’’ and inserting the following:
ø‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In carrying out’’; and
ø(D) by adding at the end the following:
ø‘‘(B) CONSULTATION.—In carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary may consult

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.003

S05JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 5, 2026

with an institution of higher education described in subsection (d)(2)(B)(iv) and other
stakeholders to establish and support emergency response procedures, as appropriate.’’.
ø(7) EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTIVITIES.—Section 3(b)(6) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(6)) is amended—
ø(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A)
through (C) as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately;
ø(B) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as
so redesignated), by striking ‘‘In carrying’’
and inserting the following:
ø‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In carrying’’;
ø(C) in subparagraph (A) (as so designated)—
ø(i) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as
so redesignated), by inserting ‘‘Native Hawaiian organizations,’’ before ‘‘and Indian
tribes’’;
ø(ii) in clause (ii) (as so redesignated), by
striking ‘‘and’’ at the end;
ø(iii) in clause (iii) (as so redesignated), by
striking the period at the end and inserting
‘‘; and’’; and
ø(iv) by adding at the end the following:
ø‘‘(iv) to improve real-time risk management during landslide events, including with
respect to landslide events caused by—
ø‘‘(I) hydrology or changes in hydrology
that may include erosion, drought, or other
characteristics that could impact landslide
risk;
ø‘‘(II) atmospheric river flooding events
and extreme precipitation events, as identified by the Secretary of Commerce and the
Secretary;
ø‘‘(III) geologic activity, such as volcanic
eruptions, earthquakes, or tsunamis;
ø‘‘(IV) data-poor areas or hazards with poor
monitoring that could contribute to increased landslide risk; or
ø‘‘(V) thawing permafrost and glacial retreat causing destabilization of slopes.’’; and
ø(D) by adding at the end the following:
ø‘‘(B) CONSULTATION.—In carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary may consult
with an institution of higher education described in subsection (d)(2)(B)(iv) and the private sector.’’.
ø(8) INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE
ON LANDSLIDE HAZARDS.—Section 3(c)(2) of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the
end the following:
ø‘‘(J) The Administrator of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.’’.
COMMITTEE.—Section
ø(9)
ADVISORY
3(d)(2)(B) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(d)(2)(B)) is
amended—
ø(A) in clause (iii), by striking ‘‘geological’’; and
ø(B) in clause (vi), by striking ‘‘local, and
Tribal emergency management agencies’’
and inserting ‘‘and local emergency management agencies and emergency management
agencies of Indian tribes and Native Hawaiian organizations’’.
ø(10) REGIONAL PARTNERSHIPS.—Section 3 of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102) is amended—
ø(A) by redesignating subsections (e)
through (i) as subsections (f) through (j), respectively; and
ø(B) by inserting after subsection (d) the
following:
ø‘‘(e) REGIONAL PARTNERSHIPS.—
ø‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—As soon as practicable
after the date of enactment of the National
Landslide Preparedness Act Reauthorization
Act of 2025, the Secretary shall establish in
the State of Alaska and other regions, as the
Secretary determines to be appropriate, a regional partnership with an eligible partner
described in paragraph (2).

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

S11

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

ø‘‘(2) ELIGIBLE PARTNERS.—An organization
or institution of higher education with expertise in landslide mapping, research, and
monitoring shall be eligible for a regional
partnership under paragraph (1).
ø‘‘(3) PURPOSES AND DUTIES.—A regional
partnership established under paragraph (1)
shall—
ø‘‘(A) allow the Secretary to leverage applicable expertise in regional organizations;
ø‘‘(B) coordinate long-term landslide research specific to the applicable region; and
ø‘‘(C) align interagency landslide monitoring efforts.’’.
ø(11) GRANT PROGRAMS.—Section 3 of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102) is amended, in paragraph (1) of
subsection (f) (as so redesignated)—
ø(A) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking
‘‘local, and Tribal governments to research,
map, assess’’ and inserting ‘‘and local governments, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian organizations to
research, map, assess, monitor’’;
ø(B) in subparagraph (B)—
ø(i) in clause (i), by inserting ‘‘institutions
of higher education described in subsection
(d)(2)(B)(iv),’’ before ‘‘and Indian tribes’’; and
ø(ii) in clause (ii)—
ø(I) by redesignating subclauses (II)
through (IV) as subclauses (III) through (V),
respectively; and
ø(II) by inserting after subclause (I) the
following:
ø‘‘(II) in regions that have recently experienced loss of life due to landslides;’’; and
ø(C) in subparagraph (C)—
ø(i) in clause (i), by inserting ‘‘awarded’’
after ‘‘grants’’; and
ø(ii) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘made’’ and
inserting ‘‘or other accomplishments resulting’’.
ø(12) SIGNIFICANT EVENTS.—Section 3 of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102) is amended, in subsection (h)(3)
(as so redesignated), by striking ‘‘local, and
Tribal partners’’ and inserting ‘‘and local
partners, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations,
and Native Hawaiian organizations’’.
ø(13) FUNDING.—Section 3 of the National
Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102) is
amended, in subsection (i) (as so redesignated)—
ø(A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1),
by striking ‘‘2024’’ and inserting ‘‘2030’’; and
ø(B) in paragraph (1), by striking ‘‘there is
authorized to be appropriated to the United
States Geological Survey, $25,000,000 to carry
out this section’’ and inserting ‘‘from
amounts appropriated or otherwise made
available to the United States Geological
Survey, $35,000,000 shall be used to carry out
this section, of which not less than $10,000,000
shall be used for the purchase, deployment,
and repair of landslide early warning systems in high risk areas’’.
ø(c) 3D ELEVATION PROGRAM.—
ø(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—Section 5(a) of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3104(a)) is amended—
ø(A) in paragraph (1)(A), by inserting ‘‘and
derivative’’ after ‘‘3D elevation’’; and
ø(B) in paragraph (2)(B)(i), by inserting ‘‘,
process, and integrate’’ after ‘‘acquire’’.
ø(2) 3D ELEVATION FEDERAL INTERAGENCY
COORDINATING COMMITTEE.—Section 5(b)(3) of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3104(b)(3)) is amended—
ø(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (D)
and (E) as subparagraphs (E) and (F), respectively; and
ø(B) by inserting after subparagraph (C)
the following:
ø‘‘(D) the 3D Hydrography Program Working Group;’’.
ø(3) GRANTS AND COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS.—Section 5(d)(3) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3104(d)(3)) is

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 6333

amended by striking ‘‘publically’’ and inserting ‘‘publicly’’.
ø(4) FUNDING.—Section 5(e) of the National
Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3104(e)) is amended by striking ‘‘2024’’ and inserting ‘‘2030’’.¿
SEC. 3. REAUTHORIZATION OF NATIONAL LANDSLIDE PREPAREDNESS ACT.
(a) DEFINITIONS.—Section 2 of the National

Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3101) is
amended—
(1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through
(11) as paragraphs (7), (8), (10), (11), (13), (14),
(15), and (16), respectively;
(2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
‘‘(4) ATMOSPHERIC RIVER.—The term ‘atmospheric river’ has the meaning given the term in
section 12(a) of the Flood Level Observation,
Operations, and Decision Support Act (15 U.S.C.
9707(a)).
‘‘(5) ATMOSPHERIC RIVER FLOODING EVENT.—
The term ‘atmospheric river flooding event’ has
the meaning given the term in section 12(a) of
the Flood Level Observation, Operations, and
Decision Support Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(a)).
‘‘(6) EXTREME PRECIPITATION EVENT.—The
term ‘extreme precipitation event’ has the meaning given the term in section 12(a) of the Flood
Level Observation, Operations, and Decision
Support Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(a)).’’;
(3) by inserting after paragraph (8) (as so redesignated) the following:
‘‘(9) INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.—The
term ‘institution of higher education’ has the
meaning given the term in section 101(a) of the
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C.
1001(a)).’’;
(4) by inserting after paragraph (11) (as so redesignated) the following:
‘‘(12) NATIVE HAWAIIAN ORGANIZATION.—The
term ‘Native Hawaiian organization’ has the
meaning given the term in section 6207 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965
(20 U.S.C. 7517), except that the term includes
the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands and
the Office of Hawaiian Affairs.’’; and
(5) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(17) TRIBAL ORGANIZATION.—The term ‘Tribal organization’ has the meaning given the term
in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination
and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C.
5304).’’.
(b) NATIONAL LANDSLIDE HAZARDS REDUCTION
PROGRAM.—
(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—Section 3(a)(3) of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3102(a)(3)) is amended by striking ‘‘protect’’ and
inserting ‘‘contribute to protecting’’.
ACTIVITIES.—Section
(2)
PROGRAM
3(b)(1)(C)(ii) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(1)(C)(ii)) is
amended by striking ‘‘implement’’ and inserting
‘‘disseminate’’.
(3) NATIONAL STRATEGY.—Section 3(b)(2) of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102(b)(2)) is amended—
(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A)
through (C) as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately;
(B) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as so
redesignated), by striking ‘‘Not later than’’ and
inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than’’; and
(C) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) ASSESSMENT.—For purposes of the first
national strategy published after the date of enactment of the National Landslide Preparedness
Act Reauthorization Act of 2025 under subparagraph (A), the Secretary, in consultation with
the Secretary of Commerce, shall include an assessment of the risks that atmospheric river
flooding events and extreme precipitation events
pose to the safety of life and property in the
United States with respect to landslide hazards.’’.
(4) NATIONAL LANDSLIDE HAZARDS DATABASE.—Section 3(b)(3) of the National Landslide

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.004

S05JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S12

Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(3)) is
amended—
(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and
(D) as subparagraphs (D) and (E), respectively;
and
(B) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the
following:
‘‘(C) the identification of areas in need of additional hazard risk assessment, including areas
that may be at risk due to—
‘‘(i) hydrology or changes in hydrology that
may include erosion, drought, or other characteristics that could impact landslide risk;
‘‘(ii) atmospheric river flooding events and extreme precipitation events, as identified by the
Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary;
‘‘(iii) geologic activity, such as volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, or tsunamis; or
‘‘(iv) data-poor areas or hazards with poor
monitoring that could contribute to increased
landslide risk;’’.
(5) LANDSLIDE HAZARD AND RISK PREPAREDNESS FOR COMMUNITIES.—Section 3(b)(4) of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3102(b)(4)) is amended—
(A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A),
by inserting ‘‘Native Hawaiian organizations
and other stakeholders, as appropriate,’’ before
‘‘and Indian tribes’’;
(B) in subparagraph (A)—
(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking ‘‘local, and Tribal governments and decisionmakers’’ and inserting ‘‘and local governments, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, Native Hawaiian organizations, and other decisionmakers’’;
(ii) by striking clause (iii) and inserting the
following:
‘‘(iii) health and safety with respect to landslides;’’;
(iii) by redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v);
and
(iv) by inserting after clause (iii) the following:
‘‘(iv) reducing losses from landslides, including the threats caused by atmospheric rivers and
other extreme precipitation events; and’’; and
(C) in subparagraph (B)—
(i) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘local, and Tribal
officials’’ and inserting ‘‘and local officials, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native
Hawaiian organizations’’; and
(ii) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘local, and Tribal emergency managers’’ and inserting ‘‘and
local emergency managers and emergency managers of Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and
Native Hawaiian organizations’’.
(6) DEBRIS FLOW EARLY WARNING SYSTEM.—
Section 3(b)(5) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(5)) is amended—
(A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘State,
territorial, local, and Tribal governments’’ and
inserting ‘‘State, territorial, and local governments, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and
Native Hawaiian organizations’’;
(B) by redesignating subparagraphs (A)
through (C) as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately;
(C) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as so redesignated), by striking ‘‘In carrying out’’ and
inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In carrying out’’; and
(D) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) CONSULTATION.—In carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary may consult with
an institution of higher education described in
subsection (d)(2)(B)(iv) and other stakeholders
to establish and support emergency response
procedures, as appropriate.’’.
(7) EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTIVITIES.—Section
3(b)(6) of the National Landslide Preparedness
Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(6)) is amended—
(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A)
through (C) as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately;
(B) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as so
redesignated), by striking ‘‘In carrying’’ and inserting the following:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In carrying’’;
(C) in subparagraph (A) (as so designated)—
(i) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as so redesignated), by inserting ‘‘Native Hawaiian organizations,’’ before ‘‘and Indian tribes’’;
(ii) in clause (ii) (as so redesignated), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end;
(iii) in clause (iii) (as so redesignated), by
striking the period at the end and inserting ‘‘;
and’’; and
(iv) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(iv) to improve real-time risk management
during landslide events, including with respect
to landslide events caused by—
‘‘(I) hydrology or changes in hydrology that
may include erosion, drought, or other characteristics that could impact landslide risk;
‘‘(II) atmospheric river flooding events and extreme precipitation events, as identified by the
Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary;
‘‘(III) geologic activity, such as volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, or tsunamis;
‘‘(IV) data-poor areas or hazards with poor
monitoring that could contribute to increased
landslide risk; or
‘‘(V) thawing permafrost and glacial retreat
causing destabilization of slopes.’’; and
(D) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) CONSULTATION.—In carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary may consult with
an institution of higher education described in
subsection (d)(2)(B)(iv) and the private sector.’’.
(8) ADVISORY COMMITTEE.—Section 3(d)(2)(B)
of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102(d)(2)(B)) is amended—
(A) in clause (iii), by striking ‘‘geological’’;
and
(B) in clause (vi), by striking ‘‘local, and Tribal emergency management agencies’’ and inserting ‘‘and local emergency management agencies
and emergency management agencies of Indian
tribes and Native Hawaiian organizations’’.
(9) REGIONAL PARTNERSHIPS.—Section 3 of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3102) is amended—
(A) by redesignating subsections (e) through
(i) as subsections (f) through (j), respectively;
and
(B) by inserting after subsection (d) the following:
‘‘(e) REGIONAL PARTNERSHIPS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—As soon as practicable after
the date of enactment of the National Landslide
Preparedness Act Reauthorization Act of 2025,
the Secretary shall establish in each region in
which the Secretary determines that there is a
high landslide hazard a regional partnership
with an eligible partner described in paragraph
(2).
‘‘(2) ELIGIBLE PARTNERS.—An organization or
institution of higher education with expertise in
landslide mapping, research, and monitoring
shall be eligible for a regional partnership under
paragraph (1).
‘‘(3) PURPOSES AND DUTIES.—A regional partnership established under paragraph (1) shall—
‘‘(A) allow the Secretary to leverage applicable expertise in regional organizations;
‘‘(B) coordinate long-term landslide research
specific to the applicable region; and
‘‘(C) align interagency landslide monitoring
efforts.’’.
(10) GRANT PROGRAMS.—Section 3 of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3102) is amended, in paragraph (1) of subsection
(f) (as redesignated by paragraph (9)(A))—
(A) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking ‘‘local,
and Tribal governments to research, map, assess’’ and inserting ‘‘and local governments, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native
Hawaiian organizations to research, map, assess, monitor’’;
(B) in subparagraph (B)—
(i) in clause (i), by inserting ‘‘institutions of
higher education described in subsection
(d)(2)(B)(iv),’’ before ‘‘and Indian tribes’’; and
(ii) in clause (ii)—
(I) by redesignating subclauses (II) through
(IV) as subclauses (III) through (V), respectively; and

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 6333

(II) by inserting after subclause (I) the following:
‘‘(II) in regions that have recently experienced
loss of life due to landslides;’’; and
(C) in subparagraph (C)—
(i) in clause (i), by inserting ‘‘awarded’’ after
‘‘grants’’; and
(ii) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘made’’ and inserting ‘‘or other accomplishments resulting’’.
(11) SIGNIFICANT EVENTS.—Section 3 of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3102) is amended, in subsection (h)(3) (as so redesignated), by striking ‘‘local, and Tribal partners’’ and inserting ‘‘and local partners, Indian
tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian organizations’’.
(12) FUNDING.—Section 3 of the National
Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102) is
amended, in subsection (i) (as redesignated by
paragraph (9)(A))—
(A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by
striking ‘‘2024’’ and inserting ‘‘2030’’; and
(B) in paragraph (1), by striking ‘‘$25,000,000
to carry out this section’’ and inserting
‘‘$35,000,000 to carry out this section, of which
not less than $10,000,000 shall be made available
for the purchase, deployment, and repair of
landslide early warning systems in high risk
areas’’.
(c) 3D ELEVATION PROGRAM.—
(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—Section 5(a) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3104(a)) is amended—
(A) in paragraph (1)(A), by inserting ‘‘and derivative’’ after ‘‘3D elevation’’; and
(B) in paragraph (2)(B)(i), by inserting ‘‘,
process, and integrate’’ after ‘‘acquire’’.
(2) 3D ELEVATION FEDERAL INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE.—Section 5(b)(3) of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3104(b)(3)) is amended—
(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and
(E) as subparagraphs (E) and (F), respectively;
and
(B) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the
following:
‘‘(D) the 3D Hydrography Program Working
Group;’’.
(3) GRANTS AND COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS.—
Section 5(d)(3) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3104(d)(3)) is amended
by striking ‘‘publically’’ and inserting ‘‘publicly’’.
(4) FUNDING.—Section 5(e) of the National
Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3104(e))
is amended by striking ‘‘2024’’ and inserting
‘‘2034’’.
SEC. 4. NEXT GENERATION WATER OBSERVING
SYSTEM.

The Act of December 24, 1942 (56 Stat. 1086,
chapter 822; 43 U.S.C. 36b), is amended—
(1) in the first section, by striking ‘‘That the
Secretary of the Interior’’ and inserting the following:
‘‘SECTION 1. GAGING STREAMS AND UNDERGROUND WATER RESOURCES.

‘‘The Secretary of the Interior (referred to in
this Act as the ‘Secretary’)’’;
(2) in section 1 (as so designated)—
(A) in the second sentence, by striking ‘‘of the
Interior’’; and
(B) in the proviso—
(i) by striking ‘‘this Act’’ each place it appears and inserting ‘‘this section’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘of the Interior’’; and
(3) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘SEC. 2. NEXT GENERATION WATER OBSERVING
SYSTEM.
‘‘(a) ESTABLISHMENT.—The Secretary shall es-

tablish within the United States Geological Survey a system, to be known as the ‘Next Generation Water Observing System’ (referred to in this
section as the ‘System’).
‘‘(b) PURPOSE.—The purpose of the System is
to provide real-time data on water quantity and
quality—
‘‘(1) that, as compared to previous systems, is
more affordable, more rapid, and available in
more locations; and

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.004

S05JAPT1

January 5, 2026

‘‘(2) to support advanced modeling tools—
‘‘(A) to provide state-of-the-art flood and
drought forecasts;
‘‘(B) to inform emergency- and water-management decision support systems; and
‘‘(C) to help evaluate—
‘‘(i) the near-term and long-term risks of
floods and droughts, including any scenarios
that modify those risks;
‘‘(ii) the quantity of water stored in seasonal
snow packs, and how changes in seasonal snow
packs affect water supplies;
‘‘(iii) the early stages of drought;
‘‘(iv) the predicted timelines for drought recovery;
‘‘(v) the quantity of water lost to
evapotranspiration;
‘‘(vi) water quality differences during wet and
dry periods;
‘‘(vii) the effects of streamflow on groundwater;
‘‘(viii) the effects of groundwater on
streamflow; and
‘‘(ix) ice and water volume stored in glaciers
and changing water volumes due to glacial retreat.
‘‘(c) SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.—The System
shall provide for—
‘‘(1) state-of-the-art measurements;
‘‘(2) a dense array of sensors at selected sites;
‘‘(3) increased spatial and temporal coverage;
‘‘(4) new technology testing and implementation;
‘‘(5) improved operational efficiency; and
‘‘(6) modernized and timely data storage and
delivery.
‘‘(d) PRIORITY REGIONS.—In determining in
which regions of the United States Geological
Survey to carry out the System, the Secretary
shall give priority to regions of the United
States Geological Survey in which there is—
‘‘(1) a high level of drought;
‘‘(2) a reliance on reservoirs for water storage;
‘‘(3) a reliance on hydrologic storage, including groundwater, aquifers, and snowpack; and
‘‘(4) flooding and extreme rainfall.
‘‘(e) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—There is authorized to be
appropriated to carry out this section in 10 initial basins, as determined by the Secretary,
$30,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until expended.
‘‘(2) DERIVATION OF FUNDS.—Amounts made
available to carry out this section shall be derived from amounts appropriated or otherwise
made available to the United States Geological
Survey.’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 5. WATER DATA ENHANCEMENT AND NATIONAL GROUNDWATER RESOURCES
MONITORING BY UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.

Section 9507 of the Omnibus Public Land
Management Act of 2009 (42 U.S.C. 10367) is
amended—
(1) in subsection (a)—
(A) in paragraph (2)(C)—
(i) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end;
(ii) in clause (ii), by inserting ‘‘and’’ after the
semicolon at the end; and
(iii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(iii) the conduct of groundwater quality assessments relating to permafrost thaw and
changes in precipitation rates;’’;
(B) in paragraph (4)—
(i) in subparagraph (A)—
(I) in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking ‘‘10 years’’ and inserting ‘‘11 years’’; and
(II) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘national
streamflow information program’’ and inserting
‘‘Federal priority streamgage program’’;
(ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘Federal
Priority streamgage program’’ and inserting
‘‘Federal Priority Streamgage Network’’; and
(iii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(C) PRIORITY SITES.—In selecting sites for
the installation of streamgages under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall give priority to
regions of the United States Geological Survey
in which there is—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

S13

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

‘‘(i) a high level of drought;
‘‘(ii) a reliance on reservoirs for water storage;
‘‘(iii) a reliance on hydrologic storage, including groundwater, aquifers, and snowpack; and
‘‘(iv) flooding and extreme rainfall.
‘‘(D) NO IMPACT ON EXISTING SITES.—The priority provided under subparagraph (C) shall
have no impact on any site or region in which
a streamgage has been installed, and is operating, as of the date of enactment of the National Landslide Preparedness Act Reauthorization Act of 2025, subject to the condition that
the data from such a site or region are continuing to meet the priority needs of stakeholders, as determined by the Secretary.’’; and
(C) in paragraph (6)—
(i) in subparagraph (B), by striking
‘‘$10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2009 through
2028’’ and inserting ‘‘$30,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2026 through 2033’’; and
(ii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(C) DERIVATION OF FUNDS.—Amounts made
available to carry out this subsection shall be
derived from amounts appropriated or otherwise
made available to the United States Geological
Survey.’’; and
(2) in subsection (b)—
(A) in paragraph (2)—
(i) in subparagraph (B), in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking ‘‘and State and
local water resource agencies and Tribes’’ and
inserting ‘‘, State and local water resource
agencies, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations,
and Native Hawaiian organizations’’; and
(ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking ‘‘State
water resource agency or Tribe’’ and inserting
‘‘State water resource agency, Indian tribe,
Tribal organization, or Native Hawaiian organization’’;
(B) in paragraph (6)—
(i) by striking ‘‘give priority to those activities’’ and inserting the following: ‘‘give priority
to—
‘‘(A) activities’’;
(ii) in subparagraph (A) (as so designated)—
(I) by striking ‘‘State, a Tribe’’ and inserting
‘‘State, Indian tribe, Tribal organization, Native
Hawaiian organization,’’; and
(II) by striking the period at the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(iii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) activities conducted in regions of the
United States Geological Survey in which there
is—
‘‘(i) a high level of drought;
‘‘(ii) a reliance on reservoirs for water storage;
‘‘(iii) a reliance on hydrologic storage, including groundwater, aquifers, and snowpack; and
‘‘(iv) flooding and extreme rainfall.’’; and
(C) in paragraph (7)—
(i) by striking ‘‘There are authorized to be appropriated’’ and inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—There is authorized to be
appropriated’’; and
(ii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) DERIVATION OF FUNDS.—Amounts made
available to carry out this subsection shall be
derived from amounts appropriated or otherwise
made available to the United States Geological
Survey.’’.

Mr. MARSHALL. I ask unanimous
consent that the Scott of Florida
amendment to the committee-reported
amendment be considered and agreed
to;
that
the
committee-reported
amendment, as amended, be agreed to;
that the bill, as amended, be considered
read a third time and passed; and that
the motion to reconsider be considered
made and laid upon the table.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The amendment (No. 4149) was agreed
to, as follows:
(Purpose: To include provisions relating to
funding and deficit reduction)
In section 3(b), add at the end the following:

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(13) DEFICIT REDUCTION.—Section 3 of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102) is amended by striking subsection (j) (as redesignated by paragraph
(9)(A)) and inserting the following:
‘‘(j) FUNDING; DEFICIT REDUCTION.—
‘‘(1) FUNDING.—Funds used by an agency to
carry out this section may, as provided in
advance in appropriations Acts, only come
from amounts authorized to be appropriated
to that agency.
‘‘(2) DEFICIT REDUCTION.—Any amount appropriated to an account of a Federal agency
for the Federal agency to carry out a responsibility under this section that is cancelled
pursuant to section 1552(a) of title 31, United
States Code, shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury and be applied to
deficit reduction.’’.

The committee-reported amendment,
as amended, was agreed to.
The bill (S. 1626), as amended, was ordered to be engrossed for a third reading, was read the third time, and
passed as follows:
S. 1626
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘National
Landslide Preparedness Act Reauthorization
Act of 2025’’.
SEC. 2. CERTAIN DEFINITIONS UNDER FLOOD
LEVEL OBSERVATION, OPERATIONS,
AND DECISION SUPPORT ACT.
(a) DEFINITIONS.—Section 12(a) of the Flood

Level Observation, Operations, and Decision
Support Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(a)) is amended—
(1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2)
as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively; and
(2) by inserting before paragraph (4) (as so
redesignated) the following:
‘‘(1) ATMOSPHERIC RIVER.—The term ‘atmospheric river’ means a transient corridor
of strong water vapor in the atmosphere
that—
‘‘(A) produces significant quantities of rain
or snow; and
‘‘(B) may be primarily beneficial to the
water supply or hazardous due to flooding.
‘‘(2) ATMOSPHERIC RIVER FLOODING EVENT.—
The term ‘atmospheric river flooding event’
means an atmospheric river that—
‘‘(A) results in flooding of rivers and
streams or other hazards to human life,
property, or the economy; and
‘‘(B) is of particular concern to human
health, property, and the economy, as determined by the Secretary of Commerce.
‘‘(3) EXTREME PRECIPITATION EVENT.—The
term ‘extreme precipitation event’ means
precipitation quantities exceeding the 5-year
annual recurrence interval for a specific location.’’.
(b) REQUIREMENTS.—Section 12(d)(1) of the
Flood Level Observation, Operations, and
Decision Support Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(d)(1)) is
amended by inserting ‘‘, such as precipitation resulting from hurricanes, atmospheric
river flooding events, and extreme precipitation events’’ before the period at the end.
SEC. 3. REAUTHORIZATION OF NATIONAL LANDSLIDE PREPAREDNESS ACT.
(a) DEFINITIONS.—Section 2 of the National

Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3101) is
amended—
(1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through
(11) as paragraphs (7), (8), (10), (11), (13), (14),
(15), and (16), respectively;
(2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
‘‘(4) ATMOSPHERIC RIVER.—The term ‘atmospheric river’ has the meaning given the
term in section 12(a) of the Flood Level Observation, Operations, and Decision Support
Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(a)).

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.004

S05JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S14

‘‘(5) ATMOSPHERIC RIVER FLOODING EVENT.—
The term ‘atmospheric river flooding event’
has the meaning given the term in section
12(a) of the Flood Level Observation, Operations, and Decision Support Act (15 U.S.C.
9707(a)).
‘‘(6) EXTREME PRECIPITATION EVENT.—The
term ‘extreme precipitation event’ has the
meaning given the term in section 12(a) of
the Flood Level Observation, Operations, and
Decision Support Act (15 U.S.C. 9707(a)).’’;
(3) by inserting after paragraph (8) (as so
redesignated) the following:
‘‘(9) INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.—
The term ‘institution of higher education’
has the meaning given the term in section
101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20
U.S.C. 1001(a)).’’;
(4) by inserting after paragraph (11) (as so
redesignated) the following:
‘‘(12) NATIVE HAWAIIAN ORGANIZATION.—The
term ‘Native Hawaiian organization’ has the
meaning given the term in section 6207 of the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965 (20 U.S.C. 7517), except that the term includes the Department of Hawaiian Home
Lands and the Office of Hawaiian Affairs.’’;
and
(5) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(17) TRIBAL ORGANIZATION.—The term
‘Tribal organization’ has the meaning given
the term in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act
(25 U.S.C. 5304).’’.
(b) NATIONAL LANDSLIDE HAZARDS REDUCTION PROGRAM.—
(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—Section 3(a)(3) of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102(a)(3)) is amended by striking
‘‘protect’’ and inserting ‘‘contribute to protecting’’.
ACTIVITIES.—Section
(2)
PROGRAM
3(b)(1)(C)(ii) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(1)(C)(ii)) is
amended by striking ‘‘implement’’ and inserting ‘‘disseminate’’.
(3) NATIONAL STRATEGY.—Section 3(b)(2) of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102(b)(2)) is amended—
(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A)
through (C) as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately;
(B) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as so
redesignated), by striking ‘‘Not later than’’
and inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than’’; and
(C) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) ASSESSMENT.—For purposes of the
first national strategy published after the
date of enactment of the National Landslide
Preparedness Act Reauthorization Act of
2025 under subparagraph (A), the Secretary,
in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, shall include an assessment of the
risks that atmospheric river flooding events
and extreme precipitation events pose to the
safety of life and property in the United
States with respect to landslide hazards.’’.
(4) NATIONAL LANDSLIDE HAZARDS DATABASE.—Section 3(b)(3) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(3)) is
amended—
(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and
(D) as subparagraphs (D) and (E), respectively; and
(B) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the
following:
‘‘(C) the identification of areas in need of
additional hazard risk assessment, including
areas that may be at risk due to—
‘‘(i) hydrology or changes in hydrology
that may include erosion, drought, or other
characteristics that could impact landslide
risk;
‘‘(ii) atmospheric river flooding events and
extreme precipitation events, as identified
by the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘(iii) geologic activity, such as volcanic
eruptions, earthquakes, or tsunamis; or
‘‘(iv) data-poor areas or hazards with poor
monitoring that could contribute to increased landslide risk;’’.
(5) LANDSLIDE HAZARD AND RISK PREPAREDNESS FOR COMMUNITIES.—Section 3(b)(4) of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102(b)(4)) is amended—
(A) in the matter preceding subparagraph
(A), by inserting ‘‘Native Hawaiian organizations and other stakeholders, as appropriate,’’ before ‘‘and Indian tribes’’;
(B) in subparagraph (A)—
(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ‘‘local, and Tribal governments and
decisionmakers’’ and inserting ‘‘and local
governments, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, Native Hawaiian organizations, and
other decisionmakers’’;
(ii) by striking clause (iii) and inserting
the following:
‘‘(iii) health and safety with respect to
landslides;’’;
(iii) by redesignating clause (iv) as clause
(v); and
(iv) by inserting after clause (iii) the following:
‘‘(iv) reducing losses from landslides, including the threats caused by atmospheric
rivers and other extreme precipitation
events; and’’; and
(C) in subparagraph (B)—
(i) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘local, and
Tribal officials’’ and inserting ‘‘and local officials, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations,
and Native Hawaiian organizations’’; and
(ii) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘local, and
Tribal emergency managers’’ and inserting
‘‘and local emergency managers and emergency managers of Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian organizations’’.
(6) DEBRIS FLOW EARLY WARNING SYSTEM.—
Section 3(b)(5) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(5)) is amended—
(A) in subparagraph (B), by striking
‘‘State, territorial, local, and Tribal governments’’ and inserting ‘‘State, territorial, and
local governments, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian organizations’’;
(B) by redesignating subparagraphs (A)
through (C) as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately;
(C) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as so
redesignated), by striking ‘‘In carrying out’’
and inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In carrying out’’; and
(D) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) CONSULTATION.—In carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary may consult
with an institution of higher education described in subsection (d)(2)(B)(iv) and other
stakeholders to establish and support emergency response procedures, as appropriate.’’.
(7) EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTIVITIES.—Section 3(b)(6) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(b)(6)) is amended—
(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A)
through (C) as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately;
(B) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as so
redesignated), by striking ‘‘In carrying’’ and
inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In carrying’’;
(C) in subparagraph (A) (as so designated)—
(i) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as so
redesignated), by inserting ‘‘Native Hawaiian
organizations,’’ before ‘‘and Indian tribes’’;
(ii) in clause (ii) (as so redesignated), by
striking ‘‘and’’ at the end;
(iii) in clause (iii) (as so redesignated), by
striking the period at the end and inserting
‘‘; and’’; and
(iv) by adding at the end the following:

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(iv) to improve real-time risk management during landslide events, including with
respect to landslide events caused by—
‘‘(I) hydrology or changes in hydrology
that may include erosion, drought, or other
characteristics that could impact landslide
risk;
‘‘(II) atmospheric river flooding events and
extreme precipitation events, as identified
by the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary;
‘‘(III) geologic activity, such as volcanic
eruptions, earthquakes, or tsunamis;
‘‘(IV) data-poor areas or hazards with poor
monitoring that could contribute to increased landslide risk; or
‘‘(V) thawing permafrost and glacial retreat causing destabilization of slopes.’’; and
(D) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) CONSULTATION.—In carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary may consult
with an institution of higher education described in subsection (d)(2)(B)(iv) and the private sector.’’.
COMMITTEE.—Section
(8)
ADVISORY
3(d)(2)(B) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102(d)(2)(B)) is
amended—
(A) in clause (iii), by striking ‘‘geological’’;
and
(B) in clause (vi), by striking ‘‘local, and
Tribal emergency management agencies’’
and inserting ‘‘and local emergency management agencies and emergency management
agencies of Indian tribes and Native Hawaiian organizations’’.
(9) REGIONAL PARTNERSHIPS.—Section 3 of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102) is amended—
(A) by redesignating subsections (e)
through (i) as subsections (f) through (j), respectively; and
(B) by inserting after subsection (d) the
following:
‘‘(e) REGIONAL PARTNERSHIPS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—As soon as practicable
after the date of enactment of the National
Landslide Preparedness Act Reauthorization
Act of 2025, the Secretary shall establish in
each region in which the Secretary determines that there is a high landslide hazard a
regional partnership with an eligible partner
described in paragraph (2).
‘‘(2) ELIGIBLE PARTNERS.—An organization
or institution of higher education with expertise in landslide mapping, research, and
monitoring shall be eligible for a regional
partnership under paragraph (1).
‘‘(3) PURPOSES AND DUTIES.—A regional
partnership established under paragraph (1)
shall—
‘‘(A) allow the Secretary to leverage applicable expertise in regional organizations;
‘‘(B) coordinate long-term landslide research specific to the applicable region; and
‘‘(C) align interagency landslide monitoring efforts.’’.
(10) GRANT PROGRAMS.—Section 3 of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3102) is amended, in paragraph (1) of subsection (f) (as redesignated by paragraph
(9)(A))—
(A) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking
‘‘local, and Tribal governments to research,
map, assess’’ and inserting ‘‘and local governments, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian organizations to
research, map, assess, monitor’’;
(B) in subparagraph (B)—
(i) in clause (i), by inserting ‘‘institutions
of higher education described in subsection
(d)(2)(B)(iv),’’ before ‘‘and Indian tribes’’; and
(ii) in clause (ii)—
(I) by redesignating subclauses (II) through
(IV) as subclauses (III) through (V), respectively; and
(II) by inserting after subclause (I) the following:

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.006

S05JAPT1

January 5, 2026

‘‘(II) in regions that have recently experienced loss of life due to landslides;’’; and
(C) in subparagraph (C)—
(i) in clause (i), by inserting ‘‘awarded’’
after ‘‘grants’’; and
(ii) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘made’’ and
inserting ‘‘or other accomplishments resulting’’.
(11) SIGNIFICANT EVENTS.—Section 3 of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102) is amended, in subsection (h)(3)
(as so redesignated), by striking ‘‘local, and
Tribal partners’’ and inserting ‘‘and local
partners, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations,
and Native Hawaiian organizations’’.
(12) FUNDING.—Section 3 of the National
Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3102) is
amended, in subsection (i) (as redesignated
by paragraph (9)(A))—
(A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1),
by striking ‘‘2024’’ and inserting ‘‘2030’’; and
(B) in paragraph (1), by striking ‘‘$25,000,000
to carry out this section’’ and inserting
‘‘$35,000,000 to carry out this section, of
which not less than $10,000,000 shall be made
available for the purchase, deployment, and
repair of landslide early warning systems in
high risk areas’’.
(13) DEFICIT REDUCTION.—Section 3 of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3102) is amended by striking subsection (j) (as redesignated by paragraph
(9)(A)) and inserting the following:
‘‘(j) FUNDING; DEFICIT REDUCTION.—
‘‘(1) FUNDING.—Funds used by an agency to
carry out this section may, as provided in
advance in appropriations Acts, only come
from amounts authorized to be appropriated
to that agency.
‘‘(2) DEFICIT REDUCTION.—Any amount appropriated to an account of a Federal agency
for the Federal agency to carry out a responsibility under this section that is cancelled
pursuant to section 1552(a) of title 31, United
States Code, shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury and be applied to
deficit reduction.’’.
(c) 3D ELEVATION PROGRAM.—
(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—Section 5(a) of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3104(a)) is amended—
(A) in paragraph (1)(A), by inserting ‘‘and
derivative’’ after ‘‘3D elevation’’; and
(B) in paragraph (2)(B)(i), by inserting ‘‘,
process, and integrate’’ after ‘‘acquire’’.
(2) 3D ELEVATION FEDERAL INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE.—Section 5(b)(3) of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43
U.S.C. 3104(b)(3)) is amended—
(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and
(E) as subparagraphs (E) and (F), respectively; and
(B) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the
following:
‘‘(D) the 3D Hydrography Program Working Group;’’.
(3) GRANTS AND COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS.—Section 5(d)(3) of the National Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C. 3104(d)(3)) is
amended by striking ‘‘publically’’ and inserting ‘‘publicly’’.
(4) FUNDING.—Section 5(e) of the National
Landslide Preparedness Act (43 U.S.C.
3104(e)) is amended by striking ‘‘2024’’ and inserting ‘‘2034’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SEC. 4. NEXT GENERATION WATER OBSERVING
SYSTEM.

The Act of December 24, 1942 (56 Stat. 1086,
chapter 822; 43 U.S.C. 36b), is amended—
(1) in the first section, by striking ‘‘That
the Secretary of the Interior’’ and inserting
the following:

(A) in the second sentence, by striking ‘‘of
the Interior’’; and
(B) in the proviso—
(i) by striking ‘‘this Act’’ each place it appears and inserting ‘‘this section’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘of the Interior’’; and
(3) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘SEC. 2. NEXT GENERATION WATER OBSERVING
SYSTEM.
‘‘(a) ESTABLISHMENT.—The Secretary shall

establish within the United States Geological Survey a system, to be known as the
‘Next Generation Water Observing System’
(referred to in this section as the ‘System’).
‘‘(b) PURPOSE.—The purpose of the System
is to provide real-time data on water quantity and quality—
‘‘(1) that, as compared to previous systems,
is more affordable, more rapid, and available
in more locations; and
‘‘(2) to support advanced modeling tools—
‘‘(A) to provide state-of-the-art flood and
drought forecasts;
‘‘(B) to inform emergency- and water-management decision support systems; and
‘‘(C) to help evaluate—
‘‘(i) the near-term and long-term risks of
floods and droughts, including any scenarios
that modify those risks;
‘‘(ii) the quantity of water stored in seasonal snow packs, and how changes in seasonal snow packs affect water supplies;
‘‘(iii) the early stages of drought;
‘‘(iv) the predicted timelines for drought
recovery;
‘‘(v) the quantity of water lost to
evapotranspiration;
‘‘(vi) water quality differences during wet
and dry periods;
‘‘(vii) the effects of streamflow on groundwater;
‘‘(viii) the effects of groundwater on
streamflow; and
‘‘(ix) ice and water volume stored in glaciers and changing water volumes due to glacial retreat.
‘‘(c) SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.—The System
shall provide for—
‘‘(1) state-of-the-art measurements;
‘‘(2) a dense array of sensors at selected
sites;
‘‘(3) increased spatial and temporal coverage;
‘‘(4) new technology testing and implementation;
‘‘(5) improved operational efficiency; and
‘‘(6) modernized and timely data storage
and delivery.
‘‘(d) PRIORITY REGIONS.—In determining in
which regions of the United States Geological Survey to carry out the System, the Secretary shall give priority to regions of the
United States Geological Survey in which
there is—
‘‘(1) a high level of drought;
‘‘(2) a reliance on reservoirs for water storage;
‘‘(3) a reliance on hydrologic storage, including
groundwater,
aquifers,
and
snowpack; and
‘‘(4) flooding and extreme rainfall.
‘‘(e) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—There is authorized to be
appropriated to carry out this section in 10
initial basins, as determined by the Secretary, $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until expended.
‘‘(2) DERIVATION OF FUNDS.—Amounts made
available to carry out this section shall be
derived from amounts appropriated or otherwise made available to the United States Geological Survey.’’.

‘‘SECTION 1. GAGING STREAMS AND UNDERGROUND WATER RESOURCES.

SEC. 5. WATER DATA ENHANCEMENT AND NATIONAL GROUNDWATER RESOURCES
MONITORING BY UNITED STATES
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.

‘‘The Secretary of the Interior (referred to
in this Act as the ‘Secretary’)’’;
(2) in section 1 (as so designated)—

Section 9507 of the Omnibus Public Land
Management Act of 2009 (42 U.S.C. 10367) is
amended—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

S15

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

(1) in subsection (a)—
(A) in paragraph (2)(C)—
(i) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the
end;
(ii) in clause (ii), by inserting ‘‘and’’ after
the semicolon at the end; and
(iii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(iii) the conduct of groundwater quality
assessments relating to permafrost thaw and
changes in precipitation rates;’’;
(B) in paragraph (4)—
(i) in subparagraph (A)—
(I) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ‘‘10 years’’ and inserting ‘‘11 years’’;
and
(II) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘national
streamflow information program’’ and inserting ‘‘Federal priority streamgage program’’;
(ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘Federal Priority streamgage program’’ and inserting ‘‘Federal Priority Streamgage Network’’; and
(iii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(C) PRIORITY SITES.—In selecting sites for
the installation of streamgages under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall give priority to regions of the United States Geological Survey in which there is—
‘‘(i) a high level of drought;
‘‘(ii) a reliance on reservoirs for water storage;
‘‘(iii) a reliance on hydrologic storage, including
groundwater,
aquifers,
and
snowpack; and
‘‘(iv) flooding and extreme rainfall.
‘‘(D) NO IMPACT ON EXISTING SITES.—The
priority provided under subparagraph (C)
shall have no impact on any site or region in
which a streamgage has been installed, and
is operating, as of the date of enactment of
the National Landslide Preparedness Act Reauthorization Act of 2025, subject to the condition that the data from such a site or region are continuing to meet the priority
needs of stakeholders, as determined by the
Secretary.’’; and
(C) in paragraph (6)—
(i) in subparagraph (B), by striking
‘‘$10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2009
through 2028’’ and inserting ‘‘$30,000,000 for
each of fiscal years 2026 through 2033’’; and
(ii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(C) DERIVATION OF FUNDS.—Amounts made
available to carry out this subsection shall
be derived from amounts appropriated or
otherwise made available to the United
States Geological Survey.’’; and
(2) in subsection (b)—
(A) in paragraph (2)—
(i) in subparagraph (B), in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking ‘‘and State and
local water resource agencies and Tribes’’
and inserting ‘‘, State and local water resource agencies, Indian tribes, Tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian organizations’’; and
(ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking ‘‘State
water resource agency or Tribe’’ and inserting ‘‘State water resource agency, Indian
tribe, Tribal organization, or Native Hawaiian organization’’;
(B) in paragraph (6)—
(i) by striking ‘‘give priority to those activities’’ and inserting the following: ‘‘give
priority to—
‘‘(A) activities’’;
(ii) in subparagraph (A) (as so designated)—
(I) by striking ‘‘State, a Tribe’’ and inserting ‘‘State, Indian tribe, Tribal organization,
Native Hawaiian organization,’’; and
(II) by striking the period at the end and
inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(iii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) activities conducted in regions of the
United States Geological Survey in which
there is—

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.006

S05JAPT1

S16

‘‘(i) a high level of drought;
‘‘(ii) a reliance on reservoirs for water storage;
‘‘(iii) a reliance on hydrologic storage, including
groundwater,
aquifers,
and
snowpack; and
‘‘(iv) flooding and extreme rainfall.’’; and
(C) in paragraph (7)—
(i) by striking ‘‘There are authorized to be
appropriated’’ and inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—There is authorized to
be appropriated’’; and
(ii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) DERIVATION OF FUNDS.—Amounts
made available to carry out this subsection
shall be derived from amounts appropriated
or otherwise made available to the United
States Geological Survey.’’.
f

ORDERS FOR TUESDAY, JANUARY
6, 2026
Mr. MARSHALL. Madam President, I
ask unanimous consent that when the
Senate completes its business today, it
stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on Tuesday, January 6; that following the
prayer and pledge, the Journal of proceedings be approved to date, the
morning hour be deemed expired, the
time for the two leaders be reserved for
their use later in the day, morning
business be closed, and the Senate proceed to executive session and resume
consideration of the Simmons nomination; further, that the Senate execute
the order of December 18 with respect
to the Simmons nomination at 11:30
a.m.; further, that the Senate recess
following disposition of the Simmons
nomination until 2:15 p.m. to allow for
the weekly conference meetings; finally, at 2:20 p.m., the Senate execute
the order of December 18 with respect
to the Bailey nomination.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

ORDER FOR ADJOURNMENT
Mr. MARSHALL. Madam President,
if there is no further business to come
before the Senate, I ask that it stand
adjourned under the previous order following the vote on the Bass nomination.
f

MESSAGES FROM THE PRESIDENT
Messages from the President of the
United States were communicated to
the Senate by Ms. Holstead, one of his
secretaries.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

EXECUTIVE MESSAGES REFERRED
As in executive session the Presiding
Officer laid before the Senate messages
from the President of the United
States submitting sundry nominations
which were referred to the Committee
on the Judiciary.
(The messages received today are
printed at the end of the Senate proceedings.)

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

MESSAGE FROM THE HOUSE
RECEIVED DURING ADJOURNMENT
ENROLLED BILLS SIGNED

Under the authority of the order of
the Senate of January 3, 2025, the Secretary of the Senate, on December 26,
2025, during the adjournment of the
Senate, received a message from the
House of Representatives announcing
that the Speaker pro tempore (Mr.
ADRIAN SMITH) has signed the following
enrolled bills:
H.R. 1823. An act to direct the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs and the Comptroller General of the United States to report on certain
funding shortfalls in the Department of Veterans Affairs.
H.R. 4323. An act to provide for the
vacating
of
certain
convictions
and
expungement of certain arrests of victims of
human trafficking.
H.R. 4446. An act to amend title 38, United
States Code, to modify the conditions under
which the Secretary of Veterans Affairs is
required to redevelop the individualized vocational rehabilitation plan for a veteran,
and for other purposes.
f

MESSAGE FROM THE HOUSE
ENROLLED BILLS SIGNED

The

President pro tempore (Mr.
GRASSLEY) announced that on today,
January 5, 2026, he had signed the following enrolled bills, which were previously signed by the Speaker pro tempore (Mr. ADRIAN SMITH) of the House:
H.R. 1823. An act to direct the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs and the Comptroller General of the United States to report on certain
funding shortfalls in the Department of Veterans Affairs.
H.R. 4323. An act to provide for the
vacating
of
certain
convictions
and
expungement of certain arrests of victims of
human trafficking.
H.R. 4446. An act to amend title 38, United
States Code, to modify the conditions under
which the Secretary of Veterans Affairs is
required to redevelop the individualized vocational rehabilitation plan for a veteran,
and for other purposes.
f

EXECUTIVE AND OTHER
COMMUNICATIONS
The following communication was
laid before the Senate, together with
accompanying papers, reports, and documents, and was referred as indicated:
EC–2351. A communication from the President of the United States to the President
pro tempore of the United States Senate,
transmitting, consistent with the War Powers Resolution, a report relative to targeted
and limited military strikes on January 3,
2026, within the territory of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
f

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND
JOINT RESOLUTIONS
The following bills and joint resolutions were introduced, read the first
and second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated:
By Mrs. HYDE-SMITH (for herself, Mr.
BENNET, Mr. JUSTICE, and Mr.
WARNOCK):
S. 3580. A bill to require the Secretary of
Agriculture to make cost-share grants for

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

retrofitting agricultural tractors with rollover protection structures, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition, and Forestry.
By Mr. PAUL:
S.J. Res. 101. A joint resolution providing
for congressional disapproval of the proposed
foreign military sales to Taiwan of certain
defense articles and services; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
f

ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS
S. 691

At the request of Mr. YOUNG, the
name of the Senator from Pennsylvania (Mr. MCCORMICK) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 691, a bill to amend the
Tariff Act of 1930 to improve the administration of antidumping and countervailing duty laws, and for other purposes.
S. 912

At the request of Mr. RICKETTS, the
name of the Senator from Pennsylvania (Mr. MCCORMICK) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 912, a bill to direct the
Secretary of Agriculture to publish, on
an annual basis, an assessment of
United States dependency on critical
agricultural products or inputs from
the People’s Republic of China, and for
other purposes.
S. 1532

At the request of Mr. CRAPO, the
names of the Senator from Vermont
(Mr. WELCH), the Senator from Maine
(Mr. KING) and the Senator from Maryland (Mr. VAN HOLLEN) were added as
cosponsors of S. 1532, a bill to amend
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to
modify the railroad track maintenance
credit.
S. 1677

At the request of Ms. BALDWIN, the
name of the Senator from Colorado
(Mr. BENNET) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 1677, a bill to provide health insurance benefits for outpatient and inpatient items and services related to
the diagnosis and treatment of a congenital anomaly or birth defect.
S. 1709

At the request of Mr. PADILLA, the
name of the Senator from Vermont
(Mr. SANDERS) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1709, a bill to amend the Public Health Service Act to establish direct care registered nurse-to-patient
staffing ratio requirements in hospitals, and for other purposes.
S. 1876

At the request of Mr. TILLIS, the
name of the Senator from Illinois (Ms.
DUCKWORTH) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 1876, a bill to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to relocate a memorial honoring the 9 Air Force crew
members who lost their lives in an airplane crash in the Cherokee and
Nantahala National Forests during a
training mission on August 31, 1982.
S. 1969

At the request of Mr. RICKETTS, the
name of the Senator from Pennsylvania (Mr. MCCORMICK) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 1969, a bill to amend the

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.006

S05JAPT1

January 5, 2026

Agricultural Foreign Investment Disclosure Act of 1978 to establish an additional reporting requirement, and for
other purposes.

States Armed Forces from hostilities
within or against Venezuela that have
not been authorized by Congress.

S. 2179

At the request of Mr. GALLEGO, the
name of the Senator from Virginia (Mr.
KAINE) was added as a cosponsor of S.J.
Res. 100, a joint resolution to direct the
removal of United States Armed Forces
from hostilities against vessels operating in the Caribbean Sea or the Eastern Pacific Ocean that have not been
authorized by Congress.

At the request of Mr. MERKLEY, the
name of the Senator from New Jersey
(Mr. KIM) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 2179, a bill to prohibit the use of M–
44 devices, commonly known as ‘‘cyanide bombs’’, on public land, and for
other purposes.
S. 2203

At the request of Mr. BOOKER, the
name of the Senator from California
(Mr. SCHIFF) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2203, a bill to authorize the Secretary of Health and Human Services
to build safer, thriving communities,
and save lives, by investing in effective
community-based violence reduction
initiatives, and for other purposes.
S. 2329

At the request of Mr. WARNER, the
name of the Senator from Illinois (Ms.
DUCKWORTH) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2329, a bill to amend title XVIII of
the Social Security Act to protect
beneficiaries with limb loss and other
orthopedic conditions by providing access to appropriate, safe, effective, patient-centered orthotic and prosthetic
care, to reduce fraud, waste, and abuse
with respect to orthotics and prosthetics, and for other purposes.
S. 2738

At the request of Ms. DUCKWORTH,
the name of the Senator from Connecticut (Mr. BLUMENTHAL) was added
as a cosponsor of S. 2738, a bill to establish eligibility requirements for
covered educational employees under
the Family and Medical Leave Act of
1993, and for other purposes.
S. 3145

At the request of Ms. COLLINS, the
names of the Senator from New Jersey
(Mr. KIM) and the Senator from West
Virginia (Mrs. CAPITO) were added as
cosponsors of S. 3145, a bill to amend
title XI of the Social Security Act to
require the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Innovation to test a comprehensive alternative response for
emergencies model under the Medicare
program.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S. 3345

At the request of Mr. CRAPO, the
name of the Senator from Idaho (Mr.
RISCH) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3345, a bill to amend titles XVIII and
XIX of the Social Security Act to ensure accurate payments to pharmacies
under Medicaid and prevent the use of
abusive spread pricing in Medicaid, and
to assure pharmacy access and choice
for Medicare beneficiaries and modernize and ensure PBM accountability
under Medicare.
S.J. RES. 98

At the request of Mr. KAINE, the
names of the Senator from Arizona
(Mr. GALLEGO) and the Senator from
Oregon (Mr. MERKLEY) were added as
cosponsors of S.J. Res. 98, a joint resolution to direct the removal of United

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

S17

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

S.J. RES. 100

AMENDMENT NO. 4056

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the names of the Senator from New
Jersey (Mr. BOOKER) and the Senator
from New Hampshire (Mrs. SHAHEEN)
were added as cosponsors of amendment No. 4056 intended to be proposed
to H.R. 4016, a bill making appropriations for the Department of Defense for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes.
f

AMENDMENTS SUBMITTED AND
PROPOSED
SA 4148. Mr. MARSHALL (for Mr. SCOTT of
Florida) proposed an amendment to the bill
S. 320, to authorize the Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Act of 1977, and for other purposes.
SA 4149. Mr. MARSHALL (for Mr. SCOTT of
Florida) proposed an amendment to the bill
S. 1626, to reauthorize the National Landslide Preparedness Act, and for other purposes.
SA 4150. Mr. GALLEGO submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by him
to the bill H.R. 4016, making appropriations
for the Department of Defense for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for other
purposes; which was ordered to lie on the
table.
f

TEXT OF AMENDMENTS
SA 4148. Mr. MARSHALL (for Mr.
SCOTT of Florida) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 320, to authorize the
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of
1977, and for other purposes; as follows:
At the end, add the following:
SEC. 10. FUNDING CONTROLS.

Section 12 of the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7706), as amended by section 9, is further amended by adding
at the end the following:
‘‘(e) FUNDING.—Funds used by an agency to
carry out this Act may, as provided in advance in appropriations Acts, only come
from amounts authorized to be appropriated
to that agency.
‘‘(f) DEFICIT REDUCTION.—Any amount appropriated to an account of a Federal agency
for the Federal agency to carry out a responsibility under this Act that is cancelled pursuant to section 1552(a) of title 31, United
States Code, shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury and be applied to
deficit reduction.’’.

SA 4149. Mr. MARSHALL (for Mr.
SCOTT of Florida) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1626, to reauthorize
the National Landslide Preparedness
Act, and for other purposes; as follows:
In section 3(b), add at the end the following:
(13) DEFICIT REDUCTION.—Section 3 of the
National Landslide Preparedness Act (43

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 0634

U.S.C. 3102) is amended by striking subsection (j) (as redesignated by paragraph
(9)(A)) and inserting the following:
‘‘(j) FUNDING; DEFICIT REDUCTION.—
‘‘(1) FUNDING.—Funds used by an agency to
carry out this section may, as provided in
advance in appropriations Acts, only come
from amounts authorized to be appropriated
to that agency.
‘‘(2) DEFICIT REDUCTION.—Any amount appropriated to an account of a Federal agency
for the Federal agency to carry out a responsibility under this section that is cancelled
pursuant to section 1552(a) of title 31, United
States Code, shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury and be applied to
deficit reduction.’’.

SA 4150. Mr. GALLEGO submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed by
him to the bill H.R. 4016, making appropriations for the Department of Defense for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes;
which was ordered to lie on the table;
as follows:
At the appropriate place, insert the following:
SEC. ll. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this Act may
be obligated or expended for the use of military force, the conduct of hostilities, or the
preparation for war against or with respect
to Greenland.
f

EXECUTIVE SESSION
EXECUTIVE CALENDAR
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate will proceed to executive session to resume
consideration of the following nomination, which the clerk will report.
The legislative clerk read the nomination of Keith Bass, of Texas, to be an
Assistant Secretary of Defense.
VOTE ON BASS NOMINATION

The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the question is, Will
the Senate advise and consent to the
Bass nomination?
Mr. MARSHALL. I ask for the yeas
and nays.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk called the roll.
Mr. THUNE. The following Senators
are necessarily absent: the Senator
from Wyoming (Mr. BARRASSO), the
Senator from Tennessee (Mrs. BLACKBURN), the Senator from North Dakota
(Mr. CRAMER), the Senator from Montana (Mr. DAINES), the Senator from
South Carolina (Mr. GRAHAM), the Senator from Utah (Mr. LEE), the Senator
from Kansas (Mr. MORAN), the Senator
from Alaska (Ms. MURKOWSKI), and the
Senator from Montana (Mr. SHEEHY).
Further, if present and voting: the
Senator from South Carolina (Mr. GRAHAM) would have voted ‘‘yea’’ and the
Senator from Kansas (Mr. MORAN)
would have voted ‘‘yea.’’
Mr. DURBIN. I announce that the
Senator from Delaware (Ms. BLUNT

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.015

S05JAPT1

S18

ROCHESTER), the Senator from Delaware (Mr. COONS), the Senator from Arizona (Mr. KELLY), the Senator from
Massachusetts (Mr. MARKEY), the Senator from Georgia (Mr. WARNOCK), and
the Senator from Vermont (Mr. WELCH)
are necessarily absent.
The result was announced—yeas 50,
nays 35, as follows:

Graham
Kelly
Lee

Markey
Moran
Murkowski

Sheehy
Warnock
Welch

The nomination was confirmed.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
RICKETTS). Under the previous order,
the motion to reconsider is considered
made and laid upon the table, and the
President will be immediately notified
of the Senate’s action.

[Rollcall Vote No. 1 Ex.]

f

YEAS—50

ADJOURNMENT UNTIL 10 A.M.
TOMORROW
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate stands
adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 6:13 p.m.,
adjourned until Tuesday, January 6,
2026, at 10 a.m.

Banks
Boozman
Britt
Budd
Capito
Cassidy
Cornyn
Cotton
Crapo
Cruz
Curtis
Ernst
Fetterman
Fischer
Gallego
Grassley
Hagerty

Hawley
Hoeven
Husted
Hyde-Smith
Johnson
Justice
Kaine
Kennedy
King
Lankford
Lummis
Marshall
McConnell
McCormick
Moody
Moreno
Mullin

Paul
Reed
Ricketts
Risch
Rosen
Rounds
Schmitt
Scott (FL)
Scott (SC)
Shaheen
Sullivan
Thune
Tillis
Tuberville
Wicker
Young

NAYS—35
Alsobrooks
Baldwin
Bennet
Blumenthal
Booker
Cantwell
Collins
Cortez Masto
Duckworth
Durbin
Gillibrand
Hassan

Barrasso
Blackburn

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Heinrich
Hickenlooper
Hirono
Kim
Klobuchar
Luján
Merkley
Murphy
Murray
Ossoff
Padilla
Peters

Sanders
Schatz
Schiff
Schumer
Slotkin
Smith
Van Hollen
Warner
Warren
Whitehouse
Wyden

OF ARKANSAS, VICE PAUL KINLOCH HOLMES III, RETIRED.
NICHOLAS JON GANJEI, OF TEXAS, TO BE UNITED
STATES DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT
OF TEXAS, VICE LYNN N. HUGHES, RETIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
KEVIN HOLMES, OF ARKANSAS, TO BE UNITED STATES
ATTORNEY FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF ARKANSAS
FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE DUANE A. KEES,
TERM EXPIRED.
ZACHARY KELLER, OF LOUISIANA, TO BE UNITED
STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF
LOUISIANA FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE BRANDON B. BROWN.

THE JUDICIARY
BRIAN CHARLES LEA, OF TENNESSEE, TO BE UNITED
STATES DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT
OF TENNESSEE, VICE JOHN THOMAS FOWLKES, JR., RETIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
BRIAN DAVID MILLER, OF PENNSYLVANIA, TO BE
UNITED STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE MIDDLE DISTRICT
OF PENNSYLVANIA FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS,
VICE GERARD M. KARAM.

f

THE JUDICIARY

NOMINATIONS
Executive nominations received by
the Senate:

JUSTIN R. OLSON, OF INDIANA, TO BE UNITED STATES
DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF INDIANA, VICE JANE E. MAGNUS-STINSON, RETIRED.
AARON CHRISTIAN PETERSON, OF ALASKA, TO BE
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE DISTRICT OF
ALASKA, VICE TIMOTHY MARK BURGESS, RETIRED.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
ANDREW BENSON, OF MAINE, TO BE UNITED STATES
ATTORNEY FOR THE DISTRICT OF MAINE FOR THE TERM
OF FOUR YEARS, VICE DARCIE N. MCELWEE.

THE JUDICIARY
MEGAN BLAIR BENTON, OF MISSOURI, TO BE UNITED
STATES DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT
OF MISSOURI, VICE M. DOUGLAS HARPOOL, RETIRING.

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
WILLIAM BOYLE, OF NORTH CAROLINA, TO BE UNITED
STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF
NORTH CAROLINA FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE
MICHAEL F. EASLEY, JR.
DANIEL E. BURROWS, OF COLORADO, TO BE AN ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL, VICE AARON REITZ, RESIGNED.

RICHARD PRICE, OF MISSOURI, TO BE UNITED STATES
ATTORNEY FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI
FOR THE TERM OF FOUR YEARS, VICE TIMOTHY A . GARRISON, TERM EXPIRED.
DARIN SMITH, OF WYOMING, TO BE UNITED STATES ATTORNEY FOR THE DISTRICT OF WYOMING FOR THE TERM
OF FOUR YEARS, VICE MARK A. KLAASSEN, TERM EXPIRED.

f

CONFIRMATION
Executive nomination confirmed by
the Senate January 5, 2026:

NOT VOTING—15

THE JUDICIARY

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Blunt Rochester
Coons

Cramer
Daines

DAVID CLAY FOWLKES, OF ARKANSAS, TO BE UNITED
STATES DISTRICT JUDGE FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT

KEITH BASS, OF TEXAS, TO BE AN ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE.

01:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4637

Sfmt 9801

E:\CR\FM\A05JA6.007

S05JAPT1

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

E1

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

SENATE COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4,
agreed to by the Senate of February 4,
1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized schedule of all
meetings and hearings of Senate committees, subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference.
This title requires all such committees
to notify the Office of the Senate Daily
Digest—designated by the Rules Committee—of the time, place and purpose
of the meetings, when scheduled and
any cancellations or changes in the
meetings as they occur.
As an additional procedure along
with the computerization of this information, the Office of the Senate Daily
Digest will prepare this information for

printing in the Extensions of Remarks
section of the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD
on Monday and Wednesday of each
week.
Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, January 6, 2026 may be found in the Daily
Digest of today’s RECORD.
MEETINGS SCHEDULED
JANUARY 7
2:30 p.m.
Committee on the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Federal Courts, Oversight, Agency Action, and Federal
Rights
To hold hearings to examine holding
rogue judges accountable.
SD–226

3 p.m.
Select Committee on Intelligence
To receive a closed briefing on certain
intelligence matters.
SH–219
FEBRUARY 3
10:15 a.m.
Committee on the Judiciary
To hold hearings to examine hidden facts
regarding Nazis and Swiss banks.
SH–216

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:22 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\M05JA8.000

E05JAPT1

Monday, January 5, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Chamber Action
Routine Proceedings, pages S3–18
Measures Introduced: One bill and one resolution
were introduced, as follows: S. 3580, and S.J. Res.
101.
Page S16
Measures Passed:
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program Reauthorization Act: Senate passed S. 320, to
authorize the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of
1977, after agreeing to the committee amendment in
the nature of a substitute, and the following amendment proposed thereto:
Pages S5–10
Marshall (for Scott (FL)) Amendment No. 4148,
to control funding for the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program.
Page S7
National Landslide Preparedness Act Reauthorization Act: Senate passed S. 1626, to reauthorize
the National Landslide Preparedness Act, after agreeing to the committee amendment, and the following
amendment proposed thereto:
Pages S10–16
Marshall (for Scott (FL)) Amendment No. 4149,
to include provisions relating to funding and deficit
reduction.
Page S13
SIMMONS AND BAILEY NOMINATIONS—
AGREEMENT: A unanimous-consent agreement
was reached providing that at approximately 10
a.m., on Tuesday, January 6, 2026, Senate resume
consideration of the nomination of Joshua Simmons,
of Virginia, to be General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency; that the Senate execute the order
of December 18, 2025, with respect to the nomination of Joshua Simmons, at 11:30 a.m.; and that at
2:20 p.m., the Senate execute the order of December
18, 2025, with respect to the nomination of Sara
Bailey, of Texas, to be Director of National Drug
Control Policy.
Page S16
Nomination Confirmed: Senate confirmed the following nomination:
By 50 yeas to 35 nays (Vote No. EX. 1), Keith
Bass, of Texas, to be an Assistant Secretary of Defense.
Pages S17–18

Nominations Received: Senate received the following nominations:
Andrew Benson, of Maine, to be United States
Attorney for the District of Maine for the term of
four years.
Megan Blair Benton, of Missouri, to be United
States District Judge for the Western District of
Missouri.
William Boyle, of North Carolina, to be United
States Attorney for the Eastern District of North
Carolina for the term of four years.
Daniel E. Burrows, of Colorado, to be an Assistant
Attorney General.
David Clay Fowlkes, of Arkansas, to be United
States District Judge for the Western District of Arkansas.
Nicholas Jon Ganjei, of Texas, to be United States
District Judge for the Southern District of Texas.
Kevin Holmes, of Arkansas, to be United States
Attorney for the Western District of Arkansas for
the term of four years.
Zachary Keller, of Louisiana, to be United States
Attorney for the Western District of Louisiana for
the term of four years.
Brian Charles Lea, of Tennessee, to be United
States District Judge for the Western District of
Tennessee.
Brian David Miller, of Pennsylvania, to be United
States Attorney for the Middle District of Pennsylvania for the term of four years.
Justin R. Olson, of Indiana, to be United States
District Judge for the Southern District of Indiana.
Aaron Christian Peterson, of Alaska, to be United
States District Judge for the District of Alaska.
Richard Price, of Missouri, to be United States
Attorney for the Western District of Missouri for the
term of four years.
Darin Smith, of Wyoming, to be United States
Attorney for the District of Wyoming for the term
Page S18
of four years.
Messages from the House:
Page S16
Executive Communications:
Page S16
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages S16–17
Statements on Introduced Bills/Resolutions:
D7

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D05JA6.REC

D05JAPT1

D8

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Amendments Submitted:
Page S17
Record Votes: One record vote was taken today.
(Total—1)
Page S18
Adjournment: Senate convened at 3 p.m., and adjourned at 6:13 p.m., until 10 a.m., on Tuesday,
January 6, 2026. (For Senate’s program, see the re-

January 5, 2026

marks of the Acting Majority Leader in today’s
Record on page S16.)

Committee Meetings
(Committees not listed did not meet)

No committee meetings were held.

h

House of Representatives
COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR TUESDAY,
JANUARY 6, 2026

Chamber Action
The House was not in session today. The House
will meet at 6:30 p.m. on Tuesday, January 6, 2026.

(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
Committee on Armed Services: Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, to receive a closed briefing on Department of Defense cyber operations and readiness for the fourth quarter
of Fiscal Year 2025, 2:30 p.m., SVC–217.
Select Committee on Intelligence: to receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence matters, 3 p.m., SH–219.

Committee Meetings
No hearings were held.

Joint Meetings

House

No joint committee meetings were held.
f

NEW PUBLIC LAWS
(For last listing of Public Laws, see DAILY DIGEST, p. D1281)

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

S. 356, to extend the Secure Rural Schools and
Community Self-Determination Act of 2000. Signed
on December 18, 2025. (Public Law 119–58)
S. 2283, to designate the facility of the United
States Postal Service located at 201 West Oklahoma
Avenue in Guthrie, Oklahoma, as the ‘‘Oscar J.
Upham Post Office’’. Signed on December 18, 2025.
(Public Law 119–59)
S. 1071, to authorize appropriations for fiscal year
2026 for military activities of the Department of
Defense, for military construction, and for defense
activities of the Department of Energy, to prescribe
military personnel strengths for such fiscal year.
Signed on December 18, 2025. (Public Law 119–60)
H.R. 165, to direct the Secretary of the Interior
to complete all actions necessary for certain land to
be held in restricted fee status by the Oglala Sioux
Tribe and Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe. Signed on
December 19, 2025. (Public Law 119–61)

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

Committee on Rules, Full Committee, hearing on H.R.
4593, the ‘‘SHOWER Act’’; H.R. 5184, the ‘‘Affordable
HOMES Act’’; and legislation on the Commerce, Justice,
Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior
and Environment Appropriations Act, 6:45 p.m., H–313
Capitol.
f

CONGRESSIONAL PROGRAM AHEAD
Week of January 6 through January 9, 2026
Senate Chamber
On Tuesday, Senate will resume consideration of
the nomination of Joshua Simmons, of Virginia, to
be General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency, and vote on confirmation thereon at 11:30 a.m.
At 2:20 p.m., Senate will vote on confirmation of
the nomination of Sara Bailey, of Texas, to be Director of National Drug Control Policy.
During the balance of the week, Senate may consider any cleared legislative and executive business.
Senate Committees
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Committee on Armed Services: January 6, Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity, to receive a closed briefing on Department of Defense cyber operations and readiness for the
fourth quarter of Fiscal Year 2025, 2:30 p.m., SVC–217.
Committee on the Judiciary: January 7, Subcommittee on
Federal Courts, Oversight, Agency Action, and Federal

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D05JA6.REC

D05JAPT1

January 5, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Rights, to hold hearings to examine holding rogue judges
accountable, 2:30 p.m., SD–226.
Select Committee on Intelligence: January 6, to receive a
closed briefing on certain intelligence matters, 3 p.m.,
SH–219.
January 7, Full Committee, to receive a closed briefing
on certain intelligence matters, 3 p.m., SH–219.

House Committees

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Committee on Education and Workforce, January 7, Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions,
hearing entitled ‘‘Modernizing Retirement Policy for Today’s Workforce’’, 10:15 a.m., 2175 Rayburn.
Committee on Energy and Commerce, January 7, Subcommittee on Energy, hearing entitled ‘‘American Energy
Dominance: Dawn of the New Nuclear Era’’, 10:15 a.m.,
2123 Rayburn.
January 8, Subcommittee on Health, hearing entitled
‘‘Legislative Proposals to Support Patient Access to Medicare Services’’, 10:15 a.m., 2123 Rayburn.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

D9

Committee on the Judiciary, January 7, Subcommittee on
the Administrative State, Regulatory Reform, and Antitrust, hearing entitled ‘‘Full Stream Ahead: Competition
and Consumer Choice in Digital Streaming’’, 10 a.m.,
2141 Rayburn.
Committee on Natural Resources, January 8, Subcommittee
on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries, hearing entitled ‘‘Fix
Our Forests for Affordable and Reliable Water and Power
Supplies’’, 10 a.m., 1324 Longworth.
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, January 7,
Full Committee, hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of Fraud
and Misuse of Federal Funds in Minnesota: Part I’’, 10
a.m., HVC–210.
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, January 8,
Full Committee, hearing entitled ‘‘Chemistry Competitiveness: Fueling Innovation and Streamlining Processes
to Ensure Safety and Security’’, 10 a.m., 2318 Rayburn.
Committee on Small Business, January 7, Full Committee,
hearing entitled ‘‘A Voice for Small Business: How the
SBA Office of Advocacy is Cutting Red Tape’’, 10 a.m.,
2360 Rayburn.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D05JA6.REC

D05JAPT1

D10

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

10 a.m., Tuesday, January 6

6:30 p.m., Tuesday, January 6

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Tuesday: Senate will resume consideration
of the nomination of Joshua Simmons, of Virginia, to be
General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency, and
vote on confirmation thereon at 11:30 a.m.
At 2:20 p.m., Senate will vote on confirmation of the
nomination of Sara Bailey, of Texas, to be Director of National Drug Control Policy.
(Senate will recess following the vote on confirmation of the
nomination of Joshua Simmons until 2:15 p.m. for their respective party conferences.)

Program for Tuesday: House will convene the Second
Session of the One Hundred Nineteenth Congress.

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

January 5, 2026

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:58 Jan 06, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D05JA6.REC

D05JAPT1

