H138

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

must await calmer times, cooler heads,
and wiser voices.
In the meantime, let us rejoice in the
fruits of this action. They include the
removal of the worst despot in the
Western Hemisphere; the revival of the
Monroe Doctrine; the ejection of malignant powers insinuating themselves
into Latin America; the unmistakable
warning to tyrants around the world
that America is back; the triumph of
American arms; and most of all, setting the stage for the return of liberty,
justice, and prosperity to the people of
Venezuela.
f

RETIREMENT ANNOUNCEMENT OF
STENY HOYER
(Mr. HOYER of Maryland was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Speaker, I would
ask Mr. SCALISE: Where is my 1 minute
when I need it?
Mr. Speaker, I thank my dear and
close friends, STEVE WOMACK and
Madam Speaker, for being here. I also
thank my colleagues and my dear
friends, Majority Leader SCALISE and
Majority Whip EMMER, for being here.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today with, obviously, mixed emotions and reluctant
conviction. There is a true story I have
told many times over the past 60 years.
It is about a young man—myself—who
was a student at the University of
Maryland, College Park, just a few
miles from this place.
As a freshman, like many young people, I lacked a vision for my future. I
nearly flunked out of college and didn’t
enroll in the 1958 fall semester. Fortunately for me, I reenrolled the following spring.
It was the spring convocation of
April 27, 1959. Classes were canceled
from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. so that we could
all go hear the guest speaker. Frankly,
I had not planned to attend. However, I
was walking up the hill near Cole Field
House where the event was located. I
saw our guest drive up in a 1958 Pontiac
convertible. That, Mr. Speaker, was a
cool car. It was so cool that I decided
to go to this convocation.
That walk was my road to Damascus.
It changed my life. The speaker was
John F. Kennedy. In his remarks, he
urged us to do our duty in those days of
world chaos. In particular, he charged
us students to become more active in
our communities. NANCY heard those
same words.
Like many hundreds of thousands of
young people, I was deeply inspired by
Senator Kennedy and his words. Jack
Kemp, who was my colleague when I
first came here, had a similar story. A
week later, I changed my major from
business to political science.
Mr. Speaker, 7 years later, in 1966, 5
months out of Georgetown Law School,
I was elected to the Maryland State
Senate. Mr. Speaker, 15 years after
that, in 1981, the voters of the Fifth
District elected me to the United
States House of Representatives.

I stand here now, after some 60 years
in public service, including nearly 45
years as a Member of this House. I have
won elections and lost a couple. I celebrated triumphs and suffered setbacks.
I enjoyed friendships and endured hardships.
As the song says: ‘‘Some days are
diamonds. Some days are stone.’’ Happily, I have experienced more diamonds
than stone.
Shakespeare advised us all: ‘‘This
above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the
day, Thou canst not then be false to
any man.’’
In that vein, Mr. Speaker, I have decided not to seek another term in the
people’s House. I make this decision
with sadness, for I love this House, an
institution the Framers designed to reflect the will of the American people
and to serve as the guardian of their
liberty and their democracy.
Through the past 45 years, I have
come to know many good, decent, and
patriotic Members chosen by their
neighbors to represent them. They
come from both parties and all parts of
the ideological spectrum.
The Congress I entered in 1981 was
somewhat different. Most Republicans
and Democrats worked together in a
collegial and productive way. The leaders of the House, Tip O’Neill and Bob
Michael, fostered that environment. It
was, of course, not a Congress without
conflict.
In the year to come, I will have much
more to say about the issues we have
grappled with and the ways this House
has changed during my time. At the
outset, I have said that I spoke with reluctant conviction. That reluctance is
because I am deeply concerned that
this House is not living up to the
Founders’ goals.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle to examine their
conscience, renew their courage, and
carry out the responsibilities that the
first Article of the Constitution demands. Only in that way can we ensure
that our 250 years will be a preface to
a stronger and brighter beacon in a free
and principled democracy. It will be a
nation of laws, not of men. It will be a
nation respected around the world for
its strength, certainly, but even more
for the ideals it represents and the justice with which it acts.
That effort must extend beyond this
House. I fear that America is heading
not toward greatness but toward smallness, pettiness, divisiveness, lawlessness, and disdainfulness.
We must respect and love one another. We must remember that we are
not great or unique because we say we
are great but because we are just, generous, and fair.
I hope that spirit can guide us the
rest of this Congress because I still
have much I want to do in the coming
year, not least of which is keeping the
government open. To do that, we must
send all our appropriations bills to the
President in a bipartisan and timely
fashion.

January 8, 2026

There are many people I intend to
thank in the coming months, but here
are a few I will recognize now:
First, my family, who has borne
much of the burden of my service. I ask
them to stand.
b 1015
To my late wife, Judy, who died too
young and gave so much.
To my beloved daughters, Susan,
Stefany, and Anne, who paid a price for
Dad’s absences.
To my grandchildren and greatgrandchildren, for giving me great joy.
To my mother, who thankfully lived
to see her son become the president of
the Maryland State Senate.
To my staff, for serving me and their
Nation with great loyalty and ability.
To my colleagues, for trusting me
with leadership.
To the people of Prince George’s
County, particularly the African-American community, without whom I
would not have won my elections.
To the people of Maryland’s Fifth
District, who gave me a majority of
their votes 23 times.
To my wife, Dr. Elaine Kamarck, who
has made my life whole and happy.
Thank you, Babe.
And to God, for sending me down this
road so many years ago that I call the
‘‘Road to Damascus.’’
I thank all of my colleagues—extraordinary people, decent people, people whom their neighbors respect and
sent here. The only way they got here
was through their neighbors saying
that they wanted them to represent
them.
I thank you all.
Mr. Speaker, with tremendous gratitude, I yield back.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
WOMACK). To my friend, Mr. HOYER,
you have served your district, your
State, and your country with dignity
and honor, and the institution wishes
you Godspeed.
f

RECOGNIZING THE HONORABLE
STENY HOYER
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, before I get into my primary remarks, for which I was going to
rise, I reflect on 18 years ago when I
came into the House of Representatives.
Some of my staff had been on the Hill
for, actually, a couple of decades at
that point.
My chief of staff said: If there was
ever a Democratic Member of Congress
who literally represents the term
‘‘statesman,’’ it is STENY HOYER.
He truly is. He has not failed at that
task, and so I offer my congratulations
on his announced retirement and my
thanks for his service as a statesman,
especially at a time of what we have
been living through, of growing divisiveness.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

YEAR IN REVIEW

Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to highlight
some of the great work that my office
delivered in 2025 that was reflected in
my year-end report.
Last year was full of legislative victories. From ensuring more milk options in public schools to making certain that rural schools receive the
funding that they need, we continue to
deliver for Pennsylvania’s 15th Congressional District.
I was proud to lead the charge to
bring whole milk back into our
schools, push for the largest investment in American agriculture in a generation, advocate for career and technical education, and establish a Federal regulatory framework for digital
assets like cryptocurrency.
On the policy front, I helped to ensure the passage of the Secure Rural
Schools Reauthorization Act. I secured
numerous provisions in the Working
Families Tax Cuts Act, which benefited
American agriculture, as well as a provision authorizing Workforce Pell
Grants.
The Whole Milk for Healthy Kids Act
will soon be signed into law, and the
House approved both my Digital Asset
Market Clarity Act of 2025 and the U.S.
Grain Standards Reauthorization Act
of 2025.
At home, I was honored to nominate
seven exceptional students to our Nation’s service academies, celebrated a
talented young artist, and delivered
more than $6.1 million in Federal funding for nine excellent community
projects.
My office responded to more than
81,000 constituent letters, answered
nearly 8,000 phone calls, and closed
nearly 1,600 constituent cases, helping
folks navigate the Federal agencies
and Federal bureaucracy.
The most rewarding part of being a
Representative is helping individuals
and families get the assistance that
they need. Throughout the year, my
staff hosts office hours across the 18
counties in the 15th Congressional District to assist constituents with issues
related to the Social Security Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs, IRS, and other Federal agencies.
Appointments are not necessary, and I
am pleased that we are available to
help those in need. Personally, I hosted
over 1,200 meetings in 2025 and sponsored and cosponsored 183 bills.
Mr. Speaker, as many around the
Capitol complex know, I often come to
this floor to share good news from
Pennsylvania’s 15th Congressional District. I spoke 91 days on the House floor
in 2025, delivering 120 speeches. I am
glad to have had the ability to communicate with my constituents in this
way and to recognize their achievements.
Mr. Speaker, I thank the people of
the 15th Congressional District for allowing me the privilege to be their
voice in Congress, and I firmly believe
that our best days lie ahead. I look for-

ward to working hard in 2026 to continue to earn their support.
f

RECOGNIZING THE HONORABLE
STENY HOYER
(Ms. PELOSI of California was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. PELOSI. Mr. Speaker, today is a
day of joy but also a day of some sadness that our great leader, STENY
HOYER, has announced his retirement
from Congress.
He still has another year. He still has
another year, and I know a lot will
come.
I join the gentleman in saluting
Elaine, Stefany, Susan, Anne, and
Judy. Judy—we loved Judy when she
was here, and now we rejoice in the
gentleman’s happiness with Elaine.
My colleagues, we all know that
STENY HOYER has been a pillar of
strength in the House of Representatives and a champion for the people of
Maryland for more than four decades.
His patriotism, mastery of the legislative process, and steadfast commitment to America’s working families
have left an indelible, positive mark on
our Nation.
STENY has been a steady presence in
our Caucus and the Democratic leadership and a valued colleague. He has
been a great leader in bipartisanship in
this body. He spoke in his remarks of
how it was when he came here. Many of
us were here at that time. We didn’t
get along because we always agreed; we
got along because we respected the differences that we brought in representing our districts. It was a very
positive time, which he harkened us
back to and challenged us to return to.
I thank STENY.
Mr. Speaker, his deep knowledge of
the institution, respect for its traditions, and commitment to public service have earned him the admiration of
colleagues on both sides of the aisle.
Personally, STENY has not only been
a trusted partner in leadership but a
dear friend. He mentioned the Presidency of John F. Kennedy. When President Kennedy was President, STENY
and I worked in the office of Danny
Brewster of Maryland. That is when I
got to know him. I was just out of
school. He was in law school. Sadly, we
saw the assassination of the President,
and that was a horrible thing.
As he concludes his extraordinary
leadership and service in the Congress,
we celebrate his legacy of decency and
devotion to our country. He has been
just so remarkable. Our gratitude to
him and his family is boundless, and we
wish them every happiness in the years
ahead.
STENY has been a leader to us and a
mentor to many. He has really been an
example of leadership and can be
viewed as one of the most substantial,
respected Members of Congress in the
history of this body.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Mr. HOYER for
his leadership.

H139

RECOGNIZING DOUG MCMILLON
(Mr. WOMACK of Arkansas was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. WOMACK. Mr. Speaker, I also
offer my personal thanks and congratulations to my dear friend, STENY
HOYER, on the announcement that he
has made today. We wish him the very
best.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to a great friend and fellow northwest Arkansan, Doug McMillon, who
steps away at the end of this month
from a 12-year run as chief executive
officer of Fortune 1, Walmart, in
Bentonville, Arkansas.
Doug’s is a story of incredible American success. Much like the company
he has led, his journey started with
humble beginnings.
At 16, Doug’s family moved from
Jonesboro, Arkansas, to Bentonville.
The eldest of three children, Doug was
a guard on the Bentonville High School
Tigers basketball team. I had the privilege of watching him play high school
sports with no way of knowing where
his dreams and ambitions would take
him.
b 1030
He began his career at Walmart as an
hourly associate in 1984, picking orders
and unloading trailers in the warehouse. He attended the University of
Arkansas and worked part time at the
Bank of Bentonville. Later, he enrolled
in the MBA program at the University
of Tulsa.
He later became an assistant manager at Walmart Store 894 in Tulsa,
and that launched a career with the
Nation’s leading retailer, with promotions to CEO of Sam’s Club in 2005,
Walmart International in 2009, and finally CEO of the entire enterprise in
2014.
With a market cap of $195 billion,
under his tenure Walmart’s value has
increased by more than 350 percent and
a current market cap of around $900
billion. His leadership in the company’s
digitization and strong e-commerce
platforms was a major shift for the
company from that as a brick-and-mortar company to an omnichannel retailer.
Supply chain automation in warehouses and major pay increases for
hourly associates were instrumental in
his visionary leadership and success.
Mr. Speaker, I could speak volumes
about Doug McMillon’s legacy. Suffice
it to say, his quiet and patient demeanor, his bold and innovative leadership, and his commitment to the shareholders and associates of Walmart
make him one of America’s true success stories, and not only that, but his
spirit of charity and funding opportunities for young entrepreneurs and in
healthcare for fellow citizens.
I am proud of what he has accomplished and the inspiration he has
given to thousands of people who have
had the privilege of serving under his
leadership.

H140

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Mr. Speaker, I know Doug McMillon
well enough to know that he would be
embarrassed by all of this fuss that we
are making about him. That is who he
is, but this tribute is well deserved.
Few among us have lived the American
Dream like he has, and what a difference he has made.
Mr. Speaker, I say to Doug and Shelley: Well done. I know I speak for a lot
of people. I thank him for his example
of selfless service and his commitment
to helping his fellow man. Godspeed
and may he enjoy a well-earned retirement.
f

FIFTEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF
ARIZONA MASS SHOOTING
(Mr. STANTON of Arizona was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. STANTON. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to mark a solemn anniversary.
Fifteen years ago today, Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords was doing
her job, holding a ‘‘Congress on Your
Corner’’ event at a grocery store in
Tucson, standing outside in the January sunshine, listening to her constituents, figuring out how she could help
them.
Then the unthinkable happened. In
an instant, this moment of democracy
turned into a tragedy. A gunman targeting Congresswoman Giffords killed
six of our fellow Arizonans: Federal
Judge John Roll, a dedicated public
servant;
Dorothy
Morris,
Phyllis
Schneck, Dorwan Stoddard, beloved
members of the community; 9-year-old
Christina-Taylor Green, born on September 11, 2001, a budding public servant who had just been elected to her
middle school student council; and
Gabe Zimmerman, Gabby’s director of
community research who died doing
the work that he loved.
Thirteen others were wounded, including Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords. She survived a gunshot wound to
her head through the sheer force of her
will, exceptional medical care, and the
unwavering support of her husband,
Captain MARK KELLY.
I worked closely with Gabby when
she was in the State legislature, and I
served on the Phoenix City Council.
She was a singularly talented leader,
brilliant and tough as nails, with the
rare gift for bringing people together.
There is no doubt in my mind that if it
were not for that day, Gabby Giffords
would be sitting in the United States
Senate right now or the Governor’s office, maybe even the White House.
We have seen the consequences when
political disagreements metastasize
into something darker. In the last few
years, political violence has increased
in frequency and intensity, and this violence has been directed at both Republicans and Democrats.
Gabby Giffords herself has shown us
the path forward. Despite a long and
difficult recovery that continues to
this very day, she has transformed unimaginable tragedy into courageous action.

Through GIFFORDS, the organization she cofounded with MARK KELLY,
she leads the fight for a future free
from gun violence, not with bitterness,
but with courage, determination, and
with hope.
Her example stands as a rebuke to
the cynicism that too often characterizes our politics. Gabby reminds us
that we can disagree and disagree
strongly while still recognizing the
fundamental humanity in one another.
We can fight for our principles without
demonizing our opponents.
On this 15th anniversary, we honor
those who we lost by recommitting
ourselves to the work that they believed in, a democracy where disagreement is not just tolerated but celebrated, where robust debate strengthens rather than threatens our institutions, and where every American can
engage in civic life without fear.
That is the America Gabby Giffords
fought for then. That is the America
she fights for now, and that is the
America we must build together.
f

HONORING BRIGADIER GENERAL
KEITH CONNOLLY
(Mr. CISCOMANI of Arizona was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor Brigadier General Keith
Connolly, who sadly passed away on
Christmas Eve.
Keith lived a life defined by service,
by family, and by purpose. He was married to his wife, Pat, for 65 years, and
together they raised four children and
were blessed with nine grandchildren
and four great-grandchildren, with another expected this spring.
A devoted husband, father, and
friend, Keith chose a life of service to
his country. He served with distinction
for 33 years in the United States Air
Force as a general officer and a fighter
pilot, flying more than 4,800 hours and
serving across the United States and
overseas, including in Japan, Thailand,
and Vietnam. He was awarded two Legions of Merit and seven Air Medals for
combat missions, primarily in the Pacific theater.
After retiring to Tucson in 1990,
Keith continued serving veterans at
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, volunteering more than 23,000 hours over 26
years, helping veterans navigate VA
claims. He also recruited and mentored
volunteers,
assisting
thousands
through tax assistance programs, and
he shared his passion for aviation
through the Pima Air & Space Museum.
In 2016, Keith was inducted into the
Arizona State Veterans Hall of Fame
in recognition of his many years of volunteer service.
It was an honor to recognize General
Connolly as part of the initial Veteran
Servant Leader Award that I have the
pleasure and the honor of conducting
every year.
General Keith Connolly’s life reflected deep love for his family, his

January 8, 2026

community, and his country. His legacy of service will endure.
Mr. Speaker, I thank him for his
service and may he rest in peace.
RECOGNIZING MICA MOUNTAIN FOOTBALL STATE
CHAMPIONSHIP

Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate Mica Mountain
High School’s football team on winning
the championship for the second year
in a row.
Number 7 Mica Mountain Thunderbolts defeated number 1 undefeated Arcadia High School with a score of 42–17.
Mica Mountain started the season 2–2
and ultimately finished 12–2. It was the
first time a southern Arizona school repeated as champions among the bigschool ranks since 1976 and 1977.
Head Coach and Mica Mountain Assistant Principal Jay Campos led the
Thunderbolts to their second consecutive State championship and the first
of his coaching career.
Evan Wheeler finished with 194 yards
and three touchdowns which earned
him both offensive and overall MVP.
Sergio Raygada had an 18-yard pick
six and was named the defensive MVP.
Mr. Speaker, this team has made
their school and community very
proud. This was a great victory for the
Thunderbolts and one they earned. I
congratulate them on yet another successful season.
f

CELEBRATING THE MEMORY OF
DOLORES OWENS
(Mr. CORREA of California was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. CORREA. Mr. Speaker, today I
rise to celebrate the memory of one of
my constituents, Dolores Owens.
She came to Santa Ana 60 years ago
when she married Dewey Flournoy, and
together they raised five boys. After
Dewey’s passing, Dolores later married
Neddie Owens and continued to build a
life rooted in love, family, and faith in
Santa Ana.
Dolores was a strong and active
woman, always cooking for her family,
even at the age of 92. She had a deep
love for the word of God and a heart for
giving, donating to community. Whenever she found anybody in need, she
would give, no questions asked. She
was a true example of a strong woman
and a loving mother who took care of
everybody in her community.
Mr. Speaker, my prayers are with her
family.
RECOGNIZING THE 2025 CONGRESSIONAL APP
CHALLENGE WINNER

Mr. CORREA. Mr. Speaker, today I
rise to recognize the winner of the 2025
Congressional App Challenge in my district, Xiong Yi.
Xiong’s app, MathFluent, helps students understand math by transforming complicated equations into
helpful visualized stories. Users can
input an equation or a problem, and
MathFluent will generate a story or
art piece that helps explain the solution.

January 8, 2026

H141

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Xiong is a student at Fairmont Prep
Academy in my home city of Anaheim,
and he is a perfect example of how the
21st century students are incorporating
technology into their educational experience.
Mr. Speaker, today I congratulate
Xiong on a well-deserved honor.
JANUARY 6 FIVE-YEAR ANNIVERSARY

Mr. CORREA. Mr. Speaker, 5 years
ago, I was on this floor when insurrectionists stormed the Capitol to interfere with the peaceful transfer of
power.
On this anniversary, I remember the
brave Capitol police officers who put
their lives on the line to protect not
only Members of Congress but America’s democracy. Today, in 2026, political violence continues to threaten the
fabric of our society and of our country.
I hope as we reflect back on January
6 that we look at those memories as a
lesson that we have to stand together
and we have to fight, not with violence,
but with debate, looking at each other
with understanding the way we have
done in this great democratic country
for over 250 years.
That night of January 6, it was both
Republicans and Democrats that came
together after the insurrection that
night to make sure we completed the
peaceful transfer of power and make
sure that democracy continued to reign
in America.
f

RECOGNIZING JIM MONAGHAN
(Mr. LAWLER of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize the incredible career of Jim Monaghan, a dedicated public servant who has spent a lifetime
serving the people of Stony Point.
Jim’s public service began with a 29year career in the New York City Police Department, where he rose to the
rank of lieutenant. From January 2016
through this past December, he served
as the town supervisor of Stony Point,
focusing on affordability for families
and seniors and ensuring public safety.
Before becoming town supervisor, Jim
served for 2 years on the town board.
A lifelong Rockland County resident,
Jim and his wife, Jackie, have lived in
Stony Point for 30 years with their two
children and now their grandchildren.
Community and family remain central
to his life. Jim and his wife are active
parishioners at Immaculate Conception
Church and have volunteered in community sports programs and nonprofits
throughout the county.
As Jim retires after a long career
serving the people of Stony Point,
Rockland County, and New York, I am
proud to recognize my good friend, Jim
Monaghan, for his many contributions
to our community. May this next chapter for him be just as fulfilling as the
last.

b 1045

HONORING LAYLA ELIZABETH SO

HONORING ANTHONY ADAMO

HONORING JOHN ‘‘SPO’’ ESPOSITO

Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of Layla Elizabeth So, a remarkable young lady from
Pearl River, New York, whose kindness
and creativity touched everyone who
knew her. Layla passed away on August 7, 2024, after a heroic 2-year battle
with cancer.
Layla grew up in Pearl River, New
York. She attended Lincoln Avenue Elementary, Pearl River Middle School,
and was a rising sophomore at Pearl
River High School where she earned
High Honor Roll.
Layla excelled on the varsity bowling
team, earning the most improved player award. She also participated in the
marine science club, enjoyed baking,
and volunteered at Pearl River Library.
One of Layla’s proudest accomplishments was being a founding member of
Eagle Scout Troop 97G in New City.
Her Eagle Project, completed posthumously by Troop 97, transformed 10
55-gallon steel drums into decorative
trash cans for the town of Orangetown
and earned her the title of Eagle Scout
after her final board of review in which
she also became a Life Scout.
Layla’s legacy reminds us that life
isn’t always numbered in years but in
the impact we leave behind. Though
her time with us and in our community
was far too short, Layla’s ambition and
kindness will endure. May her memory
always be a blessing.

Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of John ‘‘Spo’’
Esposito, a remarkable young man
from my district. John passed away
peacefully on December 28 at just 25
years old.
John grew up in Somers, New York,
where he graduated from Somers High
School in 2018. A proud student-athlete, he was a member of the 2016 New
York State Championship varsity football team, as well as the track and basketball teams, forming lifelong friendships.
John
went
on
to
attend
Manhattanville University earning his
business degree in 2023. He pursued his
entrepreneurial spirit by working at
B&E Sports Collectibles and starting
his own business, Eye On The Ball
Sports Collectibles, alongside his
brother Joey, combining his love of
sports with his ambition and his family.
Beyond his accomplishments, John
was defined by his heart. An avid Yankees fan, he remained deeply connected
to his community as a member of the
New York Bombers, a blind beep baseball team, and showed us all what it
means to persevere with humor, courage, and grace.
My deepest condolences go out to
John’s parents, Joe and Patti; his
brothers, Joey and Michael; and everyone who had the privilege of knowing
him.
May God bless his memory.

Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of an extraordinary Orangeburg resident, Pieter
Grosbeck, who passed away at the beginning of December due to a 9/11-related illness.
A proud Eagle Scout, a graduate of
Tappan Zee High School and of Rockland Community College, Pieter dedicated his life to serving others. After
working as a technician for ITT in Antarctica, Pieter began his career in public safety with the NYPD in 1984, serving as a patrolman in the 44th Precinct
in the South Bronx.
In 1990, Pieter continued his career
by joining the FDNY where he was
later assigned to Engine Company 3 in
Chelsea and later transferred to Battalion 7, serving with distinction until
his retirement in 2018.
Pieter devoted 45 years of volunteer
service to the Blauvelt Volunteer Fire
Company, serving as president, chief on
three occasions, and an active board
member, being awarded life membership in 2019.
He was a loving husband to his wife,
Lisa, for 32 years; a devoted friend; and
a man who consistently put others before himself. I extend my deepest condolences to his family, his fellow firefighters, and all those who had the
privilege of knowing him.
May his memory be a blessing.

Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of Anthony
Adamo, southern region president of
the Civil Service Employees Association who passed away this week at the
age of 46.
Born in Flushing, Queens, Anthony
graduated from New Paltz High School
and began his career at SUNY New
Paltz in 1999. Not long after, he stepped
up as a union activist in CSEA’s SUNY
New Paltz Local working as a shop
steward and grievance representative,
driven by his belief in standing up for
the working people.
In 2009, Anthony was elected as the
local president, a position he held for
10 years, during which he also served as
the chair of the union’s statewide political action committee.
In 2019, he became southern region
president and was reelected by his
peers again in 2024. Additionally, Anthony served as an AFSCME delegate
and vice president of the New York
State AFL–CIO.
Anthony embodied the very spirit of
union leadership: passionate, hardworking, and unwavering in his commitment to others. His legacy will live
on through the countless lives he
touched and the workers he proudly
fought for. He was a great friend, an
honest broker, and a true New Yorker.
I will miss my friend dearly, and may
he be at peace.

HONORING PIETER GROSBECK

H142

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

RECOGNIZING NATIONAL BLOOD
DONOR MONTH
(Mr. LATIMER of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize National Blood
Donor Month, which takes place each
January, and to thank our fellow
Americans who voluntarily donate
blood.
As a proud blood donor myself, I
commend the New York Blood Center
and all the community blood centers
across the United States that provide a
lifeline to people and patients in our
hospitals.
This week the center declared a blood
emergency.
A single blood donation can save up
to three lives, making the work of our
community blood centers and the generosity of the employees and the volunteer blood donors who contribute their
work extremely important.
NYBC has been serving New Yorkers
with lifesaving blood products since
1964. Today, as part of the New York
Blood Center Enterprises, that mission
extends far beyond New York. Together, they serve 75 million people and
provide 1 million blood products annually to over 400 hospitals.
From newborns and their mothers to
cancer patients and trauma victims,
community blood centers provide patients with the blood that keeps them
alive. This month and always, I thank
them.
SALUTING THE WORK OF PORT CHESTER
HISTORICAL SOCIETY

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
salute the work of those who are leaders and members of the Port Chester
Historical Society. Their volunteer efforts have kept alive the memories and
stories of the years past that represent
the foundation of the village of Port
Chester today.
Led by president Jordan Allen, the
society has maintained the historic
Bush-Lyon Homestead and has been
able to follow through with a host of
different items for this building that
was built in 1760, involving the community and activities at that site: celebration of historic dates, fairs and festivals, and important seminars.
This month, in concert with the Village of Port Chester and Westchester’s
Revolution 250, the society cosponsors
An Evening With Benjamin Franklin.
The society cosponsors that evening,
and he will visit us in the 21st century
to tell us a little bit about the 18th
century.
Also this month, the historical society holds a workshop on research and
genealogy for interested adults who
want to do their own family research.
The energy and resources activated by
those in the society, Kikki Short, Toni
Sacco,
Carolee
Brakewood,
Mike
DeVittorio,
Lou
Russo,
Joanne
Bellantoni, and others, is one more example of everyday Americans doing
their part to advance the story of
America.

From the floor of the House of Representatives, I salute the Port Chester
Historical Society.
PROTECTING DRIVERS FROM DANGEROUS
ELECTRIC VEHICLE BATTERY FIRES

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today because this week I am proud to
introduce new legislation to protect
drivers from dangerous electric vehicle
battery fires with my colleague Congressman BRIAN FITZPATRICK of Pennsylvania.
This bill called the Electric and Hybrid Vehicle Battery Safety Act of 2026,
H.R. 6948, comes in response to several
fatal EV accidents which occurred in
my district. The accidents involved extremely hot and difficult-to-fight
chemical battery blazes and have led to
loss of multiple lives.
I became aware of the lack of standards governing EV battery design and
heightened risks to passengers in EV
accidents, including electrical door releases becoming disabled and lack of
information on EV firefighting techniques and exposure to chemical toxins
from those fires.
This bipartisan bill addresses all of
those issues, requiring the U.S. Department of Transportation standards for
battery safety, mandates for mechanical door releases, disseminating best
practices for firefighters to tackle
these runaway blazes, and requiring a
study by HHS on the health risks to
firefighters.
These new standards will help assure
Americans that they are not taking
unnecessary risks every time they get
behind the wheel of an electric vehicle
and ensure our firefighters have the
most current knowledge and protection
to handle the latest in automotive
technology.
f

RECOGNIZING DAVID MCMAHON
(Mr. NORMAN of South Carolina was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. NORMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize an exceptional public servant, David McMahon, whose career reflects unwavering leadership,
unwavering patriotism, and a true
commitment to the security of America.
Dave has spent much of his life and
service to the State of South Carolina.
He grew up in Charleston and today
oversees the TSA operations at the
Charleston International Airport along
with five other airports all across
South Carolina. He has served as a Federal security director since January of
2020, managing operations and directing security efforts all across our great
State.
Dave’s record of service is both extensive, and it is remarkable. He has
served as an honorary commander with
the U.S. Coast Guard Base Charleston
through the Joint Base Charleston Program and has made equally significant
contributions to national security policy through service and working on
various groups.

January 8, 2026

Dave has had a distinguished record
of service. Prior to his time with the
Coast Guard, Dave served as the deputy
Federal security director for Minnesota
at the Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport. He also played a pivotal role as a primary field leader for
Super Bowl LII.
From assistant Federal security director roles to active director positions, Dave has consistently delivered
strong leadership and results wherever
he was placed. Notably, in the early
days of TSA, Dave helped federalize six
airports while serving as a crisis management coordinator.
His lengthy service record goes on.
Prior to joining the TSA, Dave served
more than 4 years as a deputy sheriff
with the Dane County Sheriff’s Office
in Wisconsin. He also served our country for 12 years in the United States
Army, a tenure which included a combat tour in Saudi Arabia and Iraq with
the 101st Airborne Division.
His military roles included criminal
investigator, patrol supervisor, SWAT/
sniper team lead, SWAT/police sniper
instructor, and military police officer
basic instructor. Dave also taught
criminal justice for Central Texas College while stationed in Okinawa,
Japan.
Dave’s life is one truly defined by his
service. His commitment to our community, to our great State, and to our
Nation has been unlimited. Above all,
Dave’s family has always been his
greatest source of strength. Dave has
been married to his wife, Jeanette, for
over 39 years, and together they have
raised two sons who continue their father’s proud tradition of service as
members of the United States Air
Force.
Apart from his public service, Dave
enjoys being with family and spending
time outdoors. Dave McMahon is truly
a man of strong character. At every
moment, he has continually shown up
with integrity, with professionalism,
and with a commitment to making his
community safer. He represents the
very best of public service.
On behalf of the people of South
Carolina, I am proud to acknowledge
Dave McMahon for his decades of service, his steadfast leadership, and the
example he sets for all of those who follow in his path. As a father, as a soldier, as a public servant and steadfast
South Carolinian, his story is a reminder of the impact one individual
can have when they devote their life to
the security and well-being of others.
On behalf of our great State of South
Carolina’s Fifth Congressional District,
I thank Dave McMahon and wish him
Godspeed in his well-deserved retirement years.
f

VENEZUELA
(Mr. ESPAILLAT of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. ESPAILLAT. Mr. Speaker, let us
make two things clear today, the

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

things that I think are eminently important and that perhaps could find
consensus in this Chamber on both
sides of the aisle. In fact, I believe even
most countries across the world would
agree with those two things, maybe
even the United Nations and the Organization of American States could
agree with that, and I am confident
even the Vatican could agree with
that, and that is that Nicholas Maduro
was not the legitimate president of
Venezuela. The Venezuelan people were
neither free nor prosperous during his
corrupt regime.
b 1100
Here is another truth, Mr. Speaker,
that in no way conflicts with this first
one: The President of the United States
must come to Congress before ordering
a military engagement against any
country.
Mr. Speaker, you cannot uphold the
rule of law by breaking it. You cannot
protect or abide by the Constitution by
assaulting it.
Again, so there is no confusion between these two positions, Nicolas
Maduro was not a legitimate President,
and unauthorized military action is illegal without the consent of Congress.
With Nicolas Maduro now in the rearview mirror, we must look forward and
craft policies that support a free and
democratic future for Venezuela and
policies that return war powers to the
United States Congress, as enshrined in
the United States Constitution.
That is why I and the executive
board of the Congressional Hispanic
Caucus will propose a forward-looking
framework for a democratic and stable
Venezuela. As members of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, we come from
different nations in Latin America and
the Caribbean. We are immigrants, like
myself. Many of the members also have
ancestors who settled in places in these
United States before the United States
even existed, and everywhere in between. We share, like most Americans
with roots from all over the world, a
special connection to Latin America
and the Caribbean. Hence, we have
crafted a series of recommendations, a
roadmap if you will, for democracy and
prosperity for the people of Venezuela.
Our first priorities will support a free
and democratic Venezuela. That means
rejecting authoritarian governance,
whether the orders come from the
Miraflores Palace or the White House.
The Venezuelan people deserve institutions that are accountable, transparent, and responsible to the world
and a restoration of democracy
through timely and legitimate elections that reflect the voices of the Venezuelan people themselves.
This is not just about the Venezuelan
people. This is ultimately also about
the American people, and the American
people deserve a government that preserves, protects, and even respects our
own rule of law, our own Constitution.
That is why we reject any further
U.S. military intervention without

congressional authorization. If we are
together, as a nation, to put our men
and women in uniform at risk, then our
Constitution wisely demands that the
decisions be made by the Representatives of those people. It may well be
that Congress will have voted for or
against an intervention, but, ultimately, it is Congress that should do
it.
Now that we are so deeply involved
with Venezuela, we must act according
to our principles. That means ensuring
humanitarian protections at home and
abroad for the Venezuelan people who
have been victims of tyranny for so
long.
At home, that includes extending
TPS. We cannot deport people to a nation where our actions have set off a
new wave of oppression.
In Venezuela, that means pushing for
an end to that repression. It means the
release of political prisoners, including
journalists and civil society leaders. It
means freedom of expression and freedom of the press. We must also ensure
that Venezuela’s future is decided by
Venezuelans.
Our future is also in balance. Mr.
Speaker, we are not a nihilist nation.
Mr. Speaker, we are a nation of values,
principles, and laws. We must act as
one.
f

FOLLOWING THROUGH ON
AMERICANS’ PRIORITIES
(Mr. MANN of Kansas was recognized
to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. MANN. Mr. Speaker, as we begin
the second session of the 119th Congress, we should take a moment to
reset our focus and remember why we
are here. A new year and a new session
bring new opportunities, but the mission remains the same. Kansans sent
me to Washington, D.C., to deliver results for the people of the Big First
District, and that is what I will continue to do.
The Big First is home to farmers and
ranchers who get up before the sun and
work until the job is done. It is home
to small business owners and families
who balance budgets, meet payroll, and
expect the same discipline from the
Federal Government. Kansans are practical people who believe in hard work,
common sense, and accountability. We
don’t want excuses. We expect results.
After President Trump’s first term,
the Biden administration inherited
near-record lows in inflation and an agricultural trade surplus of $6 billion.
After 4 years of failed Democratic policies, we were left with a 21.5 percent increase in prices and an agricultural
trade deficit of $40 billion.
When a ship runs into an iceberg, it
takes time to turn the ship around, Mr.
Speaker. You need to bail the water,
repair the planks, and restart the engine before you can fully correct
course. Fortunately, thanks to the
leadership of President Trump and congressional Republicans, we are back on
track and moving away from the ice-

H143

berg that was President Biden’s administration.
Over the course of the first session of
this Congress, we made important
progress for Kansans. We pushed back
against burdensome regulations that
drive up costs for Main Street. We
worked to strengthen American energy
production so families can afford to
heat their homes and fuel their vehicles. We advanced policies that support
agricultural producers and rural communities and restored the rule of law
at our border. Most importantly, we
cut taxes for working families, giving
the average Kansan $2,200 more per
year in take-home pay beginning this
month.
That work matters, and I am proud
of the progress we have made, but after
the damage done by the previous administration, there is much more work
to do. That is what this second session
must be about.
For Kansans, this starts with agriculture. Farmers have been facing
higher input costs, tighter margins,
and growing uncertainty since 2021.
They need predictability, risk management tools, and a strong farm safety
net. Completing a farm bill that reflects the realities on the ground is vitally important, and I will continue
pushing for a fiscally conservative, 5year farm bill that reflects the priorities of our producers who feed, fuel,
and clothe the world.
While real wages are rising and inflation is nearing a 5-year low, there is
more to be done to lower costs for families and small businesses. Washington
regulations often hit Americans hardest in rural communities like the ones
I represent. Commonsense regulatory
relief is not about cutting corners. It is
about letting people work, grow, and
innovate without unnecessary government interference.
Energy is another area where House
Republicans are working hard for the
good of our Nation. Kansans support an
all-of-the-above energy strategy that
prioritizes American oil, gas, biofuels,
and renewables. This approach supports good-paying jobs, strengthens our
economy, and keeps prices affordable.
Green New Deal policies that pick winners and losers or ignore rural realities
do not work in places like the Big First
of Kansas, and this Congress has a responsibility
to
pursue
solutions
grounded in reality, not ideology.
Finally, Congress needs to ensure
that we continue good stewardship of
hard-earned taxpayer dollars. Families
in Kansas must make tough choices
every day, and they expect their government to do the same. Last year, we
rescinded $9.4 billion in waste, fraud,
and abuse found in Federal programs,
such as funding for Iraqi ‘‘Sesame
Street,’’ electric buses in Rwanda, and
LGBTQ programs in Uganda. Fiscal responsibility is not optional. It is a
basic obligation that House Republicans are focused on each and every
day in the 119th Congress.
Mr. Speaker, the second session of
this Congress is not about starting

H144

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

over. It is about following through.
Kansans sent me here to stay focused
on results, not political noise. I will
continue working to make sure this
body delivers real outcomes for the Big
First District of Kansas and keeps its
promises to the people whom we serve.
f

PUTTING AMERICANS FIRST
(Mr. COSTA of California was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. COSTA. Mr. Speaker, first, I
would like to say thank you to STENY
HOYER for an incredible career and for
being a role model and my friend. He is
always a class act.
I also rise today to speak for the families who are forced to choose between
groceries, rent, and healthcare because
prices keep climbing. Affordability is
equal to economic stability. Let me repeat that: Affordability is equal to economic stability. Americans are struggling to pay for groceries, rent, gas,
and healthcare. They are drowning
under rising costs while promises to
lower the cost of living have remained
unfulfilled by this administration.
On day one, President Trump said he
would put America first and lower
costs. Instead, he pardoned violent insurrectionists, a mob that attacked
this Capitol to overthrow a fair and
free election. It was an attack that resulted in the deaths of five law enforcement officers.
We were promised America First, but
what we are seeing is that a majority
of Americans, who have been polled on
whether we are headed on the right
track or the wrong track, believe that
we are on the wrong track.
This administration has prioritized
costly foreign entanglements without
transparency or congressional approval
while working families pay the price at
home.
Instead of protecting the economic
well-being of Americans, we are seeing
the following: Tariff policies are increasing the costs of essential goods.
My farmers are struggling, as well as
American consumers. Healthcare costs
are skyrocketing for millions. Critical
programs that help families stay afloat
are under attack. The cuts in Medicaid
and the Affordable Care Act, as well as
SNAP and other programs, are taking
their toll.
Take healthcare as an example. The
enhanced premium tax cuts that help
millions afford coverage are now expired. In California, new enrollments
are down 31 percent last year, and
nearly 190,000 families have canceled
coverage because it is no longer affordable. Middle-class Americans who are
earning more than $62,000 are no longer
eligible for the Federal premium tax
credits, doubling cancellations from 8
percent to 16 percent.
Californians are switching to bronze
plans to save on premiums, but these
plans carry higher deductibles. For
pregnancy care or cancer care treatment, costs can more than double compared to silver plans.

In my district, over 65,000 families
risk losing Medicaid, and another 22,000
families will face higher premiums and
out-of-pocket costs. Nationwide, nearly
100,000 American families could lose
their coverage each year if Congress
fails to act.
Last year, Republicans passed a partisan bill that failed to renew the essential premium tax credits, forcing
millions of Americans to pay higher
costs this year, even though a bipartisan solution is at hand. Families,
therefore, unfortunately, are left waiting.
Americans are also struggling with
the rising costs of energy, transportation, and other critical services.
What we need are bipartisan solutions
that create jobs, lower costs, and increase enhanced premium tax credits
so millions of American families can
afford their healthcare.
What we need is bipartisan legislation such as my bipartisan Rural
Homeownership Continuity Act that
will reduce financing costs and bipartisan legislation on permitting reform
to get infrastructure like energy,
transportation, and housing projects
more quickly approved for working
families.
Mr. Speaker, we need bipartisan solutions, and they are clear. Congress
must act now to ease costs, expand access to healthcare, and invest in the future of our communities throughout
the country.
The cost of living is not a partisan
issue. It is not. It is a matter of fairness, security, and justice. From groceries to gas and from rent to
healthcare, Americans cannot afford to
wait any longer.
Mr. Speaker, it is time that we get
together. It is time for Congress to act
in a bipartisan effort to renew the
sense of Congress as the people’s House
that we can work together. It is time,
Mr. Speaker, for Congress to act.
America’s people, American citizens,
and our constituents must come first.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND SERVICE
OF CARL J. STEWART, JR.
(Mr. MOORE of North Carolina was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. MOORE of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to honor the life
and service of Carl J. Stewart, Jr., a
proud son of Gaston County, North
Carolina, and a former speaker of the
North Carolina House of Representatives, who passed away on December 23
at the age of 89.
Carl grew up in a working-class family as the son of two Firestone Mill employees. He earned a scholarship that
helped him attend Duke University and
Duke University Law School. He then
went on to serve in the North Carolina
House for 13 years and made history as
the first speaker elected to serve two
consecutive terms.
b 1115
Throughout his life, Carl was a very
well-respected attorney in our area

January 8, 2026

with an absolutely great law practice.
He combined his legal work with public
service, along with serving in the legislature. He held leadership roles on the
North Carolina Board of Transportation, the North Carolina Economic
Development Board, the North Carolina Ports Authority, as well as the
North Carolina Ethics Commission.
His legacy lives on in the infrastructure and educational access that he
helped build, especially at Gaston College. For six decades, Carl Stewart
served the community college, first as
a business law instructor, then as legal
counsel, forming a partnership with
college presidents and board members
rooted in innovation, integrity, and unwavering commitment to student success. In every role, he focused on building a stronger North Carolina, and he
really put in so much time to improve
the lives of folks in Gaston County.
Whether it was education or other
things, you name it, he was always
there.
I will tell you one thing about Carl.
He never lost sight of where he came
from, and he spent his life helping. I
got to know Carl even before I was
speaker of our statehouse, and I can
tell you, he was a great mentor. He was
somebody who loved nurturing folks
who were coming up in public service
and getting involved and folks who
really wanted to try to make our State
a better place. I am going to tell you,
North Carolina is a better place because of Carl Stewart’s work and his
example.
I join our community in mourning
this tremendous loss. I ask that you
keep his family in your thoughts and
prayers in appreciation for all that he
has done for so many in our great
State.
HONORING LIFE AND SERVICE OF OFFICER
MICHAEL MILES

Mr. MOORE of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, today I rise to honor the life
and service of Officer Michael Miles,
who passed away unexpectedly earlier
this week.
He was a proud marine, a loving father, and a dedicated police officer
serving the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department for more than 13
years. He spent much of that time protecting and mentoring others in the
Freedom Division.
Before wearing the badge, he wore
the uniform of the United States Marine Corps and served his country with
honor. That same spirit of service guided him every day on the job and at
home.
His sudden passing is a heartbreaking
loss for his loved ones, his fellow officers, and our entire community. Officer
Miles leaves behind his partner, Hannah, and four children. I ask my colleagues to join me in lifting up his
family in prayer.
f

ACA TAX CREDITS EXTENSION
(Ms. PRESSLEY of Massachusetts was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)

January 8, 2026

H145

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Ms. PRESSLEY. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today carrying the voices and the lives
of the people in the Massachusetts Seventh whose survival depends on the Affordable Care Act tax credits: the
grandmother skipping meals to pay for
her prescriptions; the young mom lying
awake at night wondering how she will
afford her baby’s asthma inhaler if premiums go up; families like Deborah’s
in Boston, staring down premiums that
will double while they care for loved
ones, serve their community, and do
everything right.
These are not abstract numbers.
These are real people with real lives
and real fears about whether they will
be able to see a doctor, fill a prescription, or keep their families healthy.
In my district alone, 29,000 people
will be forced to pay more for
healthcare if Congress fails to act, and
up to 35,000 could lose their coverage
entirely.
This is a shameful policy choice. It is
a choice, a choice by my colleagues
across the aisle, and it is a violent one
at that.
Let me tell you more about Deborah.
Her family buys insurance through the
Massachusetts
Health
Connector.
Right now, for a family of five, they
pay just over $1,000 a month. If these
ACA tax credits expire, they will pay
nearly $2,000 a month for an even worse
plan, and that doesn’t even include
their daughter, who has aged out of the
plan, is underpaid in her job, and whose
premiums they will have to help cover.
Deborah told me they are fortunate
they can afford it, but that affordability does come at a cost. Between
paying for their premiums, their son’s
college tuition, and caring for her disabled sister, Deborah’s husband, a dedicated public defender, now works weekends just to keep up.
As Deborah told me: Even work you
love shouldn’t require you to give up
every day of your life just to survive.
Mr. Speaker, Deborah’s story is no
anomaly. It is the reality for millions
of families across this country, and
this crisis did not happen by accident.
No, this is manufactured, man-made. It
was manufactured by an occupant of
the Oval Office and a Republican Party
that is hell-bent on making families
poorer, sicker, hungrier, and less safe.
It is the same party that was content
to let these lifesaving tax credits expire until Democrats had to force them
to vote on a clean 3-year extension.
That is the shame and the sham of it
all.
Dr. King once profoundly said: ‘‘Of
all the forms of inequality, injustice in
health is the most shocking and inhumane because it often results in physical death.’’ His words still ring true
today.
Mr. Speaker, healthcare isn’t a niceto-have. It is a fundamental human
right. It is a matter of life and death.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
do right by the people who sent them
here and join us in passing this extension before it is too late.

CONGRATULATING RANDOLPH BLUE DEVILS

Ms. PRESSLEY. Mr. Speaker, I rise
to congratulate the Massachusetts
Seventh’s very own Super Bowl champions, the Randolph High School Blue
Devils.
Showcasing electric offense and stifling defense, the Blue Devils shut out
West Boylston at Gillette Stadium,
capping off an undefeated season with
another championship.
These student-athletes have made
their school and families proud and
proven to themselves and the Commonwealth that the town of Randolph has
the talent, commitment, and the tenacity to succeed on and off the field.
I thank Superintendent Stovell Herndon, Principal Licorish, Head Coach
Jon Marshall, the players, and the entire team for putting teamwork on display at the highest level.
Congratulations on earning the Division 8 Super Bowl title. Go, Blue Devils.
IN MEMORY OF ALICE WONG

Ms. PRESSLEY. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to celebrate the life and legacy
of Alice Wong. Alice was a civil rights
and disability justice activist who
called the question that changed the
conversation. She stoked our consciousness, built community, and saved
lives.
She was a published author, community organizer, and a beloved friend.
Alice was unapologetic in her pursuit
of building a more just world and shining a light on issues society hesitated
to address. She saw the humanity of
everyone
and
spoke
about
intersectionality from her hometown
to Capitol Hill to Gaza to the border.
She affirmed that mutual aid was not a
nice to have, but a lifeline.
She loved science fiction as it gave
her the ability to think of a world
where choices weren’t limited because
of a person’s disability. She gave us all
permission and fortitude to dream of
what is possible.
Mr. Speaker, Alice is already deeply
missed, and her legacy carries on.
f

CONGRATULATING MILEY
MEREDITH
(Mr. BEAN of Florida was recognized
to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. BEAN of Florida. Mr. Speaker,
some achievements don’t just earn applause, they open the door for others.
Today, we honor someone who has done
just exactly that: Miley Meredith, the
first female Eagle Scout in Nassau
County, Florida.
From Troop 9152 of Scouting America
in Yulee, Miley has shown outstanding
dedication, creativity, and a genuine
commitment to serving others, qualities that earned her the rank of Eagle
Scout.
The
accomplishment,
Mr.
Speaker, as you know, is impressive for
any Scout, but for Miley’s achievement, it also marks an historic moment for our community—expanding
what is possible for young women in
northeast Florida.

As part of her service project, Miley
devoted more than 155 hours installing
a 25-foot flagpole and creating a 6-foot
mural for the Yulee Lions Club,
strengthening a valued community organization.
On behalf of Florida’s Fourth Congressional District, I proudly congratulate Miley Meredith, an Eagle Scout
whose achievements earn and deserve
applause and whose example will continue opening doors for others.
f

AMERICANS IN STATE OF
DESPERATION
(Mr. FROST of Florida was recognized
to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. FROST. Mr. Speaker, Americans
are in a state of total desperation. For
weeks, Floridians have been calling my
office in tears. They are looking at
their budgets with panic while President Trump rips away their healthcare,
sends ICE to neighborhoods, deploys
soldiers to new global conflicts, and
floods
billionaire
and
megacorporations with free money.
People cannot pay their bills, and Republicans here in Washington, D.C., are
totally unfocused, busy defending the
latest cruelty done by the administration.
Healthcare open enrollment ends
next week. Enrollment is down. Americans can no longer afford their coverage. We are in a healthcare crisis.
Democrats don’t control the House,
the Senate, or the White House, but we
still managed to get this bill to the
floor to extend the Affordable Care Act
tax subsidies. We are fighting with
every tool, with every option we have
to save healthcare for our people.
I am voting ‘‘yes’’ to get this bill
passed this week. I encourage every
single Member of Congress, whether
they are a Democrat or Republican to
do the same. I say this as someone who
represents a community in the State of
Florida, the largest Affordable Care
Act marketplace in the entire country.
We have millions of people in the State
of Florida that will be impacted by
this, and I encourage everyone to vote
‘‘yes.’’
RENEE NICOLE GOOD

Mr. FROST. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
deeply disturbed, distraught, and angered by the shooting and the killing of
Renee Nicole Good by an ICE agent
that happened just yesterday in Minneapolis.
This is a direct result of Trump’s
dangerous weaponization of our immigration system and Federal law enforcement. This is the direct result of
an agency that is so emboldened by the
President that they truly feel like they
can do anything with zero impunity
and zero accountability.
It shows up in small ways, like when
I showed up to tour an ICE facility in
my own community and was asked by a
Federal agent, in a very condescending
way, how old I was, to what we saw
yesterday, which was the killing and
shooting of a U.S. citizen in her own
damn community.

H146

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Then yesterday, on the Oversight
Committee, my Republican colleagues
voted ‘‘no’’ on a simple subpoena so we
can get information, documents relating to the murder of a U.S. citizen by
a Federal agent. Then my colleagues
broke into this righteous debate: Let
the process play out, let DHS do their
investigation, the agent gets due process.
Yes, all persons in the United States
are entitled to due process. Renee Nicole Good didn’t get that due process
because the agent was the judge, jury,
and executioner in the middle of a residential neighborhood. There was no
process or due process before the administration that runs our Nation labeled her as a domestic terrorist just
minutes after this happened.
We won’t allow this President to gaslight us, and we won’t allow this administration to lie to us about what we
have seen before our very eyes.
Not only am I going to vote ‘‘no’’ on
any funding bills that gives this agency
more resources to do this type of thing
and terrorize our communities from
the State of Florida to across this entire Nation, but I am going to continue
to show up physically at bases of operation, field offices, detention centers,
and the so-called Alligator Alcatraz to
conduct oversight and work with our
communities to keep our people safe.
Renee Nicole Good was the mother of
three, had a daughter and a son aged 15
and 12, and a 6-year-old with her husband who tragically died in 2023. She
was a devout Christian who participated in youth mission trips to Northern Ireland when she was younger. According to multiple reports, she was a
poet, a writer, a wife, and a mother.
She had lived most of her life in Colorado and briefly moved to Kansas to
stay with her parents after her second
husband, a military veteran who suffered from PTSD, died in 2023.
We will honor her life with action, of
course fighting to end gun violence because what happened yesterday was
gun violence, but also to fight to end
ICE’s campaign of terror on our communities and our people.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
NEWHOUSE). Members are reminded to
refrain from engaging in personalities
toward the President.
f

b 1130
HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF GOVERNOR JAMES BAXTER
HUNT, JR.
(Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, Governor James Baxter Hunt,
Jr.’s story is inseparable from North
Carolina’s.
From humble beginnings growing up
in Wilson County, North Carolina, to
his historic service as our Lieutenant
Governor, he was first elected as Governor at 38 years old. He served four
terms as our 69th and 71st Governor.

North Carolina’s longest serving Governor was a farmer and loved North
Carolina State University—a die-hard
fan—although he later completed law
school at UNC-Chapel Hill.
Governor Hunt believed that public
service should lift people up and create
opportunities for everyone. His unwavering dedication to education changed
the lives of countless children and families.
Through heartfelt initiatives such as
Smart Start, early childhood education, teacher support, and school accountability, he helped generations of
children have a stronger foundation
and a brighter future.
Beyond policy and politics, Governor
Hunt led with honesty, with humility,
gentleness, and genuine care for others.
He believed that the government, guided by fairness and compassion, could be
a force of good.
His leadership modernized North
Carolina’s economy, strengthened its
institutions, and elevated the State as
a national leader in education and innovation.
Throughout decades, bridging party
lines and his unmatched energy, his influence defined an era.
Governor Hunt was not only a dedicated public servant but also a mentor,
inspiring many elected and appointed
officials. He was my constituent who
didn’t mind sharing his thoughts and,
above all, sharing his support and encouragement.
He was devoted to his family. His legacy of love and service lives on through
his family that he cherished and those
he inspired.
Governor Hunt was admired, respected, and loved deeply by the people
of North Carolina. His reach went beyond our State and made America
stronger. Through his leadership, our
Nation saw the best of eastern North
Carolina. His vision, humble leadership, and faith that came from his days
at Marsh Swamp Free Will Baptist
Church and later at First Presbyterian
Church of Wilson, drove him.
He passed away at 88 years old on December 18 on his farm in Rock Ridge,
where he grew up and lived with his beloved wife, Carolyn Joyce Leonard
Hunt, for 67 years.
Our Governor and First Lady shared
a deep, deep partnership built on love
and friendship. He took great pride in
his children’s accomplishments, especially seeing his daughter Rachel follow in his footsteps as our Lieutenant
Governor.
Mr. Speaker, our hearts are with
Carolyn, Rebecca, Baxter, Rachel, and
Elizabeth. North Carolina will miss one
of its greatest public servants. His family will miss a beloved husband, brother, father, and grandfather. I will personally miss a dear friend.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF MOTHER PEGGY NOBLE
(Ms. TLAIB of Michigan was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)

January 8, 2026

Ms. TLAIB. Mr. Speaker, I will take
a moment to honor the extraordinary
life and legacy of Mother Peggy Noble.
She was an inspirational leader and a
champion for economic justice and for
working families.
Mother Peggy has dedicated her life
to her College Park neighborhood
where she lived. She was a community
organizer, supporting her neighbors,
advocating for children, and bringing
people together. She believed deeply
that real change is built through relationships and advocacy and showing up
for our communities. Year after year,
that is what she did.
Peggy was a fierce advocate for our
families from standing up for her
neighborhood to fighting for fairness in
our broken auto insurance system. Detroit is stronger because of her voice,
her leadership, and her unwavering belief in people. We carry her spirit forward in how we organize, how we protect one another, and how we show up
for our neighbors.
My thoughts are with her loved ones,
Rochelle, Eugene, Kimberly, Jaimi,
Asante, and all of Peggy’s loved ones,
during this difficult time. May she rest
in power and in love.
ACA TAX CREDITS

Ms. TLAIB. Mr. Speaker, we always
seem to have money for war, to bomb
countries, but we never have money for
healthcare for our families.
On January 1, Republicans ended the
Affordable Care Act tax credits and
raised healthcare premiums for millions of Americans, our neighbors
throughout the Nation. This comes, of
course, after Trump’s big budget betrayal ripped healthcare away from 17
million Americans and cut Medicaid by
nearly $1 trillion.
Last year, Congress did approve over
$1 trillion for the Pentagon budget,
which just failed its eighth audit in a
row. I want folks to think about that.
They are cutting money for healthcare
and spending it on bombs and death.
The ACA tax credits are what help
keep insurance affordable for many of
our neighbors across the country. They
are the difference between my neighbors having insurance or going without
healthcare. It is heartbreaking to read
the emails and messages I get from so
many families that are putting off seeing a doctor and filling their prescriptions and now rationing their medication.
No parent, Mr. Speaker, should have
to choose whether to take their child
to the doctor because healthcare is too
expensive. Our healthcare system is already broken, and it is inhumane.
My residents always tell me: Don’t
call it healthcare. Call it sick care. Because we know right now the for-profit
schemes within our healthcare system
are making it so unaffordable for our
families. Why have we not passed the
tax credits for the Affordable Care Act?
Again, we are so grateful for the
leadership of HAKEEM JEFFRIES as we
push forward a force vote for a 3-year
ACA tax credit extension today.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Again, instead of extreme cuts, we
should be expanding access to care and
guaranteeing healthcare as a fundamental human right in our country. We
must pass this tax credit extension
today and put pressure on the Senate
to take it up immediately.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my Republican
colleagues to help fix this mess they
have made by restoring the extreme
Medicaid cuts and joining us in extending the Affordable Care Act tax credits.
HOUSING IS A HUMAN RIGHT

Ms. TLAIB. Mr. Speaker, housing is a
human right, but as everyone knows,
we are facing a housing crisis right
now.
On any given night right now, more
than three-quarters of a million people
are unhoused nationwide. The last time
the Federal minimum wage of $7.25 an
hour was increased was in 2009.
Since then, average rental costs have
increased 76 percent. That is just completely wild.
We need action at every level of government. I know that many of our
local elected officials are desperate to
reduce housing costs and need the Federal Government’s partnership. We
know often here in this Chamber there
are officials that will not promote affordable housing or address the unique
barriers that our communities are facing.
That is why I introduced the Housing
Our Communities Act, and it is meant
to address it immediately. This is part
of a legislative package that passed out
of the Financial Services Committee
this past year.
My bill directs the HUD Secretary to
establish a competitive grant program
to support a wide array of affordable
housing planning and implementation
activities.
For example, grants, Mr. Speaker,
can support officials in crafting their
own housing plans, updating zoning
codes, and increasing the capacity to
conduct housing inspections so that developments are completed faster, reducing project costs.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support the Housing for the 21st Century Act and provide policymakers and
our local governments with the resources they need to make affordable
housing a reality.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF FIRE CHIEF DAVID HAVERDINK
(Mr. HUIZENGA of Michigan was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. HUIZENGA. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today with a heavy heart. I have some
prepared remarks, but I will also be
speaking from my heart as well because, unfortunately, today I am here
to honor the life and legacy of my
friend, former sheriff and Fire Chief
Dave Haverdink.
Dave was a staple in Allegan County
who dedicated his life to serving his
community until the moment tragedy
struck in the line of duty on December

23. Dave passed away on December 25,
Christmas Day.
He was there serving others as there
had been an incident on a roadway and,
unfortunately, he was struck and
killed.
I first got to know Dave while he was
serving as a county commissioner and
was running for sheriff of Allegan
County. While Dave excelled in both of
those roles—in fact, he did 8 years, two
terms, as the sheriff—his service didn’t
stop there.
Perhaps what Dave will be most remembered for was his astounding 51
years of service with the Hamilton Fire
Department, including 40 of those
years when he served as chief of the department.
Prior to coming out to Washington,
D.C., I had a chance to go and be with
his family at a visitation. I was
touched and moved when his wife said
to me that she and Dave pray for me
and everybody in Washington every
single day. It just speaks to the character of this family. At a time when
the focus should be on them and supporting them, they still were thinking
of others, including me and all of our
colleagues here.
While Dave undoubtedly had a tremendous impact on Hamilton and all of
Allegan County, his legacy, though, is
going to be one as a husband and a father and a grandfather who loved his
family deeply. My heart and prayers go
out to his wife, Judy; sons, Jeff and
Tim; and the entire Haverdink family
during this tragic time.
This is a true loss. It is a loss not
just for a particular community. It
really is a loss for humanity. He is one
of the good guys. He is one of those
that put service to others above self.
He is someone that focused on making
sure that others were okay at every
turn and didn’t think about himself.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you join me
in honoring the memory, life, and legacy of Hamilton Fire Chief Dave
Haverdink with a moment of silence.
May my friend rest well. Job well
done.
f

REMEMBERING RENEE NICOLE
GOOD
(Ms. ANSARI of Arizona was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. ANSARI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today with outrage and with grief.
Yesterday, not even a full week into
the new year, ICE murdered a U.S. citizen, Renee Nicole Good, after shooting
her multiple times as she was seemingly attempting to drive away, blocking her from medical care, and letting
her die, while a doctor stood by offering to help.
The video of this tragedy is damning.
I encourage every American to watch
it and make their own judgment.
A woman is dead. A child has been
left without a parent. A community is
shattered. The American people are
left, once again, demanding answers

H147

from an agency that has shown time
and time again that it operates without accountability.
b 1145
Mr. Speaker, what happened to Renee
Good in Minneapolis demands a full,
independent, and immediate investigation.
I represent Arizona’s Third Congressional District, a diverse and rich community of immigrants. For over a year
now, ICE has been terrorizing my constituents. No agency is above the law.
Yet ICE is now the most well-funded
law enforcement agency in the United
States, receiving more funding than
most militaries around the world,
while operating with virtually no
meaningful checks and balances.
In the immediate aftermath of Renee
Good’s death, the Trump administration did what it does best. It lied.
Kristi Noem and Stephen Miller rushed
to smear a dead woman as a ‘‘domestic
terrorist,’’ while Donald Trump took to
Truth Social to gaslight the American
people, asking them to deny their own
eyes and accept his version of events
instead.
This is what authoritarianism looks
like. This is what happens when the
leader of a nation turns a Federal agency into his personal paramilitary force
against the civilian population of the
United States.
Donald Trump has weaponized ICE,
not to keep communities safe but to
terrorize them. Minneapolis Mayor
Jacob Frey has called for ICE to vacate
his city, and I echo that call. People in
our communities don’t feel safe because they are not safe.
In my district on Christmas Eve, a
woman named Flor, a DACA recipient,
was detained while Christmas shopping. Why is ICE spending resources to
detain a DACA recipient on Christmas
Eve? They claim they are going after
‘‘real criminals.’’ That, too, is a lie.
Just days ago, ICE detained two day
laborers outside a Home Depot in Phoenix, briefly detaining a U.S. citizen in
the process. These people are not
criminals. This isn’t law enforcement.
This is a Federal agency operating outside of its mandate, using fear as a tactic to spread fear and chaos in our
neighborhoods.
It is no coincidence because Stephen
Miller is rapidly hiring tens of thousands of new ICE agents. Many are
poorly trained. Many have troubling
backgrounds. This is all to meet this
reckless mass deportation agenda that
he has set out.
We have been sounding the alarm for
well over a year, and now the worst has
happened. An American woman has
died. That is why I am introducing legislation to rein in ICE, demand transparency, and stop the unchecked funding that enables these abuses.
I am also joining as an original cosponsor in an effort led by my colleague Congresswoman ROBIN KELLY to
introduce Articles of Impeachment
against Kristi Noem, the Secretary of

H148

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

the Department of Homeland Security.
I urge my colleagues, Democrat and
Republican alike, to join us.
A woman has been murdered. Silence
is no longer neutrality. It is complicity. We must rein in ICE. We must
demand accountability. We must protect our communities from this abuse
of power.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
f

HOLDING ICE ACCOUNTABLE
(Mr. MENENDEZ of New Jersey was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. MENENDEZ. Mr. Speaker, yesterday our Nation witnessed the killing
of a fellow American in broad daylight,
in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Her name
was Renee Nicole Good. She was a concerned citizen and a mother. The loss
of her life was entirely preventable.
This tragic loss of life comes the
same week that we remember what occurred here 5 years ago on January 6.
On that day, violent insurrectionists
attacked police officers, many of whom
sustained serious injuries and five of
whom have passed away since the attack, including Brian Sicknick, a New
Jersey native and a proud Capitol Police officer.
Instead of remembering and healing
from the events of that day, President
Trump pardoned close to 1,600 seditious
and violent insurrectionists who were
convicted of criminal charges. The
President and House Republicans have
tried to vanish the events of that day
from our collective memory, but we
will not let them.
Last year, alongside my colleagues
Congresswomen WATSON COLEMAN and
MCIVER, I witnessed firsthand outside
Delaney Hall how far this administration will go to silence dissent and opposition when more than 20 armed ICE
and HSI officers physically prevented
us from doing our job.
What I said then and what I would
say today is that all of this should be
completely unacceptable to all Americans and should shake every American
to their core. I have said time and time
again that no one is safe in Trump’s
America. Mothers, Capitol Police officers, our neighbors, Members of Congress, no one, not a single person
should feel safe with him as our President.
This administration’s extreme agenda does not reflect the best of who we
are as a country but, instead, seeks to
turn us against each other. We cannot
allow that to happen.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess until noon
today.
Accordingly (at 11 o’clock and 50
minutes a.m.), the House stood in recess.

b 1200
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia) at noon.
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret
Grun Kibben, offered the following
prayer:
Immortal and invisible God, speak to
us this day Your inimitable words of
truth. While Your wisdom has often
seemed a mystery hidden from us, You
have freely offered it by Your spirit,
that we may receive and understand
Your gracious and generous gift.
Reveal to us then what no eye has
seen, nor ear heard, nor human mind
conceived, that we may comprehend
the things You have prepared for those
who love You.
Show us what our limited perspective
keeps us from seeing, that You, who
created all things, have designed a future for us that will grant us reason to
hope in what we cannot see.
Declare to us in words louder than
the soundtrack of our culture that it
will not have the final word.
Remind us that as much as we think
we know the way, the wisdom of the
world will amount to nothing, for it is
You who ultimately orders our steps.
You have made clear, O God, that
these promises are for those who love
You. Search our hearts, O Lord, we
pray, and find within us a thirst for
Your Word and a desire of our love for
You.
To You, the only wise God, in whose
name we pray, we give thanks.
Amen.
f

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair has examined the Journal of the
last day’s proceedings and announces
to the House the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Will the
gentleman from South Carolina (Mr.
WILSON) come forward and lead the
House in the Pledge of Allegiance.
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina led
the Pledge of Allegiance as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair will entertain up to 15 requests
for 1-minute speeches on each side of
the aisle.

January 8, 2026

TRUMP LEADERSHIP CAPTURES
DICTATOR MADURO
(Mr. WILSON of South Carolina
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina.
Madam Speaker, Americans are grateful that last week, under the courageous leadership of President Donald
Trump, Marco Rubio, Pete Hegseth,
General Dan Caine, Pam Bondi, and
John Ratcliffe, that our professional
military completed an inspiring, legal
operation to arrest Venezuela dictator
Maduro and his wife.
Dictator Maduro rigged elections and
also operated a murderous, drug-dealing regime. Drug cartels, which killed
hundreds of thousands of young Americans, have now been damaged.
The murderous axis of evil of war
criminal Putin, Iranian and Cuban regimes, and the Chinese Communist
Party are unraveling, exposing dictators with rule of gun which invade
democracies with rule of law.
In conclusion, God bless our troops as
the global war on terrorism continues.
Trump is reinstituting peace through
strength, revealing war criminal Putin
lies, insulting Trump, mocking Trump,
with ghost Russian tankers financing
the Maduro murderous dictatorship.
Our prayers for a speedy recovery for
Dr. JIM BAIRD and his wife, Danise.
f

RECOGNIZING
20TH
ANNUAL
CRUCIAN-RICAN TRAMP AND BIG
BREAKFAST
(Ms. PLASKETT asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. PLASKETT. Madam Speaker, I
rise to share the unbreakable ties between the U.S. Virgin Islands and
Puerto Rico, demonstrated this week
through the Annual Crucian-Rican
Tramp and Big Breakfast, a powerful
reminder that Virgin Islands culture is
inseparable from our Latin Caribbean
heritage.
Puerto Rican immigrants began coming to the Virgin Islands by the thousands in the late 1800s, cutting cane
alongside Crucians, whose ancestors
endured the same cane fields. Families
planted roots, building communities
throughout the island and on St.
Thomas. They established social clubs
and created businesses.
Spanish became our second language.
Our children grew bilingual. Our families intertwined. Our kitchens became
sacred ground, where callaloo met
asopao, fungi sat beside mofongo, and
johnnycakes shared the table with
bacalaitos.
Yet, before the migration to St.
Croix were the boats of enslaved
Crucians, who were fleeing slavery by
making the dangerous trip to Vieques
and Culebra. This isn’t fusion. It is
family, Caribbean people who refused
to let colonial borders divide us, who

January 8, 2026

H149

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

recognized in each other the same
bloodlines and the same determination
to thrive.
The Crucian-Rican Tramp celebrates
this truth: We are stronger together.
f

HONORING FATHER MIKE
CRISOSTOMO
(Mr. MOYLAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. MOYLAN. Madam Speaker, I rise
today in honor of the life and the service of Father Mike Crisostomo, a
Catholic priest from Guam who devoted his life to caring for others and
strengthening our island community.
For nearly three decades, Father
Mike, affectionately known as Pale
Mike, served the people of Guam, offering guidance, comfort, and support in
moments of both joy and hardship. He
was known for showing up when people
needed him the most, whether in times
of celebration, grief, or uncertainty.
Father Mike’s service extended beyond the walls of the church. He
worked with families, the vulnerable,
and
those
facing
difficult
circumstances, always with compassion
and humility.
Father Mike Crisostomo lived a life
rooted in faith, service, and love for his
community. Guam is in a better place
because of his work, and his legacy will
live on in the countless lives he
touched.
f

MARKING 15 YEARS SINCE TUCSON
SHOOTING
(Mr. JEFFRIES asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. JEFFRIES. Madam Speaker,
Madam Speaker Emerita, Senator
MARK KELLY, the Arizona delegation,
and to all of my colleagues who are
present here today, I rise on the 15th
anniversary of the tragic mass shooting in Tucson, Arizona, that took 6
lives and injured 13 others, including
our former colleague, our good friend,
Congresswoman Gabby Giffords, an extraordinary American leader who I am
pleased to say is here with us in the
Chamber today.
At 10:10 a.m. mountain standard
time, in Tucson, Arizona, during a Congress on Your Corner event being held
by Representative Gabby Giffords to
serve her constituents, a gunman
opened fire on this peaceful gathering.
We mourn for those whose lives were
lost on that fateful day: John Roll, a
Federal judge and public servant; Gabe
Zimmerman, a dedicated congressional
staffer; a precious 9-year-old girl
named Christina-Taylor Green; and beloved community members Dorothy
‘‘Dot’’ Morris, Phyllis Schneck, and
Dorwan Stoddard.
b 1210
At the same time, we are thankful to
God for the survival, the resilience, the

courage, the strength, the persistence
of Congresswoman Giffords and all
those who survived on that fateful day.
Prior to this assassination attempt,
Congresswoman Giffords served this
body and the people of Arizona’s
Eighth District with great distinction,
dedication, and determination. Her policy interests were diverse, spanning
from immigration reform, economic
opportunity, and promoting solar and
clean energy.
After experiencing firsthand, in the
most horrific fashion possible, the horror of a mass shooting, she refocused
her efforts on ending the gun violence
epidemic in America once and for all.
We honor her and celebrate her for the
transformational work that she has
done in the years that have followed.
House Democrats stand with Gabby
and with all Americans who say
enough is enough.
Enough with the gun violence epidemic being the leading cause of death
for the children in this country.
Enough with mass shootings being as
frequent as the common cold.
Enough with the text messages to
parents saying ‘‘I love you’’ because
there is another active school shooter.
Enough with the mass-casualty incidents at concerts, grocery stores,
movie theatres, nightclubs, churches,
mosques, synagogues, and other gathering places.
Enough with weapons of war flooding
our communities, while merchants of
death rake in record profits.
Enough unnecessary loss of life due
to preventable, senseless gun violence.
This is the cause to which Congresswoman Giffords has now dedicated her
life, and we all join her in proclaiming
enough is enough.
It is time to end the gun violence epidemic in America once and for all.
While the challenges to address this
crisis may feel insurmountable at
times, we cannot and will not give up
hope, inspired by the perseverance of
our dear leader, Congresswoman Giffords.
I am heartened by the work that has
been done despite the considerable
forces that have been arrayed against
us.
That progress includes, under the
leadership of then-Speaker NANCY
PELOSI, passage of the Bipartisan Safer
Communities Act in 2022, which represented the strongest new Federal gun
safety legislation in 30 years.
Our job, of course, as Gabby makes
clear, is far from finished. Every day
an average of 327 people are shot in this
country, including 23 children shot on
average every day. Over 65 million
Americans say at least one person in
their family has been fatally shot,
their lives extinguished by gun violence in this country. There are 393
million guns in the United States of
America, more guns than people, and
law enforcement can’t tell you where a
majority of those guns are because of
barriers that have been erected keeping
criminals protected.

It does not have to be this way. We
know there are commonsense solutions
to stop the gun violence and keep the
American people safe.
We can start by closing the gun background loophole that allows dangerous
people to buy firearms without background checks.
We need to ban assault weapons in
the United States of America to prevent these weapons of war from continuing to destroy the lives of everyday
Americans.
Led by our distinguished appropriators like ROSA DELAURO, we are continuing to fight for robust funding for
community violence intervention programs and appropriate funding for the
ATF and gun violence research. Breaking the devastating cycle of gun violence that has a choke hold on this
country is one of our Caucus’ highest
priorities and will be a high-priority
issue when we take back control of the
majority after the November election.
Democrats are continuing to maintain our commitment to keep everyday
Americans safe from the scourge of gun
violence, and we will not stop fighting
for proven policies that we know will
reduce gun violence in every community throughout our Nation.
I encourage my colleagues to support
the resolution introduced by Congresswoman DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ to
commemorate the tragic event that occurred on January 8, 2011.
I once again thank our colleague, our
fearless
leader,
our
distinguished
champion, Congresswoman Giffords, for
her presence here today on this solemn
anniversary and for her tireless,
matchless, incredible advocacy to end
the scourge of gun violence in the
United States of America once and for
all.
I now ask everyone in the Chamber
to stand, and for everyone throughout
the campus to join us in a moment of
silence to commemorate the lives lost
and the lives forever changed by the
tragic shooting that occurred on January 8, 2011.
f

b 1220
ACA TAX CREDITS EXPIRED
(Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
Madam Speaker, Christmas has come
and gone. As the ball dropped bringing
in a new year, families in eastern
North Carolina and across the Nation
literally on New Year’s Day are feeling
the squeeze of rising healthcare insurance costs.
It is not a happy new year for everyone. These are hardworking families,
our neighbors and friends, trying to
raise kids and buy groceries, and they
are small business owners.
Congress must act to extend these
subsidies so hardworking families
aren’t left stretching out tight budgets

H150

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

and forced to face skyrocketing health
insurance premiums, or better yet, left
without coverage all together.
We can pursue meaningful reforms.
Let me say it again. We can pursue
meaningful reforms without sacrificing
access to affordable care, and that is
exactly what the people sent us here to
do.
f

UNAFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE
COSTS
(Ms. MORRISON asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. MORRISON. Madam Speaker,
thousands of Minnesotans and millions
of Americans are facing unaffordable
healthcare costs. Because of their cruelly named One Big Beautiful Bill Act
and Speaker Johnson’s refusal to act,
the Republican majority is creating a
healthcare crisis that will literally dismantle American public health.
Americans are being forced into
crushing medical debt, are in danger of
losing their closest hospital, clinic, or
emergency room.
As a doctor, I worry for the patients
delaying their care and for clinics and
hospitals already struggling to meet
the needs of their community.
As a Minnesotan, I am heartbroken
for my State. Minnesotans have suffered immeasurable loss following the
tragedies of recent months.
The Trump administration’s reckless
actions and deliberate inaction from
Republicans in Congress jeopardize the
operation and availability of facilities
that are the first site of care in the
most tragic circumstances.
I have a responsibility to be abundantly clear, Madam Speaker. The consequences of inaction and ignoring hospitals, doctors, patients, and your own
constituents will be catastrophic. The
price of failing to deliver affordable
healthcare isn’t losing elections. It is
real human suffering and American
lives.
f

CELEBRATING
WESTCHESTER
JEWISH COUNCIL’S 50TH ANNIVERSARY
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Madam Speaker, this
year the Westchester Jewish Council is
celebrating their 50-year anniversary,
advancing a vision to serve the Jewish
community of Westchester County:
130,000 people and 126 member organizations. Led by president Michael
Mittelman, the board of directors, and
the talented professional staff headed
by CEO Elliot Forchheimer, the WJC
has sponsored and organized public programs from Holocaust remembrance to
Passover celebrations and gatherings.
They have ensured greater synagogue
security, programs to combat hatred
and anti-Semitism, and the connection
to Israel.

At the upcoming 50th Anniversary
Gala, two outstanding individuals will
be honored: board member Stu Seltzer
and Pam Goldstein.
Pam is the chief operating officer of
WJC. Stu, a Mamaroneck resident, is a
professional in brand licensing and
partnership marketing, president of a
firm dominant in that field. Along with
serving as a NYU adjunct professor, he
is active in his local community and of
the Westchester Jewish Center.
Pam has a long record of activism
and volunteerism as a member of Temple Israel Center, active PTO leader
and parent at what is now the Leffell
School, and important nonprofits such
as the Breast Cancer Foundation and
the Pediatric Cancer Foundation.
Friends and colleagues of Stu and Pam
will join in the celebration of their accomplishments and the 50-year accomplishments of the WJC.
From the floor of the House of Representatives, we salute the Westchester
Jewish Council.
f

CELEBRATING DON STEVENS
(Mr. MORELLE asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. MORELLE. Madam Speaker, I
rise today to celebrate Don Stevens,
the legendary voice of the Rochester
Americans, as he calls his final season
behind the microphone.
For four decades, Don has called over
3,300 games for the Amerks and became
the longest tenured play-by-play broadcaster in the American Hockey League.
From Calder Cup runs to cold
weeknights downtown, he has been the
soundtrack of winter in Rochester calling games from a press box at the Blue
Cross Arena that now proudly bears his
name.
Known as the dean of AHL broadcasters, a member of the Rochester
Americans Hall of Fame, and a twotime winner of the James H. Ellery Memorial Award for media excellence,
Don has served in roles from public relations director to TV host, and founded the AHL Broadcasters and Writers
Association.
We thank Don for the memories, the
excitement, and for making Amerks
hockey sound like home. I wish him
the very best in his well-earned retirement.
f

SUPPORTING
FAMILIES
AND
SMALL
BUSINESSES
STRUGGLING
TO
AFFORD
HEALTH
CARE
(Mr. PAPPAS asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Mr. PAPPAS. Madam Speaker, I rise
today because the House has a critical
opportunity to support families and
small businesses who are struggling to
afford healthcare for 2026.
I am thinking of the parents I have
talked to who will drop coverage for

January 8, 2026

their families because their premiums
are doubling and tripling, the nonprofits who won’t be able to cover employees anymore, the manufacturer
that is now paying more for health insurance than most of their raw materials.
The impacts of this healthcare debate are real and they are immediate.
This week Congress can solve the
problem and actually make people’s
lives better.
Everywhere I go across New Hampshire, I hear the same thing: Money is
tight, and people are worried about
their futures.
The millions of families who rely on
the Affordable Care Act tax credits for
health insurance have waited long
enough for Congress to do the right
thing.
I urge all my colleagues to support
this legislation to ensure that hardworking Americans can maintain their
coverage and have the health and financial security that they deserve.
f

FIREFIGHTER PROTECTIONS
(Mr. WHITESIDES asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. WHITESIDES. Madam Speaker,
this week marks the first anniversary
of the southern California wildfires
that took lives, devastated communities, and left families across our region displaced.
We are lucky that the damage was
not worse, and that is only because of
the wildland firefighters who run toward danger and risk their lives for all
of us.
For decades, these heroes were prohibited from wearing respiratory protection, even as the science made clear
that wildfire smoke causes lasting lung
damage and is linked to more than a
dozen cancers.
Firefighters’ life expectancy is now
nearly 10 years shorter than the average American. That is unacceptable.
The Healthy Lungs for Heroes Act
changes that. It directs our Federal
land agencies to develop and require
respiratory protection when smoke exposure becomes dangerous.
Protecting our firefighters’ lungs
should not be controversial. This bill
ensures that those who protect us are
finally protected themselves.
f

PERMISSION TO POSTPONE PROCEEDINGS ON RETAINING A PORTION OF H.R. 6938, COMMERCE,
JUSTICE, SCIENCE; ENERGY AND
WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Mr. COLE. Madam Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that the question
of retaining a portion of the bill on
H.R. 6938 may be subject to postponement as though under clause 8 of rule
XX.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Oklahoma?

January 8, 2026

H151

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

There was no objection.
f

b 1230
COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE;
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
Mr. COLE. Madam Speaker, Pursuant
to House Resolution 977, I call up the
bill (H.R. 6938) making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes, and ask for its immediate consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 977, the bill is
considered read.
The text of the bill is as follows:
H.R. 6938
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Commerce,
Justice, Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
Sec. 3. References.
Sec. 4. Explanatory statement.
Sec. 5. Statement of appropriations.
DIVISION
A—COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Title I—Department of Commerce
Title II—Department of Justice
Title III—Science
Title IV—Related Agencies
Title V—General Provisions
DIVISION B—ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Title I—Corps of Engineers—Civil
Title II—Department of the Interior
Title III—Department of Energy
Title IV—Independent Agencies
Title V—General Provisions
DIVISION C—DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED
AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Title I—Department of the Interior
Title II—Environmental Protection Agency
Title III—Related Agencies
Title IV—General Provisions
SEC. 3. REFERENCES.

Except as expressly provided otherwise,
any reference to ‘‘this Act’’ contained in any
division of this Act shall be treated as referring only to the provisions of that division.
SEC. 4. EXPLANATORY STATEMENT.

The explanatory statement regarding this
Act, printed in the House section of the Congressional Record on or about January 7,
2026, and submitted by the chair of the Committee on Appropriations of the House, shall
have the same effect with respect to the allocation of funds and implementation of divisions A through C of this Act as if it were a
joint explanatory statement of a committee
of conference.
SEC. 5. STATEMENT OF APPROPRIATIONS.

The following sums in this Act are appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury
not otherwise appropriated, for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026.

DIVISION
A—COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
TITLE I
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
INTERNATIONAL TRADE ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONS AND ADMINISTRATION

For necessary expenses for international
trade activities of the Department of Commerce provided for by law, to carry out activities associated with facilitating, attracting, and retaining business investment in the
United States, to carry out activities associated with title VI of division BB of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 (Public
Law 117–328), and for engaging in trade promotional activities abroad, including expenses of grants and cooperative agreements
for the purpose of promoting exports of
United States firms, without regard to sections 3702 and 3703 of title 44, United States
Code; full medical coverage for dependent
members of immediate families of employees
stationed overseas and employees temporarily posted overseas; travel and transportation of employees of the International
Trade Administration between two points
abroad, without regard to section 40118 of
title 49, United States Code; employment of
citizens of the United States and aliens by
contract for services; recognizing contributions to export expansion pursuant to Executive Order 10978; rental of space abroad for
periods not exceeding 10 years, and expenses
of alteration, repair, or improvement; purchase or construction of temporary demountable exhibition structures for use
abroad; payment of tort claims, in the manner authorized in the first paragraph of section 2672 of title 28, United States Code,
when such claims arise in foreign countries;
not to exceed $294,300 for official representation expenses abroad; purchase of passenger
motor vehicles for official use abroad, not to
exceed $65,000 per vehicle; not to exceed
$350,000 for purchase of armored vehicles
without regard to the general purchase price
limitations; obtaining insurance on official
motor vehicles; and rental of tie lines,
$582,000,000, of which $94,000,000 shall remain
available until September 30, 2027: Provided,
That $20,000,000 is to be derived from fees to
be retained and used by the International
Trade Administration, notwithstanding section 3302 of title 31, United States Code: Provided further, That, of amounts provided
under this heading, not less than $16,400,000
shall be for China antidumping and countervailing duty enforcement and compliance activities: Provided further, That the provisions
of the first sentence of section 105(f) and all
of section 108(c) of the Mutual Educational
and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C.
2455(f) and 2458(c)) shall apply in carrying out
these activities; and that for the purpose of
this Act, contributions under the provisions
of the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 shall include payment for
assessments for services provided as part of
these activities.
BUREAU OF INDUSTRY AND SECURITY
OPERATIONS AND ADMINISTRATION

For necessary expenses for export administration and national security activities of
the Department of Commerce, including
costs associated with the performance of export administration field activities both domestically and abroad; full medical coverage
for dependent members of immediate families of employees stationed overseas; employment of citizens of the United States
and aliens by contract for services abroad;
payment of tort claims, in the manner authorized in the first paragraph of section 2672
of title 28, United States Code, when such
claims arise in foreign countries; not to ex-

ceed $13,500 for official representation expenses abroad; awards of compensation to informers under the Export Control Reform
Act of 2018 (subtitle B of title XVII of the
John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019; Public Law 115–
232; 132 Stat. 2208; 50 U.S.C. 4801 et seq.), and
as authorized by section 1(b) of the Act of
June 15, 1917 (40 Stat. 223; 22 U.S.C. 401(b));
and purchase of passenger motor vehicles for
official use and motor vehicles for law enforcement use with special requirement vehicles eligible for purchase without regard to
any price limitation otherwise established
by law, $235,000,000, of which $94,000,000 shall
remain available until expended: Provided,
That the provisions of the first sentence of
section 105(f) and all of section 108(c) of the
Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange
Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2455(f) and 2458(c)) shall
apply in carrying out these activities: Provided further, That payments and contributions collected and accepted for materials or
services provided as part of such activities
may be retained for use in covering the cost
of such activities, and for providing information to the public with respect to the export
administration and national security activities of the Department of Commerce and
other export control programs of the United
States and other governments.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATION
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE
PROGRAMS

For economic development assistance as
provided by the Public Works and Economic
Development Act of 1965, including provision
of assistance under section 207(b) of such
Act, for trade adjustment assistance, and for
programs authorized by the StevensonWydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980,
as amended, $400,000,000 to remain available
until expended, which shall be for the purposes and in the amounts specified in the
table titled ‘‘Economic Development Assistance Programs’’ in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of administering
the economic development assistance programs as provided for by law, $66,000,000: Provided, That funds provided under this heading may be used to monitor projects approved pursuant to title I of the Public
Works Employment Act of 1976; title II of
the Trade Act of 1974; sections 27 through 30
of the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 U.S.C. 3722–3723), as
amended; and the Community Emergency
Drought Relief Act of 1977.
MINORITY BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
MINORITY BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT

For necessary expenses of the Minority
Business Development Agency in fostering,
promoting, and developing minority business
enterprises, as authorized by law, $50,000,000.
ECONOMIC AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses, as authorized by
law, of economic and statistical analysis programs of the Department of Commerce,
$118,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
BUREAU OF THE CENSUS
CURRENT SURVEYS AND PROGRAMS

For necessary expenses for collecting, compiling, analyzing, preparing, and publishing
statistics, provided for by law, $318,500,000:
Provided, That, from amounts provided herein, funds may be used for promotion, outreach, and marketing activities.
PERIODIC CENSUSES AND PROGRAMS

For necessary expenses for collecting, compiling, analyzing, preparing, and publishing

H152

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

statistics for periodic censuses and programs
provided for by law, $1,171,849,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027: Provided,
That, from amounts provided herein, funds
may be used for promotion, outreach, and
marketing activities.
NATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses, as provided for by
law, of the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration (NTIA),
$50,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That, notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 1535(d), the Secretary of
Commerce shall charge Federal agencies for
costs incurred in spectrum management,
analysis, operations, and related services,
and such fees shall be retained and used as
offsetting collections for costs of such spectrum services, to remain available until expended: Provided further, That the Secretary
of Commerce is authorized to retain and use
as offsetting collections all funds transferred, or previously transferred, from other
Government agencies for all costs incurred
in telecommunications research, engineering, and related activities by the Institute
for Telecommunication Sciences of NTIA, in
furtherance of its assigned functions under
this paragraph, and such funds received from
other Government agencies shall remain
available until expended.
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT AND CONSTRUCTION

For necessary expenses for the design, construction, alteration, improvement, maintenance, and repair of buildings and facilities
managed by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, not
otherwise provided for, $1,000,000, to remain
available until expended.
UNITED STATES PATENT AND TRADEMARK
OFFICE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the United
States
Patent
and
Trademark
Office
(USPTO) provided for by law, including defense of suits instituted against the Under
Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual
Property and Director of the USPTO,
$4,956,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That the sum herein appropriated from the general fund shall be reduced as offsetting collections of fees and
surcharges assessed and collected by the
USPTO under any law are received during
fiscal year 2026, so as to result in a fiscal
year 2026 appropriation from the general
fund estimated at $0: Provided further, That
during fiscal year 2026, should the total
amount of such offsetting collections be less
than $4,956,000,000, this amount shall be reduced accordingly: Provided further, That any
amount received in excess of $4,956,000,000 in
fiscal year 2026 and deposited in the Patent
and Trademark Fee Reserve Fund shall remain available until expended: Provided further, That the Director of USPTO shall submit a spending plan to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate for any amounts made
available by the preceding proviso and such
spending plan shall be treated as a reprogramming under section 505 of this Act
and shall not be available for obligation or
expenditure except in compliance with the
procedures set forth in that section: Provided
further, That any amounts reprogrammed in
accordance with the preceding proviso shall
be transferred to the United States Patent
and Trademark Office ‘‘Salaries and Expenses’’ account: Provided further, That the
budget of the President submitted for fiscal
year 2027 under section 1105 of title 31,

United States Code, shall include within
amounts provided under this heading for necessary expenses of the USPTO any increases
that are expected to result from an increase
promulgated through rule or regulation in
offsetting collections of fees and surcharges
assessed and collected by the USPTO under
any law in either fiscal year 2026 or fiscal
year 2027: Provided further, That from
amounts provided herein, not to exceed
$13,500 shall be made available in fiscal year
2026 for official reception and representation
expenses: Provided further, That in fiscal year
2026 from the amounts made available for
‘‘Salaries and Expenses’’ for the USPTO, the
amounts necessary to pay (1) the difference
between the percentage of basic pay contributed by the USPTO and employees under section 8334(a) of title 5, United States Code,
and the normal cost percentage (as defined
by section 8331(17) of that title) as provided
by the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) for USPTO’s specific use, of basic pay,
of employees subject to subchapter III of
chapter 83 of that title, and (2) the present
value of the otherwise unfunded accruing
costs, as determined by OPM for USPTO’s
specific use of post-retirement life insurance
and post-retirement health benefits coverage
for all USPTO employees who are enrolled in
Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB)
and Federal Employees Group Life Insurance
(FEGLI), shall be transferred to the Civil
Service Retirement and Disability Fund, the
FEGLI Fund, and the Employees FEHB
Fund, as appropriate, and shall be available
for the authorized purposes of those accounts: Provided further, That any differences
between the present value factors published
in OPM’s yearly 300 series benefit letters and
the factors that OPM provides for USPTO’s
specific use shall be recognized as an imputed cost on USPTO’s financial statements,
where applicable: Provided further, That, notwithstanding any other provision of law, all
fees and surcharges assessed and collected by
USPTO are available for USPTO only pursuant to section 42(c) of title 35, United States
Code, as amended by section 22 of the LeahySmith America Invents Act (Public Law 112–
29): Provided further, That within the
amounts appropriated, $2,450,000 shall be
transferred to the ‘‘Office of Inspector General’’ account for activities associated with
carrying out investigations and audits related to the USPTO.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND
TECHNOLOGY
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL RESEARCH AND
SERVICES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
$1,249,239,000, to remain available until expended, of which not to exceed $9,000,000 may
be transferred to the ‘‘Working Capital
Fund’’: Provided, That of the amounts appropriated under this heading, $405,331,366 shall
be made available for the NIST—STRS
projects, and in the amounts, specified in the
table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included
for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided further, That the amounts
made available for the projects referenced in
the preceding proviso may not be transferred
for any other purpose: Provided further, That
not to exceed $5,000 shall be for official reception and representation expenses: Provided further, That NIST may provide local
transportation for summer undergraduate
research fellowship program participants.
INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY SERVICES

For necessary expenses for industrial technology services, $212,000,000, to remain avail-

January 8, 2026

able until expended, of which $175,000,000
shall be for the Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership, and of which $37,000,000
shall be for the Manufacturing USA Program.
CONSTRUCTION OF RESEARCH FACILITIES

For construction of new research facilities,
including architectural and engineering design, and for renovation and maintenance of
existing facilities, not otherwise provided for
the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, as authorized by sections 13
through 15 of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology Act (15 U.S.C.
278c–278e), $385,897,000, to remain available
until expended: Provided, That of the
amounts appropriated under this heading,
$257,897,000 shall be made available for the
NIST—Construction projects, and in the
amounts, specified in the table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act): Provided further,
That up to one percent of amounts made
available for the projects referenced in the
preceding proviso may be used for the administrative costs of such projects: Provided further, That the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall submit a spending plan to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate for any amounts made
available by the preceding proviso and such
spending plan shall be treated as a reprogramming under section 505 of this Act
and shall not be available for obligation or
expenditure except in compliance with the
procedures set forth in that section: Provided
further, That the Secretary of Commerce
shall include in the budget justification materials for fiscal year 2027 that the Secretary
submits to Congress in support of the Department of Commerce budget (as submitted
with the budget of the President under section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code)
an estimate for each National Institute of
Standards and Technology construction
project having a total multi-year program
cost of more than $5,000,000, and simultaneously the budget justification materials
shall include an estimate of the budgetary
requirements for each such project for each
of the 5 subsequent fiscal years.
NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC
ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONS, RESEARCH, AND FACILITIES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of activities authorized by law for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), including maintenance, operation, and hire of
aircraft and vessels; pilot programs for
State-led fisheries management, notwithstanding any other provision of law; grants,
contracts, or other payments to nonprofit
organizations for the purposes of conducting
activities pursuant to cooperative agreements;
and
relocation
of
facilities,
$4,540,392,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That fees and donations received by the National Ocean Service
for the management of national marine sanctuaries may be retained and used for the salaries and expenses associated with those activities, notwithstanding section 3302 of title
31, United States Code: Provided further, That
in addition, $399,644,000 shall be derived by
transfer from the fund entitled ‘‘Promote
and Develop Fishery Products and Research
Pertaining to American Fisheries’’, which
shall only be used for fishery activities related to the Saltonstall-Kennedy Grant Program; Fisheries Data Collections, Surveys,
and Assessments; Observers and Training;

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Fisheries Management Programs and Services;
and
Interjurisdictional
Fisheries
Grants: Provided further, That in addition
$28,000,000 is derived from recoveries of prior
year obligations: Provided further, That of
the amounts provided under this heading, including the amounts in the clause preceding
the first proviso and in the second and third
provisos, $4,862,168,110 shall be for the purposes and in the amounts specified in the tables under this heading in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this Act): Provided further, That of the amounts provided
under this heading, including the amounts in
the clause preceding the first proviso and in
the second and third provisos, $105,867,890
shall be made available for the NOAA—CZM
and NOAA—ORF projects, and in the
amounts, specified in the table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act): Provided further,
That the amounts made available for the
projects referenced in the preceding proviso
may not be transferred for any other purpose: Provided further, That not to exceed
$71,299,000 shall be for payment to the ‘‘Department of Commerce Working Capital
Fund’’: Provided further, That any use of
deobligated balances of funds provided under
this heading in previous years shall be subject to the procedures set forth in section 505
of this Act: Provided further, That in addition, for necessary retired pay expenses
under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protection and Survivor Benefits Plan, and for
payments for the medical care of retired personnel and their dependents under the Dependents’ Medical Care Act (10 U.S.C. ch. 55),
such sums as may be necessary.
PROCUREMENT, ACQUISITION AND CONSTRUCTION
For procurement, acquisition and construction of capital assets, including alteration and modification costs, of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
$1,576,899,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028, except that funds provided
for acquisition and construction of satellites,
vessels, aircraft, and construction of facilities shall remain available until expended:
Provided, That in addition $13,000,000 is provided from recoveries of prior year obligations: Provided further, That the amounts
provided under this heading, including the
amounts in the clause preceding the first
proviso and in the first proviso, shall be for
the purposes and in the amounts specified in
the tables under this heading in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the
matter preceding division A of this Act): Provided further, That any use of deobligated
balances of funds provided under this heading in previous years shall be subject to the
procedures set forth in section 505 of this
Act: Provided further, That the Secretary of
Commerce shall include in budget justification materials for fiscal year 2027 that the
Secretary submits to Congress in support of
the Department of Commerce budget (as submitted with the budget of the President
under section 1105(a) of title 31, United
States Code) an estimate for each National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
procurement, acquisition or construction
project having a total of more than $5,000,000
and simultaneously the budget justification
shall include an estimate of the budgetary
requirements for each such project for each
of the 5 subsequent fiscal years.

provided herein, the Secretary of Commerce
may issue grants to the States of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Nevada, California,
and Alaska, and to the federally recognized
Tribes of the Columbia River and Pacific
Coast (including Alaska), for projects necessary for conservation of salmon and
steelhead populations that are listed as
threatened or endangered, or that are identified by a State as at-risk to be so listed, for
maintaining populations necessary for exercise of Tribal treaty fishing rights or native
subsistence fishing, or for conservation of
Pacific coastal salmon and steelhead habitat, based on guidelines to be developed by
the Secretary of Commerce: Provided further,
That all funds shall be allocated based on
scientific and other merit principles and
shall not be available for marketing activities: Provided further, That funds disbursed to
States shall be subject to a matching requirement of funds or documented in-kind
contributions of at least 33 percent of the
Federal funds.
FISHERIES DISASTER ASSISTANCE

For necessary expenses of administering
the fishery disaster assistance programs authorized by the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery
Conservation and Management Act (Public
Law 94–265) and the Interjurisdictional Fisheries Act (title III of Public Law 99–659),
$300,000.
FISHERMEN’S CONTINGENCY FUND
For carrying out the provisions of title IV
of Public Law 95–372, not to exceed $349,000,
to be derived from receipts collected pursuant to that Act, to remain available until expended.
FISHERIES FINANCE PROGRAM ACCOUNT

Subject to section 502 of the Congressional
Budget Act of 1974, during fiscal year 2026,
obligations of direct loans may not exceed
$24,000,000 for Individual Fishing Quota loans
and not to exceed $150,000,000 for traditional
direct loans as authorized by the Merchant
Marine Act of 1936.
RECREATIONAL QUOTA ENTITY FUND

For carrying out the provisions of section
106 of the Driftnet Modernization and Bycatch Reduction Act (title I of division S of
the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023
(Public Law 117–328)), the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration may assess
and collect fees pursuant to such section,
which shall be credited to this account, to
remain available until expended, for the purposes specified in subsection (b) of such section, in addition to amounts otherwise available for such purposes.
DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

PACIFIC COASTAL SALMON RECOVERY

For necessary expenses for the management of the Department of Commerce provided for by law, including not to exceed
$4,500 for official reception and representation, $92,500,000: Provided, That no employee
of the Department of Commerce may be detailed or assigned from a bureau or office
funded by this Act or any other Act to offices within the Office of the Secretary of the
Department of Commerce for more than 180
days in a fiscal year unless the individual’s
employing bureau or office is fully reimbursed for the salary and expenses of the employee for the entire period of assignment
using funds provided under this heading: Provided further, That amounts made available
to the Department of Commerce in this or
any prior Act may not be transferred pursuant to section 508 of this or any prior Act to
the account funded under this heading, except in the case of extraordinary circumstances that threaten life or property.

For necessary expenses associated with the
restoration of Pacific salmon populations,
$65,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That, of the funds

For necessary expenses for the renovation
and modernization of the Herbert C. Hoover
Building, $1,142,000.

RENOVATION AND MODERNIZATION

H153
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5
U.S.C. App.), $48,000,000.
GENERAL PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT OF
COMMERCE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 101. During the current fiscal year, applicable appropriations and funds made
available to the Department of Commerce by
this Act shall be available for the activities
specified in the Act of October 26, 1949 (15
U.S.C. 1514), to the extent and in the manner
prescribed by the Act, and, notwithstanding
31 U.S.C. 3324, may be used for advanced payments not otherwise authorized only upon
the certification of officials designated by
the Secretary of Commerce that such payments are in the public interest.
SEC. 102. During the current fiscal year, appropriations made available to the Department of Commerce by this Act for salaries
and expenses shall be available for hire of
passenger motor vehicles as authorized by 31
U.S.C. 1343 and 1344; services as authorized
by 5 U.S.C. 3109; and uniforms or allowances
therefor, as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 5901–
5902).
SEC. 103. Not to exceed 5 percent of any appropriation made available for the current
fiscal year for the Department of Commerce
in this Act may be transferred between such
appropriations, but no such appropriation
shall be increased by more than 10 percent
by any such transfers: Provided, That any
transfer pursuant to this section shall be
treated as a reprogramming of funds under
section 505 of this Act and shall not be available for obligation or expenditure except in
compliance with the procedures set forth in
that section: Provided further, That the Secretary of Commerce shall notify the Committees on Appropriations at least 15 days in
advance of the acquisition or disposal of any
capital asset (including land, structures, and
equipment) not specifically provided for in
this Act or any other law appropriating
funds for the Department of Commerce.
SEC. 104. The requirements set forth by section 105 of the Commerce, Justice, Science,
and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,
2012 (Public Law 112–55), as amended by section 105 of title I of division B of Public Law
113–6, are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable with respect to fiscal year
2026: Provided, That the life cycle cost for the
Joint
Polar
Satellite
System
is
$11,322,125,000, the life cycle cost of the Polar
Follow On Program is $6,837,900,000, the life
cycle cost for the Geostationary Operational
Environmental Satellite R-Series Program is
$11,700,100,000, and the life cycle cost for the
Space Weather Follow On Program is
$692,800,000.
SEC. 105. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Commerce may
furnish services (including but not limited to
utilities, telecommunications, and security
services) necessary to support the operation,
maintenance, and improvement of space that
persons, firms, or organizations are authorized, pursuant to the Public Buildings Cooperative Use Act of 1976 or other authority, to
use or occupy in the Herbert C. Hoover
Building, Washington, DC, or other buildings, the maintenance, operation, and protection of which has been delegated to the
Secretary from the Administrator of General
Services pursuant to the Federal Property
and Administrative Services Act of 1949 on a
reimbursable or non-reimbursable basis.
Amounts received as reimbursement for
services provided under this section or the
authority under which the use or occupancy
of the space is authorized, up to $200,000,
shall be credited to the appropriation or fund

H154

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

which initially bears the costs of such services.
SEC. 106. Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent a grant recipient from deterring child pornography, copyright infringement, or any other unlawful activity
over its networks.
SEC. 107. The Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is authorized to use, with their consent,
with reimbursement and subject to the limits of available appropriations, the land,
services, equipment, personnel, and facilities
of any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States, or of any State,
local government, Indian Tribal government,
Territory, or possession, or of any political
subdivision thereof, or of any foreign government or international organization, for purposes related to carrying out the responsibilities of any statute administered by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
SEC. 108. The National Technical Information Service shall not charge any customer
for a copy of any report or document generated by the Legislative Branch unless the
Service has provided information to the customer on how an electronic copy of such report or document may be accessed and
downloaded for free online. Should a customer still require the Service to provide a
printed or digital copy of the report or document, the charge shall be limited to recovering the Service’s cost of processing, reproducing, and delivering such report or document.
SEC. 109. To carry out the responsibilities
of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Administrator of
NOAA is authorized to: (1) enter into grants
and cooperative agreements with; (2) use on
a non-reimbursable basis land, services,
equipment, personnel, and facilities provided
by; and (3) receive and expend funds made
available on a consensual basis from: a Federal agency, State or subdivision thereof,
local government, Tribal government, Territory, or possession or any subdivisions thereof: Provided, That funds received for permitting and related regulatory activities pursuant to this section shall be deposited under
the heading ‘‘National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration—Operations,
Research, and Facilities’’ and shall remain
available until September 30, 2027, for such
purposes: Provided further, That all funds
within this section and their corresponding
uses are subject to section 505 of this Act.
SEC. 110. Amounts provided by this Act or
by any prior appropriations Act that remain
available for obligation, for necessary expenses of the programs of the Economics and
Statistics Administration of the Department
of Commerce, including amounts provided
for programs of the Bureau of Economic
Analysis and the Bureau of the Census, shall
be available for expenses of cooperative
agreements with appropriate entities, including any Federal, State, or local governmental unit, or institution of higher education, to aid and promote statistical, research, and methodology activities which
further the purposes for which such amounts
have been made available.
SEC. 111. The Secretary of Commerce, or
the designee of the Secretary, may waive up
to 50 percent of the cost sharing requirements under section 315, of the Coastal Zone
Management Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1461) as
necessary at the request of the grant applicant, for amounts made available under this
Act under the heading ‘‘Procurement, Acquisition and Construction’’ under the heading
‘‘National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’’.
SEC. 112. Any unobligated balances of expired discretionary funds transferred to the

Department of Commerce Nonrecurring Expenses Fund, as authorized by section 111 of
title I of division B of Public Law 116–93,
may be obligated only after the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate are notified at least 30
days in advance of the planned use of funds.
SEC. 113. The Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, in consultation with the employees of
the National Weather Service and non-governmental experts in personnel management,
may establish an alternative or fixed rate for
relocation allowance, including permanent
change of station allowance, notwithstanding the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 5724 and
the regulations prescribed under 5 U.S.C.
5738.
SEC. 114. The National Weather Service
shall maintain staffing levels in order to fulfill the mission required under 15 U.S.C. 313
to protect life and property to the maximum
extent possible.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Department
of Commerce Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE II
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
JUSTICE OPERATIONS, MANAGEMENT, AND
ACCOUNTABILITY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the operations,
management, and accountability of the Department of Justice, $140,000,000, of which
not to exceed $4,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027, and of which
not to exceed $4,000,000 for security and construction of Department of Justice facilities
shall remain available until expended.
JUSTICE INFORMATION SHARING TECHNOLOGY
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses for information
sharing technology, including planning, development, deployment and departmental direction, $38,460,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That the Attorney General may transfer up to $40,000,000 to this account, from funds available to the Department of Justice for information technology,
to remain available until expended, for enterprise-wide information technology initiatives: Provided further, That the transfer authority in the preceding proviso is in addition to any other transfer authority contained in this Act: Provided further, That any
transfer pursuant to the first proviso shall
be treated as a reprogramming under section
505 of this Act and shall not be available for
obligation or expenditure except in compliance with the procedures set forth in that
section.
EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For expenses necessary for the administration of immigration-related activities of the
Executive Office for Immigration Review,
$800,000,000, of which $10,000,000 shall be derived by transfer from the Executive Office
for Immigration Review fees deposited in the
‘‘Immigration Examinations Fee’’ account,
and of which not less than $27,500,000 shall be
available for services and activities provided
by the Legal Orientation Program: Provided,
That not to exceed $50,000,000 of the total
amount made available under this heading
shall remain available until September 30,
2030, for build-out and modifications of
courtroom space.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General, $139,000,000, including not to
exceed $10,000 to meet unforeseen emergencies of a confidential character: Provided,
That not to exceed $4,000,000 shall remain
available until September 30, 2027.

January 8, 2026
UNITED STATES PAROLE COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the United
States Parole Commission as authorized,
$13,000,000: Provided, That, notwithstanding
any other provision of law, upon the expiration of a term of office of a Commissioner,
the Commissioner may continue to act until
a successor has been appointed.
LEGAL ACTIVITIES
SALARIES AND EXPENSES, GENERAL LEGAL
ACTIVITIES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For expenses necessary for the legal activities of the Department of Justice, not otherwise provided for, including not to exceed
$20,000 for expenses of collecting evidence, to
be expended under the direction of, and to be
accounted for solely under the certificate of,
the Attorney General; the administration of
pardon and clemency petitions; and rent of
private or Government-owned space in the
District of Columbia, $900,000,000, of which
not to exceed $50,000,000 for litigation support contracts and information technology
projects, including cybersecurity and hardening of critical networks, shall remain
available until expended: Provided, That of
the total amount appropriated, not to exceed
$9,000 shall be available to the Criminal Division for official reception and representation
expenses: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 205 of this Act, upon a determination by the Attorney General that
emergent circumstances require additional
funding for litigation activities of the Civil
Division, the Attorney General may transfer
such amounts to ‘‘Salaries and Expenses,
General Legal Activities’’ from available appropriations for the current fiscal year for
the Department of Justice, as may be necessary to respond to such circumstances:
Provided further, That any transfer pursuant
to the preceding proviso shall be treated as a
reprogramming under section 505 of this Act
and shall not be available for obligation or
expenditure except in compliance with the
procedures set forth in that section: Provided
further, That of the amount appropriated,
such sums as may be necessary shall be
available to the Civil Rights Division for salaries and expenses associated with the election monitoring program under section 8 of
the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (52 U.S.C. 10305)
and to reimburse the Office of Personnel
Management for such salaries and expenses:
Provided further, That of the amounts provided under this heading for the election
monitoring program, $3,390,000 shall remain
available until expended: Provided further,
That any funds provided under this heading
in prior year appropriations Acts that remain available to the Civil Rights Division
for salaries and expenses associated with the
election monitoring program under section 8
of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (52 U.S.C.
10305) may also be used to carry out any authorized purposes of the Civil Rights Division:
Provided
further,
That
amounts
repurposed by the preceding proviso may not
be used to increase the number of permanent
positions.
In addition, for reimbursement of expenses
of the Department of Justice associated with
processing cases under the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986, $22,700,000,
to be appropriated from the Vaccine Injury
Compensation Trust Fund and to remain
available until expended.
SALARIES AND EXPENSES, ANTITRUST DIVISION

For expenses necessary for the enforcement of antitrust and kindred laws,
$245,000,000, to remain available until expended, of which not to exceed $5,000 shall be

January 8, 2026

H155

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

available for official reception and representation expenses: Provided, That notwithstanding any other provision of law, fees collected in fiscal year 2026 for premerger notification filings under the Hart-Scott-Rodino
Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 (15
U.S.C. 18a) shall be retained and used for
necessary expenses in this appropriation and
shall remain available until expended: Provided further, That the sum herein appropriated from the general fund shall be reduced (1) as such offsetting collections are
received during fiscal year 2026 and (2) to the
extent that any remaining general fund appropriations can be derived from amounts
credited to this account as offsetting collections in previous fiscal years that are not
otherwise appropriated, so as to result in a
final fiscal year 2026 appropriation from the
general fund estimated at $0: Provided further, That, notwithstanding section 605 of the
Departments of Commerce, Justice, and
State, the Judiciary, and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act, 1990 (15 U.S.C. 18a note),
none of the funds credited to this account as
offsetting collections in previous fiscal years
that were unavailable for obligation as of
September 30, 2025, shall become available
for obligation except as provided in the preceding proviso: Provided further, That any
premerger notification filing fees received in
excess of $245,000,000 in fiscal year 2026 shall
remain available until expended: Provided
further, That the Attorney General shall submit a spending plan to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate for any amounts made
available by the preceding proviso and such
spending plan shall be treated as a reprogramming under section 505 of this Act
and shall not be available for obligation or
expenditure except in compliance with the
procedures set forth in that section.
SALARIES AND EXPENSES, UNITED STATES
ATTORNEYS

For necessary expenses of the Offices of the
United States Attorneys, including intergovernmental and cooperative agreements,
$2,621,000,000: Provided, That of the total
amount appropriated, not to exceed $19,600
shall be available for official reception and
representation expenses: Provided further,
That not to exceed $40,000,000 shall remain
available until expended: Provided further,
That each United States Attorney shall establish or participate in a task force on
human trafficking.
UNITED STATES TRUSTEE SYSTEM FUND

For necessary expenses of the United
States Trustee Program, as authorized,
$205,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That, notwithstanding any
other provision of law, deposits of discretionary offsetting collections to the United
States Trustee System Fund and amounts
herein appropriated shall be available in
such amounts as may be necessary to pay refunds due depositors: Provided further, That,
notwithstanding any other provision of law,
fees deposited into the Fund as discretionary
offsetting collections pursuant to section
589a of title 28, United States Code (as limited by section 589a(f)(2) of title 28, United
States Code), shall be retained and used for
necessary expenses in this appropriation and
shall remain available until expended: Provided further, That to the extent that fees deposited into the Fund as discretionary offsetting collections in fiscal year 2026, net of
amounts necessary to pay refunds due depositors, exceed $205,000,000, those excess
amounts shall be available in this and future
fiscal years only to the extent provided in
advance in appropriations Acts: Provided further, That the sum herein appropriated from
the general fund shall be reduced (1) as such
fees are received during fiscal year 2026, net

of amounts necessary to pay refunds due depositors, (estimated at $205,000,000) and (2) to
the extent that any remaining general fund
appropriations can be derived from amounts
deposited in the Fund as discretionary offsetting collections in previous fiscal years
that are not otherwise appropriated, so as to
result in a final fiscal year 2026 appropriation from the general fund estimated at $0.
SALARIES AND EXPENSES, FOREIGN CLAIMS
SETTLEMENT COMMISSION

For expenses necessary to carry out the activities of the Foreign Claims Settlement
Commission, including services as authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States
Code, $2,504,000.

FEDERAL PRISONER DETENTION

For necessary expenses related to United
States prisoners in the custody of the United
States Marshals Service as authorized by
section 4013 of title 18, United States Code,
$2,236,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That not to exceed
$20,000,000 shall be considered ‘‘funds appropriated for State and local law enforcement
assistance’’ pursuant to section 4013(b) of
title 18, United States Code: Provided further,
That the United States Marshals Service
shall be responsible for managing the Justice
Prisoner and Air Transportation System.
NATIONAL SECURITY DIVISION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

FEES AND EXPENSES OF WITNESSES

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For fees and expenses of witnesses, for expenses of contracts for the procurement and
supervision of expert witnesses, for private
counsel expenses, including advances, and for
expenses of foreign counsel, $320,000,000, to
remain available until expended, of which
not to exceed $16,000,000 is for construction of
buildings for protected witness safesites; not
to exceed $3,000,000 is for the purchase and
maintenance of armored and other vehicles
for witness security caravans; and not to exceed $35,000,000 is for the purchase, installation, maintenance, and upgrade of secure
telecommunications equipment and a secure
automated information network to store and
retrieve the identities and locations of protected witnesses: Provided, That amounts
made available under this heading may not
be transferred pursuant to section 205 of this
Act.
SALARIES AND EXPENSES, COMMUNITY

For expenses necessary to carry out the activities of the National Security Division,
$117,200,000, of which not to exceed $5,000,000
for information technology systems shall remain available until expended: Provided,
That notwithstanding section 205 of this Act,
upon a determination by the Attorney General that emergent circumstances require
additional funding for the activities of the
National Security Division, the Attorney
General may transfer such amounts to this
heading from available appropriations for
the current fiscal year for the Department of
Justice, as may be necessary to respond to
such circumstances: Provided further, That
any transfer pursuant to the preceding proviso shall be treated as a reprogramming
under section 505 of this Act and shall not be
available for obligation or expenditure except in compliance with the procedures set
forth in that section.
INTERAGENCY LAW ENFORCEMENT

RELATIONS SERVICE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Community
Relations Service, $20,000,000: Provided, That
notwithstanding section 205 of this Act, upon
a determination by the Attorney General
that emergent circumstances require additional funding for conflict resolution and violence prevention activities of the Community Relations Service, the Attorney General
may transfer such amounts to the Community Relations Service, from available appropriations for the current fiscal year for the
Department of Justice, as may be necessary
to respond to such circumstances: Provided
further, That any transfer pursuant to the
preceding proviso shall be treated as a reprogramming under section 505 of this Act
and shall not be available for obligation or
expenditure except in compliance with the
procedures set forth in that section.
ASSETS FORFEITURE FUND

For expenses authorized by subparagraphs
(B), (F), and (G) of section 524(c)(1) of title 28,
United States Code, $20,514,000, to be derived
from the Department of Justice Assets Forfeiture Fund.
UNITED STATES MARSHALS SERVICE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the United
States Marshals Service, $1,702,000,000, of
which not to exceed $20,000 shall be available
for official reception and representation expenses, not to exceed $8,900 shall be available
for INTERPOL Washington official reception
and representation expenses, and not to exceed $25,000,000 shall remain available until
expended: Provided, That the Director of
INTERPOL Washington shall concurrently
report to the Deputy Attorney General.
CONSTRUCTION

For construction in space that is controlled, occupied, or utilized by the United
States Marshals Service for prisoner holding
and related support, $8,000,000, to remain
available until expended.

INTERAGENCY CRIME AND DRUG ENFORCEMENT

For necessary expenses for the identification, investigation, and prosecution of individuals associated with the most significant
drug trafficking organizations, transnational
organized crime, and money laundering organizations not otherwise provided for, to include inter-governmental agreements with
State and local law enforcement agencies engaged in the investigation and prosecution of
individuals involved in transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, $300,000,000,
of which $50,000,000 shall remain available
until expended: Provided, That any amounts
obligated from appropriations under this
heading may be used under authorities available to the organizations reimbursed from
this appropriation: Provided further, That
any amounts obligated from appropriations
under this heading shall only be available for
the same purposes for which the amounts
were obligated in fiscal year 2024.
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Federal Bureau of Investigation for detection, investigation, and prosecution of crimes against
the United States, $10,609,456,000, of which
not to exceed $216,900,000 shall remain available until expended: Provided, That not to exceed $284,000 shall be available for official reception and representation expenses.
CONSTRUCTION

For necessary expenses, to include the cost
of equipment, furniture, and information
technology requirements, related to construction or acquisition of buildings, facilities, and sites by purchase, or as otherwise
authorized by law; conversion, modification,
and extension of federally owned buildings;
preliminary planning and design of projects;
and operation and maintenance of secure
work environment facilities and secure networking capabilities; $15,000,000, to remain
available until expended.

H156

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Drug Enforcement Administration, including not to
exceed $70,000 to meet unforeseen emergencies of a confidential character pursuant
to section 530C of title 28, United States
Code; and expenses for conducting drug education and training programs, including
travel and related expenses for participants
in such programs and the distribution of
items of token value that promote the goals
of such programs, $2,580,340,000, of which not
to exceed $75,000,000 shall remain available
until expended and not to exceed $90,000 shall
be available for official reception and representation expenses: Provided, That, notwithstanding section 3672 of Public Law 106–
310, up to $10,000,000 may be used to reimburse States, units of local government, Indian Tribal Governments, other public entities, and multi-jurisdictional or regional
consortia thereof for expenses incurred to
clean up and safely dispose of substances associated with clandestine methamphetamine
laboratories, conversion and extraction operations, tableting operations, or laboratories
and processing operations for fentanyl and
fentanyl-related substances which may
present a danger to public health or the environment: Provided further, That none of the
funds made available by this Act or any
prior Department of Justice Appropriations
Act shall be available to restart the illicit
crop imagery program.
BUREAU OF ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, FIREARMS AND
EXPLOSIVES
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives,
for training of State and local law enforcement agencies with or without reimbursement, including training in connection with
the training and acquisition of canines for
explosives and fire accelerants detection;
and for provision of laboratory assistance to
State and local law enforcement agencies,
with
or
without
reimbursement,
$1,585,000,000, of which not to exceed $36,000
shall be for official reception and representation expenses, not to exceed $1,000,000 shall
be available for the payment of attorneys’
fees as provided by section 924(d)(2) of title
18, United States Code, and not to exceed
$25,000,000 shall remain available until expended: Provided, That none of the funds appropriated herein shall be available to investigate or act upon applications for relief
from Federal firearms disabilities under section 925(c) of title 18, United States Code:
Provided further, That such funds shall be
available to investigate and act upon applications filed by corporations for relief from
Federal firearms disabilities under section
925(c) of title 18, United States Code: Provided further, That no funds made available
by this or any other Act may be used to
transfer the functions, missions, or activities
of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms
and Explosives to other agencies or Departments.
FEDERAL PRISON SYSTEM
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Federal Prison System for the administration, operation,
and maintenance of Federal penal and correctional institutions, and for the provision
of technical assistance and advice on corrections related issues to foreign governments,
$8,100,000,000: Provided, That not less than
$409,483,000 shall be for the programs and activities authorized by the First Step Act of
2018 (Public Law 115–391), of which not less
than 2 percent shall be transferred to and

merged with the appropriation for ‘‘Research, Evaluation and Statistics’’ for the
National Institute of Justice to carry out
evaluations of programs and activities related to the First Step Act of 2018: Provided
further, That the Attorney General may
transfer to the Department of Health and
Human Services such amounts as may be
necessary for direct expenditures by that Department for medical relief for inmates of
Federal penal and correctional institutions:
Provided further, That the Director of the
Federal Prison System, where necessary,
may enter into contracts with a fiscal agent
or fiscal intermediary claims processor to
determine the amounts payable to persons
who, on behalf of the Federal Prison System,
furnish health services to individuals committed to the custody of the Federal Prison
System: Provided further, That not to exceed
$5,400 shall be available for official reception
and representation expenses: Provided further, That not to exceed $50,000,000 shall remain available until expended for necessary
operations: Provided further, That, of the
amounts provided for contract confinement,
not to exceed $20,000,000 shall remain available until expended to make payments in advance for grants, contracts and reimbursable
agreements, and other expenses: Provided further, That the Director of the Federal Prison
System may accept donated property and
services relating to the operation of the prison card program from a not-for-profit entity
which has operated such program in the
past, notwithstanding the fact that such notfor-profit entity furnishes services under
contracts to the Federal Prison System relating to the operation of pre-release services, halfway houses, or other custodial facilities: Provided further, That amounts made
available under this heading for programs
and activities related to the First Step Act
of 2018 may not be transferred, or otherwise
made available, to or for administration by
the Department of Labor.
BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES

For planning, acquisition of sites, and construction of new facilities; purchase and acquisition of facilities and remodeling, and
equipping of such facilities for penal and correctional use, including all necessary expenses incident thereto, by contract or force
account; and constructing, remodeling, and
equipping necessary buildings and facilities
at existing penal and correctional institutions, including all necessary expenses incident thereto, by contract or force account,
$279,762,000, to remain available until expended, of which $150,000,000 shall be available only for costs related to construction of
new facilities: Provided, That labor of United
States prisoners may be used for work performed under this appropriation.
FEDERAL PRISON INDUSTRIES, INCORPORATED
The Federal Prison Industries, Incorporated, is hereby authorized to make such
expenditures within the limits of funds and
borrowing authority available, and in accord
with the law, and to make such contracts
and commitments without regard to fiscal
year limitations as provided by section 9104
of title 31, United States Code, as may be
necessary in carrying out the program set
forth in the budget for the current fiscal
year for such corporation.
LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES,
FEDERAL PRISON INDUSTRIES, INCORPORATED
Not to exceed $2,700,000 of the funds of the
Federal Prison Industries, Incorporated,
shall be available for its administrative expenses, and for services as authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, to be
computed on an accrual basis to be determined in accordance with the corporation’s
current prescribed accounting system, and

January 8, 2026

such amounts shall be exclusive of depreciation, payment of claims, and expenditures
which such accounting system requires to be
capitalized or charged to cost of commodities acquired or produced, including selling
and shipping expenses, and expenses in connection with acquisition, construction, operation, maintenance, improvement, protection, or disposition of facilities and other
property belonging to the corporation or in
which it has an interest.
STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
ACTIVITIES
OFFICE ON VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN PREVENTION AND
PROSECUTION PROGRAMS
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For grants, contracts, cooperative agreements, and other assistance for the prevention and prosecution of violence against
women, as authorized by the Omnibus Crime
Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, as
amended (34 U.S.C. 10101 et seq.) (‘‘the 1968
Act’’); title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1968
(commonly known as the ‘‘Indian Civil
Rights Act of 1968’’) (Public Law 90–284, as
amended) (‘‘the Indian Civil Rights Act’’);
the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (Public Law 103–322, as
amended) (34 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.) (‘‘the 1994
Act’’); the Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990
(Public Law 101–647) (‘‘the 1990 Act’’); the
Prosecutorial Remedies and Other Tools to
end the Exploitation of Children Today Act
of 2003 (Public Law 108–21); the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974
(34 U.S.C. 11101 et seq.) (‘‘the 1974 Act’’); the
Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (Public Law 106–386, as
amended) (‘‘the 2000 Act’’); the Justice for
All Act of 2004 (Public Law 108–405, as
amended) (‘‘the 2004 Act’’); the Violence
Against Women and Department of Justice
Reauthorization Act of 2005 (Public Law 109–
162, as amended) (‘‘the 2005 Act’’); the Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of
2013 (Public Law 113–4) (‘‘the 2013 Act’’); the
Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015
(Public Law 114–22) (‘‘the 2015 Act’’); the
Abolish Human Trafficking Act (Public Law
115–392); and the Violence Against Women
Act Reauthorization Act of 2022 (division W
of Public Law 117–103) (‘‘the 2022 Act’’); and
for related victims services, $720,000,000, to
remain available until expended, of which
$100,000,000 shall be derived by transfer from
amounts available for obligation in this Act
from the Fund established by section 1402 of
chapter XIV of title II of Public Law 98–473
(34 U.S.C. 20101), notwithstanding section
1402(d) of such Act of 1984, and merged with
the amounts otherwise made available under
this heading: Provided, That except as otherwise provided by law, not to exceed 5 percent
of funds made available under this heading
may be used for expenses related to evaluation, training, and technical assistance: Provided further, That of the amount provided—
(1) $257,000,000 is for grants to combat violence against women, as authorized by part
T of the 1968 Act, and any applicable increases for the amount of such grants, as authorized by section 5903 of the James M.
Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2023: Provided, That $10,000,000
shall be for any such increases under such
section 5903, which shall apply to fiscal year
2026 grants funded by amounts provided in
this paragraph;
(2) $51,000,000 is for transitional housing assistance grants for victims of domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual assault as authorized by section 40299 of the
1994 Act;
(3) $2,500,000 is for the National Institute of
Justice and the Bureau of Justice Statistics

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

for research, evaluation, and statistics of violence against women and related issues addressed by grant programs of the Office on
Violence Against Women, which shall be
transferred to ‘‘Research, Evaluation and
Statistics’’ for administration by the Office
of Justice Programs;
(4) $17,000,000 is for a grant program to provide services to advocate for and respond to
youth victims of domestic violence, dating
violence, sexual assault, and stalking; assistance to children and youth exposed to such
violence; assistance to middle and high
school students through education and other
services related to such violence; and programs to engage men and youth in preventing domestic violence, dating violence,
sexual assault, and stalking: Provided, That
unobligated balances available for the programs authorized by sections 41201, 41204,
41303, and 41305 of the 1994 Act, prior to its
amendment by the 2013 Act, shall be available for this program: Provided further, That
10 percent of the total amount available for
this grant program shall be available for
grants under the program authorized by section 2015 of the 1968 Act: Provided further,
That the definitions and grant conditions in
section 40002 of the 1994 Act shall apply to
this program;
(5) $60,500,000 is for grants to improve the
criminal justice response as authorized by
part U of title I of the 1968 Act, of which up
to $4,000,000 is for a homicide reduction initiative; up to $2,000,000 is for a domestic violence lethality reduction initiative; and up
to $5,000,000 is for an initiative to promote
effective policing and prosecution responses
to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual
assault, and stalking, including evaluation
of the effectiveness of funded interventions
(‘‘Policing and Prosecution Initiative’’);
(6) $79,500,000 is for sexual assault victims
assistance, as authorized by section 41601 of
the 1994 Act;
(7) $50,500,000 is for rural domestic violence
and child abuse enforcement assistance
grants, as authorized by section 40295 of the
1994 Act;
(8) $25,000,000 is for grants to reduce violent
crimes against women on campus, as authorized by section 304 of the 2005 Act, of which
$12,500,000 is for grants to Historically Black
Colleges and Universities, Hispanic-Serving
Institutions, and Tribal colleges and universities;
(9) $55,000,000 is for legal assistance for victims, as authorized by section 1201 of the 2000
Act;
(10) $9,000,000 is for enhanced training and
services to end violence against and abuse of
women in later life, as authorized by section
40801 of the 1994 Act;
(11) $21,000,000 is for grants to support families in the justice system, as authorized by
section 1301 of the 2000 Act: Provided, That
unobligated balances available for the programs authorized by section 1301 of the 2000
Act and section 41002 of the 1994 Act, prior to
their amendment by the 2013 Act, shall be
available for this program;
(12) $11,500,000 is for education and training
to end violence against and abuse of women
with disabilities, as authorized by section
1402 of the 2000 Act;
(13) $1,000,000 is for the National Resource
Center on Workplace Responses to assist victims of domestic violence, as authorized by
section 41501 of the 1994 Act;
(14) $2,000,000 is for analysis and research
on violence against Indian women, including
as authorized by section 904 of the 2005 Act:
Provided, That such funds may be transferred
to ‘‘Research, Evaluation and Statistics’’ for
administration by the Office of Justice Programs;
(15) $500,000 is for a national clearinghouse
that provides training and technical assist-

ance on issues relating to sexual assault of
American Indian and Alaska Native women;
(16) $14,500,000 is for programs to assist
Tribal Governments in exercising special
Tribal criminal jurisdiction, as authorized
by section 204 of the Indian Civil Rights Act:
Provided, That the grant conditions in section 40002(b) of the 1994 Act shall apply to
grants made;
(17) $1,500,000 is for the purposes authorized
under the 2015 Act;
(18) $14,000,000 is for a grant program as authorized by section 41801 of the 1994 Act: Provided, That the definitions and grant conditions in section 109 of the 2022 Act shall
apply to this program;
(19) $10,000,000 is for culturally specific
services for victims, as authorized by section
121 of the 2005 Act;
(20) $4,500,000 is for an initiative to support
cross-designation of tribal prosecutors as
Tribal Special Assistant United States Attorneys: Provided, That the definitions and
grant conditions in section 40002 of the 1994
Act shall apply to this initiative;
(21) $1,000,000 is for an initiative to support
victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking, including
through the provision of technical assistance, as authorized by section 206 of the 2022
Act: Provided, That the definitions and grant
conditions in section 40002 of the 1994 Act
shall apply to this initiative;
(22) $2,000,000 is for a National Deaf Services Line to provide services to Deaf victims
of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual
assault, and stalking: Provided, That the
definitions and grant conditions in section
40002 of the 1994 Act shall apply to this service line;
(23) $4,500,000 is for grants for outreach and
services to underserved populations, as authorized by section 120 of the 2005 Act;
(24) $3,000,000 is for an initiative to provide
financial assistance to victims, including
evaluation of the effectiveness of funded
projects: Provided, That the definitions and
grant conditions in section 40002 of the 1994
Act shall apply to this initiative;
(25) $5,000,000 is for trauma-informed, victim-centered training for law enforcement,
and related research and evaluation activities, as authorized by section 41701 of the 1994
Act;
(26) $12,000,000 is for grants to support access to sexual assault nurse examinations, as
authorized by section 304 of title III of the
2004 Act: Provided, That the grant conditions
in section 40002 of the 1994 Act shall apply to
this program; and
(27) $5,000,000 is for local law enforcement
grants for prevention, enforcement, and
prosecution of cybercrimes against individuals, as authorized by section 1401 of the 2022
Act, and for a National Resource Center on
Cybercrimes Against Individuals, as authorized by section 1402 of the 2022 Act: Provided,
That the grant conditions in section 40002 of
the 1994 Act shall apply to this paragraph.
OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS
RESEARCH, EVALUATION AND STATISTICS
For grants, contracts, cooperative agreements, and other assistance authorized by
title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and
Safe Streets Act of 1968 (‘‘title I of the 1968
Act’’) (Public Law 90–351); the Violent Crime
Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994
(Public Law 103–322) (‘‘the 1994 Act’’); the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention
Act of 1974 (‘‘the 1974 Act’’) (Public Law 93–
415); the Missing Children’s Assistance Act
(34 U.S.C. 11291 et seq.); the Prosecutorial
Remedies and Other Tools to end the Exploitation of Children Today Act of 2003 (Public
Law 108–21) (‘‘the PROTECT Act’’); the Justice for All Act of 2004 (Public Law 108–405);
the Violence Against Women and Depart-

H157

ment of Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005
(Public Law 109–162) (‘‘the 2005 Act’’); the
Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990 (title II of
Public Law 101–647); the Second Chance Act
of 2007 (Public Law 110–199); the Victims of
Crime Act of 1984 (chapter XIV of title II of
Public Law 98–473); the Adam Walsh Child
Protection and Safety Act of 2006 (Public
Law 109–248) (‘‘the Adam Walsh Act’’); the
PROTECT Our Children Act of 2008 (Public
Law 110–401); subtitle C of title II of the
Homeland Security Act of 2002 (Public Law
107–296) (‘‘the 2002 Act’’); the Prison Rape
Elimination Act of 2003 (Public Law 108–79)
(‘‘PREA’’); the NICS Improvement Amendments Act of 2007 (Public Law 110–180); the
Violence Against Women Reauthorization
Act of 2013 (Public Law 113–4) (‘‘the 2013
Act’’); the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act of 2016 (Public Law 114–198); the
First Step Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–391);
and other programs, $55,000,000, to remain
available until expended, of which—
(1) $33,000,000 is for criminal justice statistics programs and other activities as authorized by part C of title I of the 1968 Act; and
(2) $22,000,000 is for research, development,
and evaluation programs, and other activities as authorized by part B of title I of the
1968 Act and subtitle C of title II of the 2002
Act, and for activities authorized by or consistent with the First Step Act of 2018.
STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
ASSISTANCE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For grants, contracts, cooperative agreements, and other assistance authorized by
the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (Public Law 103–322) (‘‘the
1994 Act’’); the Omnibus Crime Control and
Safe Streets Act of 1968 (Public Law 90–351)
(‘‘the 1968 Act’’); the Justice for All Act of
2004 (Public Law 108–405); the Victims of
Child Abuse Act of 1990 (Public Law 101–647)
(‘‘the 1990 Act’’); the Trafficking Victims
Protection Reauthorization Act of 2005 (Public Law 109–164) (‘‘the TVPRA of 2005’’); the
Violence Against Women and Department of
Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005 (Public
Law 109–162) (‘‘the 2005 Act’’); the Adam
Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of
2006 (Public Law 109–248) (‘‘the Adam Walsh
Act’’); the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (Public Law 106–
386) (‘‘the Victims of Trafficking Act’’); the
NICS Improvement Amendments Act of 2007
(Public Law 110–180); subtitle C of title II of
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (Public
Law 107–296) (‘‘the 2002 Act’’); the Prison
Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (Public Law
108–79) (‘‘PREA’’); the Second Chance Act of
2007 (Public Law 110–199); the Prioritizing
Resources and Organization for Intellectual
Property Act of 2008 (Public Law 110–403); the
Victims of Crime Act of 1984 (Public Law 98–
473); the Mentally Ill Offender Treatment
and Crime Reduction Reauthorization and
Improvement Act of 2008 (Public Law 110–
416); the Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 (Public Law 113–4) (‘‘the
2013 Act’’); the Comprehensive Addiction and
Recovery Act of 2016 (Public Law 114–198)
(‘‘CARA’’); the Justice for All Reauthorization Act of 2016 (Public Law 114–324); Kevin
and Avonte’s Law (division Q of Public Law
115–141) (‘‘Kevin and Avonte’s Law’’); the
Keep Young Athletes Safe Act of 2018 (title
III of division S of Public Law 115–141) (‘‘the
Keep Young Athletes Safe Act’’); the STOP
School Violence Act of 2018 (title V of division S of Public Law 115–141) (‘‘the STOP
School Violence Act’’); the Fix NICS Act of
2018 (title VI of division S of Public Law 115–
141); the Project Safe Neighborhoods Grant
Program Authorization Act of 2018 (Public
Law 115–185); the SUPPORT for Patients and
Communities Act (Public Law 115–271); the

H158

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Second Chance Reauthorization Act of 2018
(Public Law 115–391); the Matthew Shepard
and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention
Act (Public Law 111–84); the Ashanti Alert
Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–401); the Missing
Persons and Unidentified Remains Act of
2019 (Public Law 116–277); the Jabara-Heyer
NO HATE Act (34 U.S.C. 30507); the Violence
Against Women Act Reauthorization Act of
2022 (division W of Public Law 117–103) (‘‘the
2022 Act’’); the Daniel Anderl Judicial Security and Privacy Act of 2022 (Public Law 117–
263); and other programs, $2,400,000,000, to remain available until expended as follows—
(1) $964,000,000 for the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant program as authorized by subpart 1 of part E of title I of
the 1968 Act (except that section 1001(c), and
the special rules for Puerto Rico under section 505(g), of title I of the 1968 Act shall not
apply for purposes of this Act), of which, notwithstanding such subpart 1—
(A) $12,500,000 is for an Officer Robert Wilson III memorial initiative on Preventing
Violence Against Law Enforcement and Ensuring Officer Resilience and Survivability
(VALOR);
(B) $3,000,000 is for the operation, maintenance, and expansion of the National Missing
and Unidentified Persons System;
(C) $6,000,000 is for a grant program for
State and local law enforcement to provide
officer training on responding to individuals
with mental illness or disabilities, including
for purposes described in the Law Enforcement De-Escalation Training Act of 2022
(Public Law 117–325);
(D) $2,500,000 is for a student loan repayment assistance program pursuant to section
952 of Public Law 110–315;
(E) $15,000,000 is for prison rape prevention
and prosecution grants to States and units of
local government, and other programs, as
authorized by PREA;
(F) $2,500,000 is for the Missing Americans
Alert Program (title XXIV of the 1994 Act),
as amended by Kevin and Avonte’s Law;
(G) $13,000,000 is for grants authorized
under the Project Safe Neighborhoods Grant
Authorization Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–
185);
(H) $11,500,000 is for the Capital Litigation
Improvement Grant Program, as authorized
by section 426 of Public Law 108–405, and for
grants for wrongful conviction review;
(I) $3,000,000 is for the program specified in
paragraph (1)(I) under the heading ‘‘State
and Local Law Enforcement Assistance’’ in
division B of Public Law 117–328;
(J) $1,000,000 is for the purposes of the
Ashanti Alert Communications Network as
authorized under the Ashanti Alert Act of
2018 (Public Law 115–401);
(K) $2,750,000 is for a grant program to replicate and support family-based alternative
sentencing programs;
(L) $3,000,000 is for a rural violent crime
initiative, including assistance for law enforcement;
(M) $3,000,000 is for grants authorized under
the Missing Persons and Unidentified Remains Act of 2019 (Public Law 116–277);
(N) $1,000,000 is for the purposes authorized
under section 1506 of the 2022 Act; and
(O) $537,978,926 is for discretionary grants
to improve the functioning of the criminal
justice system, to prevent or combat juvenile delinquency, and to assist victims of
crime (other than compensation), which
shall be made available for the OJP—Byrne
projects, and in the amounts, specified in the
table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included
for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided, That such amounts may not
be transferred for any other purpose;

(2) $202,500,000 for the State Criminal Alien
Assistance Program, as authorized by section 241(I)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1231(I)(5)): Provided, That
no jurisdiction shall request compensation
for any cost greater than the actual cost for
Federal immigration and other detainees
housed in State and local detention facilities;
(3) $83,500,000 for victim services programs
for victims of trafficking, as authorized by
section 107(b)(2) of the Victims of Trafficking
Act, by the TVPRA of 2005, or programs authorized under Public Law 113–4;
(4) $7,500,000 for a grant program to prevent
and address economic, high technology,
white collar, and Internet crime, including
as authorized by section 401 of Public Law
110–403, of which not less than $2,500,000 is for
intellectual property enforcement grants including as authorized by section 401, and
$2,000,000 is for grants to develop databases
on Internet of Things device capabilities and
to build and execute training modules for
law enforcement;
(5) $19,000,000 for sex offender management
assistance, as authorized by the Adam Walsh
Act, and related activities, of which
$1,000,000 is for the National Sex Offender
Public Website;
(6) $30,000,000 for the Patrick Leahy Bulletproof Vest Partnership Grant Program, as
authorized by section 2501 of title I of the
1968 Act: Provided, That $1,500,000 shall be
transferred directly to the National Institute
of Standards and Technology’s Office of Law
Enforcement Standards for research, testing,
and evaluation programs;
(7) $83,000,000 for grants to States to upgrade criminal and mental health records for
the National Instant Criminal Background
Check System, of which no less than
$24,000,000 shall be for grants made under the
authorities of the NICS Improvement
Amendments Act of 2007 (Public Law 110–180)
and Fix NICS Act of 2018;
(8) $32,500,000 for Paul Coverdell Forensic
Sciences Improvement Grants under part BB
of title I of the 1968 Act;
(9) $138,000,000 for DNA-related and forensic
programs and activities, of which—
(A) $115,000,000 is for the purposes authorized under section 2 of the DNA Analysis
Backlog Elimination Act of 2000 (Public Law
106–546) (the Debbie Smith DNA Backlog
Grant Program): Provided, That up to 4 percent of funds made available under this paragraph may be used for the purposes described
in the DNA Training and Education for Law
Enforcement, Correctional Personnel, and
Court Officers program (Public Law 108–405,
section 303);
(B) $6,000,000 is for other local, State, and
Federal forensic activities;
(C) $13,000,000 is for the purposes described
in the Kirk Bloodsworth Post-Conviction
DNA Testing Grant Program (Public Law
108–405, section 412); and
(D) $4,000,000 is for Sexual Assault Forensic
Exam Program grants, including as authorized by section 304 of Public Law 108–405;
(10) $50,000,000 for community-based grant
programs to improve the response to sexual
assault, including assistance for investigation and prosecution of related cold cases;
(11) $14,000,000 for the court-appointed special advocate program, as authorized by section 217 of the 1990 Act;
(12) $48,000,000 for assistance to Indian
Tribes;
(13) $111,000,000 for offender reentry programs and research, as authorized by the
Second Chance Act of 2007 (Public Law 110–
199) and by the Second Chance Reauthorization Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–391), without
regard to the time limitations specified at
section 6(1) of such Act, of which not to exceed—

January 8, 2026

(A) $8,000,000 is for a program to improve
State, local, and Tribal probation or parole
supervision efforts and strategies;
(B) $5,000,000 is for children of incarcerated
parents demonstration programs to enhance
and maintain parental and family relationships for incarcerated parents as a reentry or
recidivism reduction strategy;
(C) $5,000,000 is for additional replication
sites employing the Project HOPE Opportunity Probation with Enforcement model
implementing swift and certain sanctions in
probation, of which no less than $500,000 shall
be used for a project that provides training,
technical assistance, and best practices; and
(D) $10,000,000 is for a grant program for
crisis stabilization and community reentry,
as authorized by the Crisis Stabilization and
Community Reentry Act of 2020 (Public Law
116–281):
Provided, That up to $7,500,000 of funds made
available in this paragraph may be used for
performance-based awards for Pay for Success projects, of which up to $5,000,000 shall
be for Pay for Success programs implementing the Permanent Supportive Housing
Model and reentry housing;
(14) $403,000,000 for comprehensive opioid
use reduction activities, including as authorized by CARA, and for the following programs, which shall address opioid, stimulant,
and substance use disorders consistent with
underlying program authorities, of which—
(A) $86,000,000 is for Drug Courts, as authorized by section 1001(a)(25)(A) of title I of
the 1968 Act;
(B) $35,000,000 is for mental health courts
and adult and juvenile collaboration program grants, as authorized by parts V and
HH of title I of the 1968 Act, and the Mentally Ill Offender Treatment and Crime Reduction Reauthorization and Improvement
Act of 2008 (Public Law 110–416);
(C) $30,000,000 is for grants for Residential
Substance Abuse Treatment for State Prisoners, as authorized by part S of title I of the
1968 Act;
(D) $32,000,000 is for a veterans treatment
courts program, of which $4,000,000 is for a
national center for veterans justice;
(E) $35,000,000 is for a program to monitor
prescription drugs and scheduled listed
chemical products; and
(F) $185,000,000 is for a comprehensive
opioid, stimulant, and substance use disorder
program;
(15) $2,500,000 for a competitive grant program authorized by the Keep Young Athletes
Safe Act;
(16) $82,000,000 for grants to be administered by the Bureau of Justice Assistance for
purposes authorized under the STOP School
Violence Act;
(17) $3,000,000 for grants to State and local
law enforcement agencies for the expenses
associated with the investigation and prosecution of criminal offenses involving civil
rights, as authorized by the Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crimes Reauthorization
Act of 2016 (Public Law 114–325);
(18) $17,000,000 for grants to State, local,
and Tribal law enforcement agencies to conduct educational outreach and training on
hate crimes and to investigate and prosecute
hate crimes, as authorized by section 4704 of
the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr.
Hate Crimes Prevention Act (Public Law 111–
84);
(19) $9,000,000 for grants specified in paragraph (20) under the heading ‘‘State and
Local Law Enforcement Assistance’’ in division B of Public Law 117–328;
(20) $9,000,000 for programs authorized
under the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act (34
U.S.C. 30507);
(21) $84,000,000 for initiatives to improve
police-community
relations,
of
which
$15,000,000 is for a competitive matching

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

grant program for purchases of body-worn
cameras for State, local, and Tribal law enforcement; $19,000,000 is for a justice reinvestment initiative, for activities related to
criminal justice reform and recidivism reduction; and $50,000,000 is for a community
violence intervention and prevention initiative; and
(22) $7,500,000 for a grant program as authorized by the Daniel Anderl Judicial Security and Privacy Act of 2022 (Public Law 117–
263):
Provided, That, if a unit of local government
uses any of the funds made available under
this heading to increase the number of law
enforcement officers, the unit of local government will achieve a net gain in the number of law enforcement officers who perform
non-administrative public sector safety service: Provided further, That in the spending
plan submitted pursuant to section 528 of
this Act, the Office of Justice Programs shall
specifically and explicitly identify all
changes in the administration of competitive
grant programs for fiscal year 2026, including
changes to applicant eligibility, priority
areas or weightings, and the application review process.
JUVENILE JUSTICE PROGRAMS

For grants, contracts, cooperative agreements, and other assistance authorized by
the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 (Public Law 93–415) (‘‘the
1974 Act’’); title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (Public Law
90–351) (‘‘the 1968 Act’’); the Violence Against
Women and Department of Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005 (Public Law 109–162) (‘‘the
2005 Act’’); the Missing Children’s Assistance
Act (34 U.S.C. 11291 et seq.); the PROTECT
Act (Public Law 108–21); the Victims of Child
Abuse Act of 1990 (Public Law 101–647) (‘‘the
1990 Act’’); the Adam Walsh Child Protection
and Safety Act of 2006 (Public Law 109–248)
(‘‘the Adam Walsh Act’’); the PROTECT Our
Children Act of 2008 (Public Law 110–401)
(‘‘the 2008 Act’’); the Violence Against
Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 (Public
Law 113–4) (‘‘the 2013 Act’’); the Justice for
All Reauthorization Act of 2016 (Public Law
114–324); the Missing Children’s Assistance
Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–267); the Juvenile
Justice Reform Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–
385); the Victims of Crime Act of 1984 (chapter XIV of title II of Public Law 98–473) (‘‘the
1984 Act’’); the Comprehensive Addiction and
Recovery Act of 2016 (Public Law 114–198);
and
other
juvenile
justice
programs,
$375,000,000, to remain available until expended as follows—
(1) $65,000,000 for programs authorized by
section 221 of the 1974 Act, and for training
and technical assistance to assist small, nonprofit organizations with the Federal grants
process: Provided, That of the amounts provided under this paragraph, $500,000 shall be
for a competitive demonstration grant program to support emergency planning among
State, local, and Tribal juvenile justice residential facilities;
(2) $105,000,000 for youth mentoring grants;
(3) $50,500,000 for delinquency prevention,
of which, pursuant to sections 261 and 262 of
the 1974 Act—
(A) $4,000,000 shall be for grants to prevent
trafficking of girls;
(B) $16,000,000 shall be for the Tribal Youth
Program;
(C) $4,500,000 shall be for competitive
grants focusing on girls in the juvenile justice system;
(D) $10,500,000 shall be for an initiative relating to youth affected by opioids, stimulants, and substance use disorder;
(E) $9,000,000 shall be for an initiative relating to children exposed to violence; and
(F) $2,000,000 shall be for the Arts in Juvenile Justice Demonstration Program;

(4) $43,000,000 for programs authorized by
the Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990;
(5) $105,000,000 for missing and exploited
children programs, including as authorized
by sections 404(b) and 405(a) of the 1974 Act
(except that section 102(b)(4)(B) of the 2008
Act (Public Law 110–401) shall not apply for
purposes of this Act);
(6) $4,500,000 for child abuse training programs for judicial personnel and practitioners, as authorized by section 222 of the
1990 Act; and
(7) $2,000,000 for a program to improve juvenile indigent defense:
Provided, That not more than 10 percent of
each amount may be used for research, evaluation, and statistics activities designed to
benefit the programs or activities authorized: Provided further, That not more than 2
percent of the amounts designated under
paragraphs (1) through (3) and (6) may be
used for training and technical assistance:
Provided further, That the two preceding provisos shall not apply to grants and projects
administered pursuant to sections 261 and 262
of the 1974 Act and to missing and exploited
children programs.
PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER BENEFITS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For payments and expenses authorized
under section 1001(a)(4) of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of
1968, such sums as are necessary (including
amounts for administrative costs), to remain
available until expended; and $34,800,000 for
payments authorized by section 1201(b) of
such Act and for educational assistance authorized by section 1218 of such Act, to remain available until expended: Provided,
That notwithstanding section 205 of this Act,
upon a determination by the Attorney General that emergent circumstances require
additional funding for such disability and
education payments, the Attorney General
may transfer such amounts to ‘‘Public Safety Officer Benefits’’ from available appropriations for the Department of Justice as
may be necessary to respond to such circumstances: Provided further, That any
transfer pursuant to the preceding proviso
shall be treated as a reprogramming under
section 505 of this Act and shall not be available for obligation or expenditure except in
compliance with the procedures set forth in
that section.
COMMUNITY ORIENTED POLICING SERVICES
COMMUNITY ORIENTED POLICING SERVICES
PROGRAMS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For activities authorized by the Violent
Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of
1994 (Public Law 103–322); the Omnibus Crime
Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (‘‘the
1968 Act’’); the Violence Against Women and
Department of Justice Reauthorization Act
of 2005 (Public Law 109–162) (‘‘the 2005 Act’’);
the American Law Enforcement Heroes Act
of 2017 (Public Law 115–37); the Law Enforcement Mental Health and Wellness Act of 2017
(Public Law 115–113) (‘‘the LEMHW Act’’);
the SUPPORT for Patients and Communities
Act (Public Law 115–271); the Supporting and
Treating Officers In Crisis Act of 2019 (Public
Law 116–32) (‘‘the STOIC Act’’); and the Law
Enforcement De-Escalation Training Act of
2022 (Public Law 117–325), $800,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided,
That any balances made available through
prior year deobligations shall only be available in accordance with section 505 of this
Act: Provided further, That of the amount
provided under this heading—
(1) $253,093,613 is for grants under section
1701 of title I of the 1968 Act (34 U.S.C. 10381)
for the hiring and rehiring of additional career law enforcement officers under part Q of

H159

such title notwithstanding subsection (i) of
such section: Provided, That, notwithstanding section 1704(c) of such title (34
U.S.C. 10384(c)), funding for hiring or rehiring a career law enforcement officer may not
exceed $125,000 unless the Director of the Office of Community Oriented Policing Services grants a waiver from this limitation:
Provided further, That of the amounts appropriated under this paragraph, $32,000,000 is
for improving Tribal law enforcement, including hiring, equipment, training, antimethamphetamine activities, and antiopioid activities: Provided further, That of
the amounts appropriated under this paragraph, $44,000,000 is for regional information
sharing activities, as authorized by part M of
title I of the 1968 Act, which shall be transferred to and merged with ‘‘Research, Evaluation, and Statistics’’ for administration by
the Office of Justice Programs: Provided further, That of the amounts appropriated under
this paragraph, no less than $4,000,000 is to
support the Tribal Access Program: Provided
further, That of the amounts appropriated
under this paragraph, $10,000,000 is for training, peer mentoring, mental health program
activities, and other support services as authorized under the LEMHW Act and the
STOIC Act: Provided further, That of the
amounts appropriated under this paragraph,
$5,500,000 is for the collaborative reform
model of technical assistance in furtherance
of section 1701 of title I of the 1968 Act (34
U.S.C. 10381);
(2) $11,500,000 is for activities authorized by
the POLICE Act of 2016 (Public Law 114–199);
(3) $13,500,000 is for competitive grants to
State law enforcement agencies in States
with high seizures of precursor chemicals,
finished methamphetamine, laboratories,
and laboratory dump seizures: Provided, That
funds appropriated under this paragraph
shall be utilized for investigative purposes to
locate or investigate illicit activities, including precursor diversion, laboratories, or
methamphetamine traffickers;
(4) $34,500,000 is for competitive grants to
statewide law enforcement agencies in
States with high rates of primary treatment
admissions for heroin and other opioids: Provided, That these funds shall be utilized for
investigative purposes to locate or investigate illicit activities, including activities
related to the distribution of heroin or unlawful distribution of prescription opioids, or
unlawful heroin and prescription opioid traffickers through statewide collaboration;
(5) $53,000,000 is for competitive grants to
be administered by the Community Oriented
Policing Services Office for purposes authorized under the STOP School Violence Act
(title V of division S of Public Law 115–141);
(6) $18,000,000 is for community policing development activities in furtherance of section 1701 of title I of the 1968 Act (34 U.S.C.
10381);
(7) $401,406,387 is for a law enforcement
technologies and interoperable communications program, and related law enforcement
and public safety equipment, which shall be
made available for the COPS Tech projects,
and in the amounts, specified in the table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for
this division in the explanatory statement
described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act):
Provided, That such amounts may not be
transferred for any other purpose: Provided
further, That grants funded by such amounts
shall not be subject to section 1703 of title I
of the 1968 Act (34 U.S.C. 10383); and
(8) $15,000,000 is for activities authorized by
the Law Enforcement De-Escalation Training Act of 2022 (Public Law 117–325).

H160

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

GENERAL PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 201. In addition to amounts otherwise
made available in this title for official reception and representation expenses, a total of
not to exceed $50,000 from funds appropriated
to the Department of Justice in this title
shall be available to the Attorney General
for official reception and representation expenses.
SEC. 202. None of the funds appropriated by
this title shall be available to pay for an
abortion, except where the life of the mother
would be endangered if the fetus were carried
to term, or in the case of rape or incest: Provided, That should this prohibition be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, this section shall be null
and void.
SEC. 203. None of the funds appropriated
under this title shall be used to require any
person to perform, or facilitate in any way
the performance of, any abortion.
SEC. 204. Nothing in the preceding section
shall remove the obligation of the Director
of the Bureau of Prisons to provide escort
services necessary for a female inmate to receive such service outside the Federal facility: Provided, That nothing in this section in
any way diminishes the effect of section 203
intended to address the philosophical beliefs
of individual employees of the Bureau of
Prisons.
SEC. 205. Not to exceed 5 percent of any appropriation made available for the current
fiscal year for the Department of Justice in
this Act may be transferred between such appropriations, but no such appropriation, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall
be increased by more than 10 percent by any
such transfers: Provided, That any transfer
pursuant to this section shall be treated as a
reprogramming of funds under section 505 of
this Act and shall not be available for obligation except in compliance with the procedures set forth in that section: Provided further, That this section shall not apply to the
following—
(1) paragraph 1(O) under the heading
‘‘State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance’’; and
(2) paragraph (7) under the heading ‘‘Community Oriented Policing Services Programs’’.
SEC. 206. None of the funds made available
under this title may be used by the Federal
Bureau of Prisons or the United States Marshals Service for the purpose of transporting
an individual who is a prisoner pursuant to
conviction for crime under State or Federal
law and is classified as a maximum or high
security prisoner, other than to a prison or
other facility certified by the Federal Bureau of Prisons as appropriately secure for
housing such a prisoner.
SEC. 207. (a) None of the funds appropriated
by this Act may be used by Federal prisons
to purchase cable television services, or to
rent or purchase audiovisual or electronic
media or equipment used primarily for recreational purposes.
(b) Subsection (a) does not preclude the
rental, maintenance, or purchase of audiovisual or electronic media or equipment for
inmate training, religious, or educational
programs.
SEC. 208. None of the funds made available
under this title shall be obligated or expended for any new or enhanced information
technology program having total estimated
development costs in excess of $100,000,000,
unless the Deputy Attorney General and the
investment review board certify to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate that the information technology program has appro-

priate program management controls and
contractor oversight mechanisms in place,
and that the program is compatible with the
enterprise architecture of the Department of
Justice.
SEC. 209. The notification thresholds and
procedures set forth in section 505 of this Act
shall apply to deviations from the amounts
designated for specific activities in this Act
and in the explanatory statement described
in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act), and to any use of
deobligated balances of funds provided under
this title in previous years.
SEC. 210. None of the funds appropriated by
this Act may be used to plan for, begin, continue, finish, process, or approve a publicprivate competition under the Office of Management and Budget Circular A–76 or any
successor administrative regulation, directive, or policy for work performed by employees of the Bureau of Prisons or of Federal Prison Industries, Incorporated.
SEC. 211. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no funds shall be available for
the salary, benefits, or expenses of any
United States Attorney assigned dual or additional responsibilities by the Attorney
General or his designee that exempt that
United States Attorney from the residency
requirements of section 545 of title 28, United
States Code.
SEC. 212. At the discretion of the Attorney
General, and in addition to any amounts
that otherwise may be available (or authorized to be made available) by law, with respect to funds appropriated by this title
under the headings ‘‘Research, Evaluation
and Statistics’’, ‘‘State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance’’, and ‘‘Juvenile Justice Programs’’—
(1) up to 2 percent of funds made available
to the Office of Justice Programs for grant
or reimbursement programs may be used by
such Office to provide training and technical
assistance; and
(2) up to 2 percent of funds made available
for grant or reimbursement programs under
such headings, except for amounts appropriated specifically for research, evaluation,
or statistical programs administered by the
National Institute of Justice and the Bureau
of Justice Statistics, shall be transferred to
and merged with funds provided to the National Institute of Justice and the Bureau of
Justice Statistics, to be used by them for research, evaluation, or statistical purposes,
without regard to the authorizations for
such grant or reimbursement programs.
This section shall not apply to paragraph
1(O) under the heading ‘‘State and Local Law
Enforcement Assistance’’.
SEC. 213. Upon request by a grantee for
whom the Attorney General has determined
there is a fiscal hardship, the Attorney General may, with respect to funds appropriated
in this or any other Act making appropriations for fiscal years 2023 through 2026 for the
following programs, waive the following requirements:
(1) For the adult and juvenile offender
State and local reentry demonstration
projects under part FF of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of
1968 (34 U.S.C. 10631 et seq.), the requirements under section 2976(g)(1) of such part
(34 U.S.C. 10631(g)(1)).
(2) For grants to protect inmates and safeguard communities as authorized by section
6 of the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003
(34 U.S.C. 30305(c)(3)), the requirements of
section 6(c)(3) of such Act.
SEC. 214. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, section 20109(a) of subtitle A of
title II of the Violent Crime Control and Law
Enforcement Act of 1994 (34 U.S.C. 12109(a))
shall not apply to amounts made available
by this or any other Act.

January 8, 2026

SEC. 215. None of the funds made available
under this Act, other than for the national
instant criminal background check system
established under section 103 of the Brady
Handgun Violence Prevention Act (34 U.S.C.
40901), may be used by a Federal law enforcement officer to facilitate the transfer of an
operable firearm to an individual if the Federal law enforcement officer knows or suspects that the individual is an agent of a
drug cartel, unless law enforcement personnel of the United States continuously
monitor or control the firearm at all times.
SEC. 216. (a) None of the income retained in
the Department of Justice Working Capital
Fund pursuant to title I of Public Law 102–
140 (105 Stat. 784; 28 U.S.C. 527 note) shall be
available for obligation during fiscal year
2026, except up to $12,000,000 may be obligated for implementation of a unified Department of Justice financial management
system.
(b) Not to exceed $30,000,000 of the unobligated balances transferred to the capital account of the Department of Justice Working
Capital Fund pursuant to title I of Public
Law 102–140 (105 Stat. 784; 28 U.S.C. 527 note)
shall be available for obligation in fiscal
year 2026, and any use, obligation, transfer,
or allocation of such funds shall be treated
as a reprogramming of funds under section
505 of this Act.
(c) Not to exceed $10,000,000 of the excess
unobligated balances available under section
524(c)(8)(E) of title 28, United States Code,
shall be available for obligation during fiscal
year 2026, and any use, obligation, transfer or
allocation of such funds shall be treated as a
reprogramming of funds under section 505 of
this Act.
SEC. 217. Discretionary funds that are made
available in this Act for the Office of Justice
Programs may be used to participate in Performance Partnership Pilots authorized
under such authorities as have been enacted
for Performance Partnership Pilots in appropriations acts in prior fiscal years and the
current fiscal year.
SEC. 218. The Attorney General shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
quarterly reports on the Crime Victims
Fund, the Working Capital Fund, the Three
Percent Fund, and the Assets Forfeiture
Fund. Such quarterly reports shall contain
at least the same level of information and
detail for each Fund as was provided to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate in fiscal
year 2024.
SEC. 219. None of the funds made available
under this Act may be used to conduct, contract for, or otherwise support, live tissue
training, unless the Attorney General issues
a written, non-delegable determination that
such training is medically necessary and
cannot be replicated by alternatives.
SEC. 220. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used by the Department
of Justice to target or investigate parents
who peacefully protest at school board meetings and are not suspected of engaging in unlawful activity.
SEC. 221. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to investigate or
prosecute religious institutions on the basis
of their religious beliefs.
SEC. 222. Any remaining unobligated balances from amounts originally made available under the heading ‘‘Federal Bureau of
Investigation—Construction’’ in the Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2016
(title II of division B of Public Law 114–113)
or in the Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2017 (title II of division B of Public
Law 115–31) for the new Federal Bureau of Investigation consolidated headquarters facility in the National Capital Region that were

January 8, 2026

H161

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

subsequently reprogrammed pursuant to a
notification received by the Committees on
Appropriations from the Assistant Attorney
General for Administration on July 1, 2025,
may not be further obligated until the Federal Bureau of Investigation submits to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate the contracted and completed architectural and engineering plan for the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s new headquarters building for
review: Provided, That classified portions of
the architectural and engineering plan shall
be submitted through a classified annex.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Department
of Justice Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE III
SCIENCE
OFFICE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY
For necessary expenses of the Office of
Science and Technology Policy, in carrying
out the purposes of the National Science and
Technology Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6601 et seq.), hire
of passenger motor vehicles, and services as
authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United
States Code, not to exceed $2,250 for official
reception and representation expenses, and
rental of conference rooms in the District of
Columbia, $7,965,000.
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
ADMINISTRATION
SCIENCE

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, in the conduct and support of
science research and development activities,
including research, development, operations,
support, and services; maintenance and repair, facility planning and design; space
flight, spacecraft control, and communications activities; program management; personnel and related costs, including uniforms
or allowances therefor, as authorized by sections 5901 and 5902 of title 5, United States
Code; travel expenses; purchase and hire of
passenger motor vehicles; and purchase,
lease, charter, maintenance, and operation of
mission
and
administrative
aircraft,
$7,250,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That of the amount
made available under this heading, the total
amount specified in the table under this
heading in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this Act) shall be for the purposes and in not less than the amount for
each such purpose specified in such table.
AERONAUTICS

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, in the conduct and support of aeronautics research and development activities,
including research, development, operations,
support, and services; maintenance and repair, facility planning and design; space
flight, spacecraft control, and communications activities; program management; personnel and related costs, including uniforms
or allowances therefor, as authorized by sections 5901 and 5902 of title 5, United States
Code; travel expenses; purchase and hire of
passenger motor vehicles; and purchase,
lease, charter, maintenance, and operation of
mission
and
administrative
aircraft,
$935,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
SPACE TECHNOLOGY

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, in the conduct and support of
space technology research and development
activities, including research, development,
operations, support, and services; maintenance and repair, facility planning and design; space flight, spacecraft control, and
communications activities; program management; personnel and related costs, includ-

ing uniforms or allowances therefor, as authorized by sections 5901 and 5902 of title 5,
United States Code; travel expenses; purchase and hire of passenger motor vehicles;
and purchase, lease, charter, maintenance,
and operation of mission and administrative
aircraft, $920,500,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027.
EXPLORATION

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, in the conduct and support of exploration research and development activities, including research, development, operations, support, and services; maintenance
and repair, facility planning and design;
space flight, spacecraft control, and communications activities; program management;
personnel and related costs, including uniforms or allowances therefor, as authorized
by sections 5901 and 5902 of title 5, United
States Code; travel expenses; purchase and
hire of passenger motor vehicles; and purchase, lease, charter, maintenance, and operation of mission and administrative aircraft,
$7,783,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration shall
provide to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate, concurrent with the annual
budget submission, a 5-year budget profile
for an integrated system that includes the
Space Launch System, the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle, Human Landing System,
and associated ground systems.
SPACE OPERATIONS

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, in the conduct and support of
space operations research and development
activities, including research, development,
operations, support and services; space
flight, spacecraft control, and communications activities, including operations, production, and services; maintenance and repair, facility planning and design; program
management; personnel and related costs, including uniforms or allowances therefor, as
authorized by sections 5901 and 5902 of title 5,
United States Code; travel expenses; purchase and hire of passenger motor vehicles;
and purchase, lease, charter, maintenance,
and operation of mission and administrative
aircraft, $4,175,000,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING, AND
MATHEMATICS ENGAGEMENT

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, in the conduct and support of aerospace and aeronautical education research
and development activities, including research, development, operations, support,
and services; program management; personnel and related costs, including uniforms
or allowances therefor, as authorized by sections 5901 and 5902 of title 5, United States
Code; travel expenses; purchase and hire of
passenger motor vehicles; and purchase,
lease, charter, maintenance, and operation of
mission
and
administrative
aircraft,
$143,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That of the amount
made available under this heading, the total
amount specified in the table under this
heading in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act) shall be
for the purposes and in not less than the
amount for each such purpose specified in
such table.
SAFETY, SECURITY AND MISSION SERVICES
For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, in the conduct and support of
science, aeronautics, space technology, exploration, space operations and education research and development activities, including
research, development, operations, support,

and services; maintenance and repair, facility planning and design; space flight, spacecraft control, and communications activities; program management; personnel and related costs, including uniforms or allowances
therefor, as authorized by sections 5901 and
5902 of title 5, United States Code; travel expenses; purchase and hire of passenger motor
vehicles; not to exceed $63,000 for official reception and representation expenses; and
purchase, lease, charter, maintenance, and
operation of mission and administrative aircraft, $3,000,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2027: Provided, That if available balances in the ‘‘Science, Space, and
Technology Education Trust Fund’’ are not
sufficient to provide for the grant disbursements required under the third and fourth
provisos under such heading in the Department of Housing and Urban DevelopmentIndependent Agencies Appropriations Act,
1989 (Public Law 100–404) as amended by the
Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 1995
(Public Law 103–327), up to $1,000,000 shall be
available from amounts made available
under this heading to make such grant disbursements: Provided further, That of the
amounts appropriated under this heading,
$58,417,135 shall be made available for the
SSMS projects, and in the amounts, specified
in the table titled ‘‘Community Project
Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’
included for this division in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided further, That the amounts
made available for the projects referenced in
the preceding proviso may not be transferred
for any other purpose.
CONSTRUCTION AND ENVIRONMENTAL
COMPLIANCE AND RESTORATION

For necessary expenses for construction of
facilities including repair, rehabilitation, revitalization, and modification of facilities,
construction of new facilities and additions
to existing facilities, facility planning and
design, and restoration, and acquisition or
condemnation of real property, as authorized
by law, and environmental compliance and
restoration, $185,336,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2031: Provided, That proceeds from leases deposited into this account
shall be available for a period of 5 years to
the extent and in amounts as provided in annual appropriations Acts: Provided further,
That such proceeds referred to in the preceding proviso shall be available for obligation for fiscal year 2026 in an amount not to
exceed $33,000,000: Provided further, That each
annual budget request shall include an annual estimate of gross receipts and collections and proposed use of all funds collected
pursuant to section 20145 of title 51, United
States Code.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the Inspector General Act of 1978, $46,500,000, of which
$2,500,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

Funds for any announced prize otherwise
authorized shall remain available, without
fiscal year limitation, until a prize is
claimed or the offer is withdrawn.
Not to exceed 10 percent of any appropriation made available for the current fiscal
year for the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration in this Act may be transferred between such appropriations, but no
such appropriation, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall be increased by more
than 20 percent by any such transfers. Any

H162

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

funds transferred to ‘‘Construction and Environmental Compliance and Restoration’’ for
construction activities shall not increase
that account by more than 20 percent. Balances so transferred shall be merged with
and available for the same purposes and the
same time period as the appropriations to
which transferred. Any transfer pursuant to
this provision shall be treated as a reprogramming of funds under section 505 of
this Act and shall not be available for obligation except in compliance with the procedures set forth in that section.
Not to exceed 5 percent of any appropriation provided for the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration under previous appropriations Acts that remains available for
obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026
may be transferred between such appropriations, but no such appropriation, except as
otherwise specifically provided, shall be increased by more than 10 percent by any such
transfers. Any transfer pursuant to this provision shall retain its original availability
and shall be treated as a reprogramming of
funds under section 505 of this Act and shall
not be available for obligation except in
compliance with the procedures set forth in
that section.
The spending plan required by this Act
shall be provided by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration at the
theme, program, project, and activity level.
The spending plan, as well as any subsequent
change of an amount established in that
spending plan that meets the notification requirements of section 505 of this Act, shall be
treated as a reprogramming under section
505 of this Act and shall not be available for
obligation or expenditure except in compliance with the procedures set forth in that
section.
Not more than 20 percent or $50,000,000,
whichever is less, of the amounts made available in the current-year Construction and
Environmental Compliance and Restoration
(CECR) appropriation may be applied to
CECR projects funded under previous years’
CECR appropriations. Use of current-year
funds under this provision shall be treated as
a reprogramming of funds under section 505
of this Act and shall not be available for obligation except in compliance with the procedures set forth in that section.
Of the amounts made available in this Act
under the heading ‘‘Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Engagement’’
(‘‘STEM Engagement’’), up to $5,000,000 shall
be available to jointly fund, with an additional amount of up to $1,000,000 each from
amounts made available in this Act under
the headings ‘‘Science’’, ‘‘Aeronautics’’,
‘‘Space Technology’’, ‘‘Exploration’’, and
‘‘Space Operations’’, projects and activities
for engaging students in STEM and increasing STEM research capacities of universities, including Minority Serving Institutions.
Not to exceed $38,500,000 made available for
the current fiscal year in this Act within
‘‘Safety, Security and Mission Services’’
may be transferred to the Working Capital
Fund of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration. Balances so transferred
shall be available until expended only for activities described in section 30102(b)(3) of
title 51, United States Code, as amended by
this Act, and shall remain available until expended. Any transfer pursuant to this provision shall be treated as a reprogramming of
funds under section 505 of this Act and shall
not be available for obligation except in
compliance with the procedures set forth in
that section.
There is hereby established in the Treasury of the United States a fund to be known
as the ‘‘National Aeronautics and Space Administration Nonrecurring Expenses Fund’’

(the Fund). Unobligated balances of expired
discretionary funds appropriated for this or
any succeeding fiscal year from the General
Fund of the Treasury to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
by this or any other Act may be transferred
(not later than the end of the fifth fiscal
year after the last fiscal year for which such
funds are available for the purposes for
which appropriated) into the Fund. Amounts
deposited in the Fund shall be available until
expended, and in addition to such other
funds as may be available for such purposes,
for facilities infrastructure improvements,
including nonrecurring maintenance, necessary for the operation of NASA, subject to
approval by the Office of Management and
Budget. Amounts in the Fund may not be
available for the purpose described in subsection (b)(3) of section 30102 of title 51,
United States Code. Amounts in the Fund
may be obligated only after the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate are notified at least 30
days in advance of the planned use of funds.
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
RESEARCH AND RELATED ACTIVITIES

For necessary expenses in carrying out the
National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42
U.S.C. 1861 et seq.), and Public Law 86–209 (42
U.S.C. 1880 et seq.); services as authorized by
section 3109 of title 5, United States Code;
maintenance and operation of aircraft and
purchase of flight services for research support; acquisition of aircraft; and authorized
travel; $7,176,500,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027: Provided, That of
the amounts appropriated under this heading, not to exceed $700,000,000 shall remain
available until expended for polar research
and operations support, and for reimbursement to other Federal agencies for operational and science support and logistical
and other related activities for the United
States Antarctic program: Provided further,
That of the amounts in the preceding proviso, not less than $118,800,000 shall be for
U.S. Antarctic Logistical Support: Provided
further, That receipts for scientific support
services and materials furnished by the National Research Centers and other National
Science Foundation supported research facilities may be credited to this appropriation.
MAJOR RESEARCH EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
CONSTRUCTION

For necessary expenses for the acquisition,
construction, commissioning, and upgrading
of major research equipment, facilities, and
other such capital assets pursuant to the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42
U.S.C. 1861 et seq.), including authorized
travel, $251,000,000, to remain available until
expended.
STEM EDUCATION

For necessary expenses in carrying out
science, mathematics, and engineering education and human resources programs and
activities pursuant to the National Science
Foundation Act of 1950 (42 U.S.C. 1861 et
seq.), including services as authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, authorized travel, and rental of conference
rooms in the District of Columbia,
$938,250,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That of the amount
made available under this heading, the total
amount specified in the table under this
heading in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act) shall be
for the purposes and in not less than the
amount for each such purpose specified in
such table.
AGENCY OPERATIONS AND AWARD MANAGEMENT

For agency operations and award management necessary in carrying out the National

January 8, 2026

Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42 U.S.C.
1861 et seq.); services authorized by section
3109 of title 5, United States Code; hire of
passenger motor vehicles; uniforms or allowances therefor, as authorized by sections 5901
and 5902 of title 5, United States Code; rental
of conference rooms in the District of Columbia; and reimbursement of the Department of Homeland Security for security
guard services; $355,000,000: Provided, That
not to exceed $12,000 is for official reception
and representation expenses: Provided further, That contracts may be entered into
under this heading in fiscal year 2026 for
maintenance and operation of facilities and
for other services to be provided during the
next fiscal year.
OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL SCIENCE BOARD

For necessary expenses (including payment
of salaries, authorized travel, hire of passenger motor vehicles, the rental of conference rooms in the District of Columbia,
and the employment of experts and consultants under section 3109 of title 5, United
States Code) involved in carrying out section
4 of the National Science Foundation Act of
1950 (42 U.S.C. 1863) and Public Law 86–209 (42
U.S.C. 1880 et seq.), $5,090,000: Provided, That
not to exceed $2,500 shall be available for official reception and representation expenses.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General as authorized by the Inspector General Act of 1978, $24,160,000, of which
$1,500,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

Not to exceed 5 percent of any appropriation made available for the current fiscal
year for the National Science Foundation in
this Act may be transferred between such appropriations, but no such appropriation shall
be increased by more than 10 percent by any
such transfers. Any transfer pursuant to this
paragraph shall be treated as a reprogramming of funds under section 505 of this Act
and shall not be available for obligation except in compliance with the procedures set
forth in that section.
The Director of the National Science Foundation (NSF) shall notify the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate at least 30 days in advance of any planned divestment through
transfer, decommissioning, termination, or
deconstruction of any NSF-owned facilities
or any NSF capital assets (including land,
structures, and equipment) valued greater
than $2,500,000.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Science Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE IV
RELATED AGENCIES
COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Commission
on Civil Rights, including hire of passenger
motor vehicles, $14,350,000: Provided, That
none of the funds appropriated in this paragraph may be used to employ any individuals
under Schedule C of subpart C of part 213 of
title 5 of the Code of Federal Regulations exclusive of one special assistant for each Commissioner: Provided further, That none of the
funds appropriated in this paragraph shall be
used to reimburse Commissioners for more
than 75 billable days, with the exception of
the chairperson, who is permitted 125 billable
days: Provided further, That the Chair may
accept and use any gift or donation to carry
out the work of the Commission: Provided
further, That none of the funds appropriated
in this paragraph shall be used for any activity or expense that is not explicitly authorized by section 3 of the Civil Rights Commission Act of 1983 (42 U.S.C. 1975a): Provided

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

further, That notwithstanding the preceding
proviso, $2,000,000 shall be used to separately
fund the Commission on the Social Status of
Black Men and Boys.
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission as authorized by title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, the Equal Pay Act of 1963,
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990,
section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973,
the Civil Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) of
2008 (Public Law 110–233), the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 (Public Law 110–325), the
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111–2), and Public Law 117–328, including
services as authorized by section 3109 of title
5, United States Code; hire of passenger
motor vehicles as authorized by section
1343(b) of title 31, United States Code; nonmonetary awards to private citizens; and up
to $32,500,000 for payments to State and local
enforcement agencies for authorized services
to the Commission, $435,382,000, of which
$2,788,000 shall be for the Office of the Inspector General: Provided, That the Commission
is authorized to make available for official
reception and representation expenses not to
exceed $2,250 from available funds: Provided
further, That the Commission may take no
action to implement any workforce repositioning, restructuring, or reorganization
until such time as the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate have been notified of such
proposals, in accordance with the reprogramming requirements of section 505 of this Act:
Provided further, That the Chair may accept
and use any gift or donation to carry out the
work of the Commission.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the International Trade Commission, including hire
of passenger motor vehicles and services as
authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United
States Code, and not to exceed $2,250 for official reception and representation expenses,
$122,000,000, to remain available until expended, of which not less than $2,096,176 shall
be for the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5
U.S.C. 401 et seq.).
LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION
PAYMENT TO THE LEGAL SERVICES
CORPORATION

For payment to the Legal Services Corporation to carry out the purposes of the
Legal Services Corporation Act of 1974,
$540,000,000, of which $496,300,000 is for basic
field programs and required independent audits; $6,000,000 is for the Office of Inspector
General, of which such amounts as may be
necessary may be used to conduct additional
audits of recipients; $26,200,000 is for management and grants oversight; $4,750,000 is for
client self-help and information technology;
$4,750,000 is for a Pro Bono Innovation Fund;
and $2,000,000 is for loan repayment assistance: Provided, That the budget execution for
the payment to the Legal Services Corporation shall be carried out in this fiscal year in
the same manner as such budget execution
was carried out in fiscal year 2024 and such
payment shall be made in full as an annual
installment paid to the Corporation at the
beginning of the fiscal year in such amounts
as specified under this heading: Provided further, That the Legal Services Corporation
may continue to provide locality pay to officers and employees at a rate no greater than

that provided by the Federal Government to
Washington, DC-based employees as authorized by section 5304 of title 5, United States
Code, notwithstanding section 1005(d) of the
Legal Services Corporation Act (42 U.S.C.
2996d(d)): Provided further, That the authorities provided in section 205 of this Act shall
be applicable to the Legal Services Corporation: Provided further, That, for the purposes
of section 505 of this Act, the Legal Services
Corporation shall be considered an agency of
the United States Government.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—LEGAL SERVICES
CORPORATION

None of the funds appropriated in this Act
to the Legal Services Corporation shall be
expended for any purpose prohibited or limited by, or contrary to any of the provisions
of, sections 501, 502, 503, 504, 505, and 506 of
Public Law 105–119, and all funds appropriated in this Act to the Legal Services Corporation shall be subject to the same terms
and conditions set forth in such sections, except that all references in sections 502 and
503 to 1997 and 1998 shall be deemed to refer
instead to 2025 and 2026, respectively.
Section 501 of the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and
Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1998
(Public Law 105–119) is amended by adding
the following new subsection at the end:
‘‘(d) MODIFIED GOVERNING BODY REQUIREMENT.—For purposes of this Act, section
1007(c) of the Legal Services Corporation Act
(42 U.S.C. 2996f(c)) shall be applied by substituting ‘33 percent’ for ‘60 percent’.’’.
Section 502(2) of the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and
Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1996
(Public Law 104–134) is amended by striking
subparagraph (B) in its entirety and replacing it with the following:
‘‘(B) is governed by a board of directors or
other governing body, 33 percent of which is
comprised of attorneys who are members of
the bar of a State, as defined in section
1002(8) of the Legal Services Corporation Act
(42 U.S.C. 2996a(8)), in which the legal assistance is to be provided;’’.
MARINE MAMMAL COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Marine
Mammal Commission as authorized by title
II of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of
1972 (16 U.S.C. 1361 et seq.), $4,300,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES TRADE
REPRESENTATIVE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Office of the
United States Trade Representative, including the hire of passenger motor vehicles and
the employment of experts and consultants
as authorized by section 3109 of title 5,
United States Code, $65,000,000, of which
$1,000,000 shall remain available until expended: Provided, That of the total amount
made available under this heading, not to exceed $124,000 shall be available for official reception and representation expenses.
TRADE ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For activities of the United States Trade
Representative authorized by section 611 of
the Trade Facilitation and Trade Enforcement Act of 2015 (19 U.S.C. 4405), including
transfers, $23,000,000, to be derived from the
Trade Enforcement Trust Fund: Provided,
That any transfer pursuant to subsection
(d)(1) of such section shall be treated as a reprogramming under section 505 of this Act.
STATE JUSTICE INSTITUTE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the State Justice Institute, as authorized by the State

H163

Justice Institute Act of 1984 (42 U.S.C. 10701
et seq.) $7,640,000, of which $500,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That not to exceed $2,250 shall be
available for official reception and representation expenses: Provided further, That, for
the purposes of section 505 of this Act, the
State Justice Institute shall be considered
an agency of the United States Government.
TITLE V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS AND RESCISSIONS OF
FUNDS)

SEC. 501. No part of any appropriation contained in this Act shall be used for publicity
or propaganda purposes not authorized by
the Congress.
SEC. 502. No part of any appropriation contained in this Act shall remain available for
obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless expressly so provided herein.
SEC. 503. The expenditure of any appropriation under this Act for any consulting service through procurement contract, pursuant
to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code,
shall be limited to those contracts where
such expenditures are a matter of public
record and available for public inspection,
except where otherwise provided under existing law, or under existing Executive order
issued pursuant to existing law.
SEC. 504. If any provision of this Act or the
application of such provision to any person
or circumstances shall be held invalid, the
remainder of the Act and the application of
each provision to persons or circumstances
other than those as to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 505. (a) None of the funds provided
under this Act, or provided under previous
appropriations Acts to the agencies funded
by this Act that remain available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, or
provided from any accounts in the Treasury
of the United States derived by the collection of fees available to the agencies funded
by this Act, shall be available for obligation
or expenditure through a reprogramming of
funds that: (1) creates or initiates a new program, project, or activity; (2) eliminates a
program, project, or activity; (3) increases
funds or personnel by any means for any
project or activity for which funds have been
denied or restricted; (4) relocates an office or
employees; (5) reorganizes or renames offices, programs, or activities; (6) contracts
out or privatizes any functions or activities
presently performed by Federal employees;
(7) augments existing programs, projects, or
activities in excess of $500,000 or 5 percent,
whichever is less, or reduces by 5 percent
funding for any program, project, or activity, or numbers of personnel by 5 percent; (8)
results from any general savings, including
savings from a reduction in personnel, which
would result in a change in existing programs, projects, or activities as approved by
Congress; unless the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations are notified 30
days in advance of such reprogramming of
funds.
SEC. 506. (a) If it has been finally determined by a court or Federal agency that any
person intentionally affixed a label bearing a
‘‘Made in America’’ inscription, or any inscription with the same meaning, to any
product sold in or shipped to the United
States that is not made in the United States,
the person shall be ineligible to receive any
contract or subcontract made with funds
made available in this Act, pursuant to the
debarment, suspension, and ineligibility procedures described in sections 9.400 through
9.409 of title 48, Code of Federal Regulations.
(b)(1) To the extent practicable, with respect to authorized purchases of promotional
items, funds made available by this Act shall

H164

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

be used to purchase items that are manufactured, produced, or assembled in the United
States, its territories or possessions.
(2) The term ‘‘promotional items’’ has the
meaning given the term in OMB Circular A–
87, Attachment B, Item (1)(f)(3).
SEC. 507. (a) The Departments of Commerce
and Justice, the National Science Foundation, and the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration shall provide to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate a quarterly report on the status of balances of appropriations at the account level. For unobligated, uncommitted balances and unobligated, committed balances the quarterly reports shall separately identify the amounts
attributable to each source year of appropriation from which the balances were derived. For balances that are obligated, but
unexpended, the quarterly reports shall separately identify amounts by the year of obligation.
(b) The report described in subsection (a)
shall be submitted within 30 days of the end
of each quarter.
(c) If a department or agency is unable to
fulfill any aspect of a reporting requirement
described in subsection (a) due to a limitation of a current accounting system, the department or agency shall fulfill such aspect
to the maximum extent practicable under
such accounting system and shall identify
and describe in each quarterly report the extent to which such aspect is not fulfilled.
SEC. 508. Any costs incurred by a department or agency funded under this Act resulting from, or to prevent, personnel actions
taken in response to funding reductions included in this Act shall be absorbed within
the total budgetary resources available to
such department or agency: Provided, That
the authority to transfer funds between appropriations accounts as may be necessary
to carry out this section is provided in addition to authorities included elsewhere in this
Act: Provided further, That use of funds to
carry out this section shall be treated as a
reprogramming of funds under section 505 of
this Act and shall not be available for obligation or expenditure except in compliance
with the procedures set forth in that section:
Provided further, That for the Department of
Commerce, this section shall also apply to
actions taken for the care and protection of
loan collateral or grant property.
SEC. 509. None of the funds provided by this
Act shall be available to promote the sale or
export of tobacco or tobacco products, or to
seek the reduction or removal by any foreign
country of restrictions on the marketing of
tobacco or tobacco products, except for restrictions which are not applied equally to
all tobacco or tobacco products of the same
type.
SEC. 510. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, amounts deposited or available
in the Fund established by section 1402 of
chapter XIV of title II of Public Law 98–473
(34 U.S.C. 20101) in any fiscal year in excess
of $1,950,000,000 shall not be available for obligation until the following fiscal year: Provided, That notwithstanding section 1402(d)
of such Act, of the amounts available from
the Fund for obligation: (1) $10,000,000 shall
be transferred to the Department of Justice
Office of Inspector General and remain available until expended for oversight and auditing purposes associated with this section;
and (2) 5 percent shall be available to the Office for Victims of Crime for grants, consistent with the requirements of the Victims
of Crime Act, to Indian Tribes to improve
services for victims of crime.
SEC. 511. None of the funds made available
to the Department of Justice in this Act
may be used to discriminate against or denigrate the religious or moral beliefs of stu-

dents who participate in programs for which
financial assistance is provided from those
funds, or of the parents or legal guardians of
such students.
SEC. 512. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be transferred to any department, agency, or instrumentality of the
United States Government, except pursuant
to a transfer made by, or transfer authority
provided in, this Act or any other appropriations Act.
SEC. 513. (a) The Inspectors General of the
Department of Commerce, the Department
of Justice, the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, the National Science
Foundation, and the Legal Services Corporation shall conduct audits, pursuant to the Inspector General Act (5 U.S.C. App.), of grants
or contracts for which funds are appropriated by this Act, and shall submit reports
to Congress on the progress of such audits,
which may include preliminary findings and
a description of areas of particular interest,
within 180 days after initiating such an audit
and every 180 days thereafter until any such
audit is completed.
(b) Within 60 days after the date on which
an audit described in subsection (a) by an Inspector General is completed, the Secretary,
Attorney General, Administrator, Director,
or President, as appropriate, shall make the
results of the audit available to the public on
the Internet website maintained by the Department, Administration, Foundation, or
Corporation, respectively. The results shall
be made available in redacted form to exclude—
(1) any matter described in section 552(b) of
title 5, United States Code; and
(2) sensitive personal information for any
individual, the public access to which could
be used to commit identity theft or for other
inappropriate or unlawful purposes.
(c) Any person awarded a grant or contract
funded by amounts appropriated by this Act
shall submit a statement to the Secretary of
Commerce, the Attorney General, the Administrator, Director, or President, as appropriate, certifying that no funds derived from
the grant or contract will be made available
through a subcontract or in any other manner to another person who has a financial interest in the person awarded the grant or
contract.
(d) The provisions of the preceding subsections of this section shall take effect 30
days after the date on which the Director of
the Office of Management and Budget, in
consultation with the Director of the Office
of Government Ethics, determines that a
uniform set of rules and requirements, substantially similar to the requirements in
such subsections, consistently apply under
the executive branch ethics program to all
Federal departments, agencies, and entities.
SEC. 514. (a) None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available under this Act
may be used by the Departments of Commerce and Justice, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, or the National
Science Foundation to acquire a high-impact
or moderate-impact information system, as
defined for security categorization in the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s (NIST) Federal Information Processing Standard Publication 199, ‘‘Standards
for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems’’ unless the
agency has—
(1) reviewed the supply chain risk for the
information systems against criteria developed by NIST and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to inform acquisition decisions for high-impact and moderate-impact
information systems within the Federal Government;
(2) reviewed the supply chain risk from the
presumptive awardee against available and

January 8, 2026

relevant threat information provided by the
FBI and other appropriate agencies; and
(3) in consultation with the FBI or other
appropriate Federal entity, conducted an assessment of any risk of cyber-espionage or
sabotage associated with the acquisition of
such system, including any risk associated
with such system being produced, manufactured, or assembled by one or more entities
identified by the United States Government
as posing a cyber threat, including but not
limited to, those that may be owned, directed, or subsidized by the People’s Republic of China, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, or
the Russian Federation.
(b) None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this Act may be
used to acquire a high-impact or moderateimpact information system reviewed and assessed under subsection (a) unless the head
of the assessing entity described in subsection (a) has—
(1) developed, in consultation with NIST,
the FBI, and supply chain risk management
experts, a mitigation strategy for any identified risks;
(2) determined, in consultation with NIST
and the FBI, that the acquisition of such system is in the national interest of the United
States; and
(3) reported that determination to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate and the
agency Inspector General.
SEC. 515. None of the funds made available
in this Act shall be used in any way whatsoever to support or justify the use of torture
by any official or contract employee of the
United States Government.
SEC. 516. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to include in any
new bilateral or multilateral trade agreement the text of—
(1) paragraph 2 of article 16.7 of the United
States–Singapore Free Trade Agreement;
(2) paragraph 4 of article 17.9 of the United
States–Australia Free Trade Agreement; or
(3) paragraph 4 of article 15.9 of the United
States–Morocco Free Trade Agreement.
SEC. 517. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to authorize or issue
a national security letter in contravention of
any of the following laws authorizing the
Federal Bureau of Investigation to issue national security letters: The Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978; The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986; The Fair
Credit Reporting Act; The National Security
Act of 1947; USA PATRIOT Act; USA FREEDOM Act of 2015; and the laws amended by
these Acts.
SEC. 518. If at any time during any quarter,
the program manager of a project within the
jurisdiction of the Departments of Commerce or Justice, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, or the National
Science Foundation totaling more than
$75,000,000 has reasonable cause to believe
that the total program cost has increased by
10 percent or more, the program manager
shall immediately inform the respective Secretary, Administrator, or Director. The Secretary, Administrator, or Director shall notify the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations within 30 days in writing of
such increase, and shall include in such notice: the date on which such determination
was made; a statement of the reasons for
such increases; the action taken and proposed to be taken to control future cost
growth of the project; changes made in the
performance or schedule milestones and the
degree to which such changes have contributed to the increase in total program costs
or procurement costs; new estimates of the
total project or procurement costs; and a

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

statement validating that the project’s management structure is adequate to control
total project or procurement costs.
SEC. 519. Funds appropriated by this Act,
or made available by the transfer of funds in
this Act, for intelligence or intelligence related activities are deemed to be specifically
authorized by the Congress for purposes of
section 504 of the National Security Act of
1947 (50 U.S.C. 3094) during fiscal year 2026
until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for fiscal year 2026.
SEC. 520. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this Act may be
used to enter into a contract in an amount
greater than $5,000,000 or to award a grant in
excess of such amount unless the prospective
contractor or grantee certifies in writing to
the agency awarding the contract or grant
that, to the best of its knowledge and belief,
the contractor or grantee has filed all Federal tax returns required during the three
years preceding the certification, has not
been convicted of a criminal offense under
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and has
not, more than 90 days prior to certification,
been notified of any unpaid Federal tax assessment for which the liability remains
unsatisfied, unless the assessment is the subject of an installment agreement or offer in
compromise that has been approved by the
Internal Revenue Service and is not in default, or the assessment is the subject of a
non-frivolous administrative or judicial proceeding.
(RESCISSIONS)

SEC. 521. (a) Of the unobligated balances
available to the Department of Commerce,
the following funds are hereby permanently
rescinded, not later than September 30, 2026,
from the following accounts in the specified
amounts—
(1) ‘‘Economic Development Administration—Economic
Development
Assistance
Programs’’, $60,000,000, only from prior year
appropriations that remain available until
expended; and
(2) ‘‘Census Working Capital Fund’’,
$15,000,000.
(b) Of the unobligated balances from prior
year appropriations available to the Department of Justice, the following funds are
hereby permanently rescinded, not later
than September 30, 2026, from the following
accounts in the specified amounts—
(1) ‘‘State and Local Law Enforcement Activities—Office
on
Violence
Against
Women—Violence Against Women Prevention and Prosecution Programs’’, $36,000,000;
(2) ‘‘State and Local Law Enforcement Activities—Office
of
Justice
Programs’’,
$250,000,000; and
(3) ‘‘State and Local Law Enforcement Activities—Community Oriented Policing Services’’, $25,000,000.
(c) Of the unobligated balances available to
the Department of Justice, the following
funds are hereby permanently rescinded, not
later than September 30, 2026, from the following accounts in the specified amounts—
(1) ‘‘Working Capital Fund’’, $210,000,000;
and
(2) ‘‘Legal Activities—Assets Forfeiture
Fund’’, $113,200,000.
(d) The Departments of Commerce and Justice shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate a report no later than September 1, 2026, specifying the amount of each
rescission made pursuant to subsections (a),
(b), and (c).
(e) The amounts rescinded in subsections
(a), (b), and (c) shall not be from amounts
that were designated by the Congress as an
emergency or disaster relief requirement
pursuant to the concurrent resolution on the
budget or the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.

(f) The amounts rescinded pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) shall not be from—
(1) amounts provided under subparagraph
(Q) of paragraph (1) under the heading ‘‘State
and Local Law Enforcement Activities—Office of Justice Programs—State and Local
Law Enforcement Assistance’’ in title II of
division B of Public Law 117–103 or Public
Law 117–328, or amounts provided under subparagraph (R) of paragraph (1) under the
heading ‘‘State and Local Law Enforcement
Activities—Office of Justice Programs—
State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance’’ in title II of division C of Public Law
118–42; or
(2) amounts provided under paragraph (7)
under the heading ‘‘State and Local Law Enforcement Activities—Community Oriented
Policing Services—Community Oriented Policing Services Programs’’ in title II of division B of Public Law 117–103 or Public Law
117–328, or amounts provided under paragraph (7) under the heading ‘‘State and Local
Law Enforcement Activities—Community
Oriented Policing Services—Community Oriented Policing Services Programs’’ in title II
of division C of Public Law 118–42.
SEC. 522. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to purchase first
class or premium airline travel in contravention of sections 301–10.122 through 301–10.124
of title 41 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
SEC. 523. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to send or otherwise
pay for the attendance of more than 50 employees from a Federal department or agency, who are stationed in the United States,
at any single conference occurring outside
the United States unless—
(1) such conference is a law enforcement
training or operational conference for law
enforcement personnel and the majority of
Federal employees in attendance are law enforcement personnel stationed outside the
United States; or
(2) such conference is a scientific conference and the department or agency head
determines that such attendance is in the
national interest and notifies the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate within at least
15 days of that determination and the basis
for that determination.
SEC. 524. The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall instruct any department, agency, or instrumentality of the
United States receiving funds appropriated
under this Act to track undisbursed balances
in expired grant accounts and include in its
annual performance plan and performance
and accountability reports the following:
(1) Details on future action the department, agency, or instrumentality will take
to resolve undisbursed balances in expired
grant accounts.
(2) The method that the department, agency, or instrumentality uses to track
undisbursed balances in expired grant accounts.
(3) Identification of undisbursed balances
in expired grant accounts that may be returned to the Treasury of the United States.
(4) In the preceding 3 fiscal years, details
on the total number of expired grant accounts with undisbursed balances (on the
first day of each fiscal year) for the department, agency, or instrumentality and the
total finances that have not been obligated
to a specific project remaining in the accounts.
SEC. 525. To the extent practicable, funds
made available in this Act should be used to
purchase light bulbs that are ‘‘Energy Star’’
qualified or have the ‘‘Federal Energy Management Program’’ designation.
SEC. 526. (a) None of the funds made available by this Act may be used for the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-

H165

tion (NASA) or the Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP) to develop, design, plan, promulgate, implement, or execute a bilateral policy, program, order, or
contract of any kind to participate, collaborate, or coordinate bilaterally in any way
with China or any Chinese-owned company
unless such activities are specifically authorized by a law enacted after the date of
enactment of this Act.
(b) None of the funds made available by
this Act may be used to effectuate the
hosting of official Chinese visitors at facilities belonging to or utilized by NASA.
(c) The limitations described in subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to activities which NASA or OSTP, after consultation with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, have certified—
(1) pose no risk of resulting in the transfer
of technology, data, or other information
with national security or economic security
implications to China or a Chinese-owned
company; and
(2) will not involve knowing interactions
with officials who have been determined by
the United States to have direct involvement
with violations of human rights.
(d) Any certification made under subsection (c) shall be submitted to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate, and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, no later
than 30 days prior to the activity in question
and shall include a description of the purpose
of the activity, its agenda, its major participants, and its location and timing.
SEC. 527. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to maintain or
establish a computer network unless such
network blocks the viewing, downloading,
and exchanging of pornography.
(b) Nothing in subsection (a) shall limit
the use of funds necessary for any Federal,
State, Tribal, or local law enforcement agency or any other entity carrying out criminal
investigations, prosecution, adjudication, or
other law enforcement- or victim assistancerelated activity.
SEC. 528. The Departments of Commerce
and Justice, the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, the National Science
Foundation, the Commission on Civil Rights,
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the International Trade Commission, the Legal Services Corporation, the
Marine Mammal Commission, the Offices of
Science and Technology Policy and the
United States Trade Representative, and the
State Justice Institute shall submit spending plans, signed by the respective department or agency head, to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate not later than 45 days
after the date of enactment of this Act: Provided, That the spending plans submitted
pursuant to this section shall contain at
least the same level of detail as the spending
plans submitted pursuant to this section in
fiscal year 2024.
SEC. 529. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this
Act may be used to pay award or incentive
fees for contractor performance that has
been judged to be below satisfactory performance or for performance that does not
meet the basic requirements of a contract.
SEC. 530. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used in contravention of
section 7606 (‘‘Legitimacy of Industrial Hemp
Research’’) of the Agricultural Act of 2014
(Public Law 113–79) by the Department of
Justice or the Drug Enforcement Administration.
SEC. 531. None of the funds made available
under this Act to the Department of Justice
may be used, with respect to any of the

H166

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

States of Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont,
Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming, or with respect to the
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of
the Northern Mariana Islands, the United
States Virgin Islands, Guam, or Puerto Rico,
to prevent any of them from implementing
their own laws that authorize the use, distribution, possession, or cultivation of medical marijuana.
SEC. 532. The Department of Commerce,
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the National Science Foundation shall provide a quarterly report to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate on any official travel to China by any employee of
such Department or agency, including the
purpose of such travel.
SEC. 533. Of the amounts made available by
this Act, not less than 10 percent of each
total amount provided, respectively, for Public Works grants authorized by the Public
Works and Economic Development Act of
1965 and grants authorized by section 27 of
the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 U.S.C. 3722) shall be allocated for assistance in persistent poverty
counties: Provided, That for purposes of this
section, the term ‘‘persistent poverty counties’’ means any county that has had 20 percent or more of its population living in poverty over the past 30 years, as measured by
the 1993 Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates, the 2000 decennial census, and the
most recent Small Area Income and Poverty
Estimates, or any Territory or possession of
the United States.
SEC. 534. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law or treaty, none of the funds
appropriated or otherwise made available
under this Act or any other Act may be expended or obligated by a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States
to pay administrative expenses or to compensate an officer or employee of the United
States in connection with requiring an export license for the export to Canada of components, parts, accessories or attachments
for firearms listed in Category I, section
121.1 of title 22, Code of Federal Regulations
(International Trafficking in Arms Regulations (ITAR), part 121, as it existed on April
1, 2005) with a total value not exceeding $500
wholesale in any transaction, provided that
the conditions of subsection (b) of this section are met by the exporting party for such
articles.
(b) The foregoing exemption from obtaining an export license—
(1) does not exempt an exporter from filing
any Shipper’s Export Declaration or notification letter required by law, or from being
otherwise eligible under the laws of the
United States to possess, ship, transport, or
export the articles enumerated in subsection
(a); and
(2) does not permit the export without a license of—
(A) fully automatic firearms and components and parts for such firearms, other than
for end use by the Federal Government, or a
Provincial or Municipal Government of Canada;
(B) barrels, cylinders, receivers (frames) or
complete breech mechanisms for any firearm
listed in Category I, other than for end use
by the Federal Government, or a Provincial
or Municipal Government of Canada; or

(C) articles for export from Canada to another foreign destination.
(c) In accordance with this section, the
District Directors of Customs and postmasters shall permit the permanent or temporary export without a license of any unclassified articles specified in subsection (a)
to Canada for end use in Canada or return to
the United States, or temporary import of
Canadian-origin items from Canada for end
use in the United States or return to Canada
for a Canadian citizen.
(d) The President may require export licenses under this section on a temporary
basis if the President determines, upon publication first in the Federal Register, that
the Government of Canada has implemented
or maintained inadequate import controls
for the articles specified in subsection (a),
such that a significant diversion of such articles has and continues to take place for use
in international terrorism or in the escalation of a conflict in another nation. The
President shall terminate the requirements
of a license when reasons for the temporary
requirements have ceased.
SEC. 535. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States receiving
appropriated funds under this Act or any
other Act shall obligate or expend in any
way such funds to pay administrative expenses or the compensation of any officer or
employee of the United States to deny any
application submitted pursuant to 22 U.S.C.
2778(b)(1)(B) and qualified pursuant to 27 CFR
section 478.112 or .113, for a permit to import
United States origin ‘‘curios or relics’’ firearms, parts, or ammunition.
SEC. 536. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to pay the salaries
or expenses of personnel to deny, or fail to
act on, an application for the importation of
any model of shotgun if—
(1) all other requirements of law with respect to the proposed importation are met;
and
(2) no application for the importation of
such model of shotgun, in the same configuration, had been denied by the Attorney General prior to January 1, 2011, on the basis
that the shotgun was not particularly suitable for or readily adaptable to sporting purposes.
SEC. 537. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be obligated or expended to
implement the Arms Trade Treaty until the
Senate approves a resolution of ratification
for the Treaty.
SEC. 538. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available in this or any
other Act may be used to transfer, release,
or assist in the transfer or release to or within the United States, its territories, or possessions Khalid Sheikh Mohammed or any
other detainee who—
(1) is not a United States citizen or a member of the Armed Forces of the United
States; and
(2) is or was held on or after June 24, 2009,
at the United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by the Department of Defense.
SEC. 539. (a) None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available in this or any
other Act may be used to construct, acquire,
or modify any facility in the United States,
its territories, or possessions to house any
individual described in subsection (c) for the
purposes of detention or imprisonment in the
custody or under the effective control of the
Department of Defense.
(b) The prohibition in subsection (a) shall
not apply to any modification of facilities at
United States Naval Station, Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba.
(c) An individual described in this subsection is any individual who, as of June 24,

January 8, 2026

2009, is located at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and who—
(1) is not a citizen of the United States or
a member of the Armed Forces of the United
States; and
(2) is—
(A) in the custody or under the effective
control of the Department of Defense; or
(B) otherwise under detention at United
States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.
SEC. 540. Funds made available to the Department of Commerce and the Department
of Justice in this Act and any remaining unobligated balances of funds made available
to the Department of Commerce and the Department of Justice in prior year Acts, other
than amounts designated by the Congress as
being for an emergency requirement pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the budget
or the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 or from amounts
made available under the heading ‘‘Department of Justice—Legal Activities—Fees and
Expenses of Witnesses’’, shall be available to
provide payments pursuant to section
901(i)(2) of title IX of division J of the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020
(22 U.S.C. 2680b(i)(2)): Provided, That payments made pursuant to the matter preceding this proviso may not exceed $5,000,000
for the Department of Commerce and
$10,000,000 for the Department of Justice.
SEC. 541. (a)(1) Within 45 days of enactment
of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall
allocate amounts made available from the
Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce
Semiconductors (CHIPS) for America Fund
for fiscal year 2026 pursuant to paragraphs
(1) and (2) of section 102(a) of the CHIPS Act
of 2022 (division A of Public Law 117–167) not
otherwise allocated pursuant to section
546(a)(1)(B) of division C of Public Law 118–42,
including the transfer authority in such
paragraphs of that section of that Act, to the
accounts specified, in the amounts specified,
and for the projects and activities specified,
in the table titled ‘‘Department of Commerce Allocation of National Institute of
Standards and Technology Funds: CHIPS
Act Fiscal Year 2026’’ in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
(2) Within 45 days of enactment of this Act,
the Director of the National Science Foundation shall allocate amounts made available
from the Creating Helpful Incentives to
Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) for America Workforce and Education Fund for fiscal
year 2026 pursuant to section 102(d)(1) of the
CHIPS Act of 2022 (division A of Public Law
117–167), to the account specified, in the
amounts specified, and for the projects and
activities specified in the table titled ‘‘National Science Foundation Allocation of
Funds: CHIPS Act Fiscal Year 2026’’ in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act).
(b) Neither the President nor his designee
may allocate any amounts that are made
available for any fiscal year under section
102(a)(2)(A) of the CHIPS Act of 2022 or under
section 102(d)(2) of such Act if there is in effect an Act making or continuing appropriations for part of a fiscal year for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, Science,
and Related Agencies: Provided, That in any
fiscal year, the matter preceding this proviso
shall not apply to the allocation, apportionment, or allotment of amounts for continuing administration of programs allocated funds from the CHIPS for America
Fund, which may be allocated only in
amounts that are no more than the allocation for such purposes in subsection (a) of
this section.

January 8, 2026

H167

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(c) Subject to prior consultation with, and
the regular notification procedures of, the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate, and subject to the terms and conditions in section
505 of this Act—
(1) the Secretary of Commerce may reallocate funds allocated to Industrial Technology Services for section 9906 of Public
Law 116–283 by subsection (a)(1) of this section; and
(2) the Director of the National Science
Foundation may reallocate funds allocated
to the CHIPS for America Workforce and
Education Fund by subsection (a)(2) of this
section.
(d) Concurrent with the annual budget submission of the President for fiscal year 2027,
the Director of the National Science Foundation, as appropriate, shall submit to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate proposed
allocations by account and by program,
project, or activity, with detailed justifications, for amounts made available under section 102(d)(2) of the CHIPS Act of 2022 for fiscal year 2027.
(e) The Department of Commerce and the
National Science Foundation, as appropriate, shall each provide the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and Senate quarterly reports on the
status of balances of projects and activities
funded by the CHIPS for America Fund for
amounts allocated pursuant to subsection
(a)(1) of this section and prior appropriations
Acts, the status of balances of projects and
activities funded by the Public Wireless Supply Chain Innovation Fund for amounts allocated pursuant to section 543(a)(2) of division
B of Public Law 117–328, and the status of
balances of projects and activities funded by
the CHIPS for America Workforce and Education Fund for amounts allocated pursuant
to subsection (a)(2) of this section and prior
appropriations Acts, including all uncommitted, committed, and unobligated funds.
SEC. 542. In making Federal financial assistance, the Department of Commerce, the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the National Science Foundation
shall continue to apply the negotiated indirect cost rates in section 200.414 of title 2,
Code of Federal Regulations, including with
respect to the approval of deviations from
negotiated indirect cost rates, to the same
extent and in the same manner as such negotiated indirect cost rates were applied in fiscal year 2024: Provided, That none of the
funds appropriated in this or prior Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Acts, or otherwise made
available to the Department of Commerce,
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the National Science Foundation may be used to develop, modify, or implement changes to such fiscal year 2024 negotiated indirect cost rates.
SEC. 543. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to move the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) Canine Training Center or the
ATF National Canine Division from Front
Royal, Virginia, to another location.
SEC. 544. (a) Of the amounts made available
under the heading ‘‘Department of Commerce—National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration—Operations, Research, and
Facilities’’, $507,000,000 shall be derived by
transfer from the unobligated balances of
amounts previously appropriated under such
heading for fiscal year 2026 in division J of
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(Public Law 117–58): Provided, That amounts
derived by transfer pursuant to this subsection shall continue to be treated as
amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5.

(b) Of the amounts made available under
the heading ‘‘Department of Commerce—National Telecommunications and Information
Administration—Salaries and Expenses’’,
$50,000,000 shall be derived by transfer from
the unobligated balances of amounts previously appropriated under the heading ‘‘National Telecommunications and Information
Administration’’ in division J of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public
Law 117–58), of which $25,000,000 shall be from
amounts repurposed or transferred for salaries and expenses, administration, and oversight of programs pursuant to section 542 of
the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024
(Public Law 118–42) and $25,000,000 shall be
from amounts made available under the
heading ‘‘Middle Mile Deployment’’: Provided, That amounts derived by transfer pursuant to this subsection shall continue to be
treated as amounts specified in section 103(b)
of division A of Public Law 118–5.
(c) Of the amounts made available under
the heading ‘‘Department of Commerce—
Economic Development Administration—
Economic Development Assistance Programs’’, $16,276,000 shall be derived by transfer from the unobligated balances of
amounts previously appropriated under the
heading ‘‘National Telecommunications and
Information Administration’’ in division J of
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(Public Law 117–58) and repurposed or transferred for salaries and expenses, administration, and oversight of programs pursuant to
section 542 of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118–42): Provided,
That amounts derived by transfer pursuant
to this subsection shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in section 103(b) of
division A of Public Law 118–5.
(d) Of the amounts made available under
the heading ‘‘Department of Commerce—National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration—Procurement, Acquisition and Construction’’, $44,000,000 shall be derived by
transfer from the unobligated balances of the
Department of Commerce Nonrecurring Expenses Fund.
This division may be cited as the ‘‘Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
DIVISION B—ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
TITLE I
CORPS OF ENGINEERS—CIVIL
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
CORPS OF ENGINEERS—CIVIL
The following appropriations shall be expended under the direction of the Secretary
of the Army and the supervision of the Chief
of Engineers for authorized civil functions of
the Department of the Army pertaining to
river and harbor, flood and storm damage reduction, shore protection, aquatic ecosystem
restoration, and related efforts.
INVESTIGATIONS

For expenses necessary where authorized
by law for the collection and study of basic
information pertaining to river and harbor,
flood and storm damage reduction, shore
protection, aquatic ecosystem restoration,
and related needs; for surveys and detailed
studies, and plans and specifications of proposed river and harbor, flood and storm damage reduction, shore protection, and aquatic
ecosystem restoration projects, and related
efforts prior to construction; for restudy of
authorized projects; and for miscellaneous
investigations, and, when authorized by law,
surveys and detailed studies, and plans and
specifications of projects prior to construction, $150,384,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That the Secretary shall
not deviate from the work plan, once the

plan has been submitted to the Committees
on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress.
CONSTRUCTION

For expenses necessary for the construction of river and harbor, flood and storm
damage reduction, shore protection, aquatic
ecosystem restoration, and related projects
authorized by law; for conducting detailed
studies, and plans and specifications, of such
projects (including those involving participation by States, local governments, or private
groups) authorized or made eligible for selection by law (but such detailed studies, and
plans and specifications, shall not constitute
a commitment of the Government to construction); $3,169,966,000, to remain available
until expended; of which $217,983,000, to be
derived from the Harbor Maintenance Trust
Fund, shall be to cover the Federal share of
construction costs for facilities under the
Dredged Material Disposal Facilities program; and of which such sums as are necessary to cover 25 percent of the costs of construction, replacement, rehabilitation, and
expansion of inland waterways projects shall
be derived from the Inland Waterways Trust
Fund, except as otherwise specifically provided for in law: Provided, That the Secretary shall not deviate from the work plan,
once the plan has been submitted to the
Committees on Appropriations of both
Houses of Congress.
MISSISSIPPI RIVER AND TRIBUTARIES

For expenses necessary for flood damage
reduction projects and related efforts in the
Mississippi River alluvial valley below Cape
Girardeau, Missouri, as authorized by law,
$531,588,000, to remain available until expended, of which $9,768,000, to be derived
from the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund,
shall be to cover the Federal share of eligible
operation and maintenance costs for inland
harbors: Provided, That the Secretary shall
not deviate from the work plan, once the
plan has been submitted to the Committees
on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For expenses necessary for the operation,
maintenance, and care of existing river and
harbor, flood and storm damage reduction,
aquatic ecosystem restoration, and related
projects authorized by law; providing security for infrastructure owned or operated by
the Corps, including administrative buildings and laboratories; maintaining harbor
channels provided by a State, municipality,
or other public agency that serve essential
navigation needs of general commerce,
where authorized by law; surveying and
charting northern and northwestern lakes
and
connecting
waters;
clearing
and
straightening channels; and removing obstructions to navigation, $6,013,217,000, to remain available until expended, of which
$3,245,249,000, to be derived from the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund, shall be to cover
the Federal share of eligible operations and
maintenance costs for coastal harbors and
channels, and for inland harbors, of which
$416,760,000 shall be for donor and energy
ports as specified in section 102 of the Water
Resources Development Act of 2020; of which
$40,000,000, to be derived from the general
fund of the Treasury, shall be for the design
and construction to replace Federal dredges,
in addition to amounts otherwise made
available for such purposes, and shall be
transferred to and merged with funds available for such purposes in the revolving fund
established by the first section of the Act of
July 27, 1953 (33 U.S.C. 576); of which such
sums as may be necessary shall be derived
from amounts collected in this or prior fiscal

H168

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

years under section 210 of the Flood Control
Act of 1968 (16 U.S.C. 460d–3) and are not otherwise appropriated shall be for resource protection, research, interpretation, and maintenance activities related to resource protection in the areas at which outdoor recreation
is available; of which such sums as become
available from fees collected under section
217 of Public Law 104–303 shall be used to
cover the cost of operation and maintenance
of the dredged material disposal facilities for
which such fees have been collected; and of
which $62,000,000, to be derived from the general fund of the Treasury, shall be to carry
out subsection (c) of section 2106 of the
Water Resources Reform and Development
Act of 2014 (33 U.S.C. 2238c) and shall be designated as being for such purpose pursuant
to paragraph (2) of section 14003 of division B
of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security Act (Public Law 116–136): Provided,
That funding derived from the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund for donor and energy
ports shall be allocated solely in accordance
with section 2106 of the Water Resources Reform and Development Act of 2014: Provided
further, That 1 percent of the total amount of
funds provided for each of the programs,
projects, or activities funded under this
heading shall not be allocated to a field operating activity prior to the beginning of the
fourth quarter of the fiscal year and shall be
available for use by the Chief of Engineers to
fund such emergency activities as the Chief
of Engineers determines to be necessary and
appropriate, and that the Chief of Engineers
shall allocate during the fourth quarter any
remaining funds which have not been used
for emergency activities proportionally in
accordance with the amounts provided for
the programs, projects, or activities: Provided further, That the Secretary shall not
deviate from the work plan, once the plan
has been submitted to the Committees on
Appropriations of both Houses of Congress.
REGULATORY PROGRAM

For expenses necessary for administration
of laws pertaining to regulation of navigable
waters and wetlands, $221,000,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027.
FORMERLY UTILIZED SITES REMEDIAL ACTION
PROGRAM

For expenses necessary to clean up contamination from sites in the United States
resulting from work performed as part of the
Nation’s early atomic energy program,
$75,000,000, to remain available until expended.
FLOOD CONTROL AND COASTAL EMERGENCIES

For expenses necessary to prepare for
flood, hurricane, and other natural disasters
and support emergency operations, repairs,
and other activities in response to such disasters as authorized by law, $40,000,000, to remain available until expended.
EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the supervision
and general administration of the civil
works program in the headquarters of the
Corps of Engineers and the offices of the Division Engineers; and for costs of management and operation of the Humphreys Engineer Center Support Activity, the Institute
for Water Resources, the United States
Army Engineer Research and Development
Center, and the United States Army Corps of
Engineers Finance Center allocable to the
civil works program, $220,000,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, of which
not to exceed $5,000 may be used for official
reception and representation purposes and
only during the current fiscal year: Provided,
That no part of any other appropriation provided in this title shall be available to fund
the civil works activities of the Office of the
Chief of Engineers or the civil works execu-

tive direction and management activities of
the division offices: Provided further, That
any Flood Control and Coastal Emergencies
appropriation may be used to fund the supervision and general administration of emergency operations, repairs, and other activities in response to any flood, hurricane, or
other natural disaster.
OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
ARMY FOR CIVIL WORKS

For the Office of the Assistant Secretary of
the Army for Civil Works as authorized by 10
U.S.C. 7016(b)(3), $7,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That
not more than 75 percent of such amount
may be obligated or expended until the Assistant Secretary submits to the Committees
on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress the report required under section 101(d)
of this Act and a work plan that allocates at
least 95 percent of the additional funding
provided under each heading in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the
matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act), to specific programs, projects, or
activities.
WATER INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE AND
INNOVATION PROGRAM ACCOUNT

For the cost of direct loans and for the cost
of guaranteed loans, as authorized by the
Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014, $2,200,000, to remain available until expended, for safety projects to
maintain, upgrade, and repair dams identified in the National Inventory of Dams with
a primary owner type of State, local government, public utility, or private: Provided,
That any activity that results in a decrease
in the hazard or a decrease in the potential
consequences of poor performance of a dam
structure listed on the National Inventory of
Dams with a primary owner type of State,
local government, public utility, or private
shall be considered a safety project eligible
for funds provided under this heading for
that purpose by this or any prior Act: Provided further, That any safety project for a
dam identified in the National Inventory of
Dams with a primary owner type of State,
local government, public utility, or private
shall be eligible under section 5026(1)(A) of
the Water Resources Reform and Development Act of 2014 (Public Law 113–121) (33
U.S.C. 3905(1)(A)) for funds provided under
this heading for that purpose by this or any
prior Act: Provided further, That no project
may be funded with amounts provided under
this heading in this or any prior Act for a
dam that is identified as jointly owned in the
National Inventory of Dams and where one
of those joint owners is the Federal Government: Provided further, That not later than 90
days following the end of any submittal period occurring before or after the date of enactment of this Act of a solicitation of preliminary applications from prospective borrowers seeking credit assistance of funds
made available under this heading by this or
any prior Act, the Secretary shall provide to
each applicant a written notice to inform the
applicant whether the applicant will be invited to apply for credit assistance: Provided
further, That amounts made available under
this heading in this Act shall also be available for projects to construct, maintain, upgrade, and repair levees and ancillary features with a primary owner type of State,
municipal, county, private, or other nonFederal entity: Provided further, That not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall begin a
rulemaking process to establish the process
to provide financial assistance for projects
to construct, maintain, upgrade, and repair
levees and ancillary features with a primary
owner type of State, municipal, county, private, or other non-Federal entity: Provided

January 8, 2026

further, That no project may be funded with
amounts provided under this heading for a
levee unless the Secretary has certified in
advance, in writing, that the levee is not
owned, in whole or in part, by the Federal
Government: Provided further, That such
costs, including the cost of modifying such
loans, shall be as defined in section 502 of the
Congressional Budget Act of 1974: Provided
further, That these funds are available to
subsidize gross obligations for the principal
amount of direct loans, including capitalized
interest, and total loan principal, including
capitalized interest, any part of which is to
be guaranteed, not to exceed $500,000,000: Provided further, That the use of direct loans or
loan guarantee authority under this heading
for direct loans or commitments to guarantee loans for any project, including any
project that is made eligible for funds pursuant to the second proviso under this heading,
shall be in accordance with the criteria published in the Federal Register on June 30,
2020 (85 FR 39189) pursuant to the fourth proviso under the heading ‘‘Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Program Account’’ in division D of the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020 (Public Law
116–94): Provided further, That none of the direct loans or loan guarantee authority made
available under this heading shall be available for any project unless the Secretary and
the Director of the Office of Management
and Budget have certified in advance in writing that the direct loan or loan guarantee, as
applicable, and the project comply with the
criteria referenced in the previous proviso:
Provided further, That any references to the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or
the Administrator in the criteria referenced
in the previous two provisos shall be deemed
to be references to the Army Corps of Engineers or the Secretary of the Army, respectively, for purposes of the direct loans or
loan guarantee authority made available
under this heading: Provided further, That for
the purposes of carrying out the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, the Director of the
Congressional Budget Office may request,
and the Secretary shall promptly provide,
documentation and information relating to a
project identified in a Letter of Interest submitted to the Secretary pursuant to a Notice
of Funding Availability for applications for
credit assistance under the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act Program,
including with respect to a project that was
initiated or completed before the date of enactment of this Act.
In addition, fees authorized to be collected
pursuant to sections 5029 and 5030 of the
Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014 shall be deposited in this account, to remain available until expended.
In addition, for administrative expenses to
carry out the direct and guaranteed loan
programs, notwithstanding section 5033 of
the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014, $5,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
GENERAL PROVISIONS—CORPS OF
ENGINEERS—CIVIL
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 101. (a) None of the funds provided in
title I of this Act, or provided by previous
appropriations Acts to the agencies or entities funded in title I of this Act that remain
available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, shall be available for obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming of funds that:
(1) creates or initiates a new program,
project, or activity;
(2) eliminates a program, project, or activity;
(3) increases funds or personnel for any
program, project, or activity for which funds

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

have been denied or restricted by this Act,
unless prior approval is received from the
Committees on Appropriations of both
Houses of Congress;
(4) proposes to use funds directed for a specific activity for a different purpose, unless
prior approval is received from the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of
Congress;
(5) augments or reduces existing programs,
projects, or activities in excess of the
amounts contained in paragraphs (6) through
(10), unless prior approval is received from
the Committees on Appropriations of both
Houses of Congress;
(6) INVESTIGATIONS.—For a base level over
$100,000, reprogramming of 25 percent of the
base amount up to a limit of $150,000 per
project, study or activity is allowed: Provided, That for a base level less than $100,000,
the reprogramming limit is $25,000: Provided
further, That up to $25,000 may be reprogrammed into any continuing study or activity that did not receive an appropriation for
existing obligations and concomitant administrative expenses;
(7) CONSTRUCTION.—For a base level over
$2,000,000, reprogramming of 15 percent of the
base amount up to a limit of $3,000,000 per
project, study or activity is allowed: Provided, That for a base level less than
$2,000,000, the reprogramming limit is
$300,000: Provided further, That up to $3,000,000
may be reprogrammed for settled contractor
claims, changed conditions, or real estate deficiency judgments: Provided further, That up
to $300,000 may be reprogrammed into any
continuing study or activity that did not receive an appropriation for existing obligations and concomitant administrative expenses;
(8) OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.—Unlimited reprogramming authority is granted for
the Corps to be able to respond to emergencies: Provided, That the Chief of Engineers shall notify the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress of these
emergency actions as soon thereafter as
practicable: Provided further, That for a base
level over $1,000,000, reprogramming of 15
percent of the base amount up to a limit of
$5,000,000 per project, study, or activity is allowed: Provided further, That for a base level
less than $1,000,000, the reprogramming limit
is $150,000: Provided further, That $150,000 may
be reprogrammed into any continuing study
or activity that did not receive an appropriation;
(9) MISSISSIPPI RIVER AND TRIBUTARIES.—
The reprogramming guidelines in paragraphs
(6), (7), and (8) shall apply to the Investigations, Construction, and Operation and
Maintenance portions of the Mississippi
River and Tributaries Account, respectively;
and
(10) FORMERLY UTILIZED SITES REMEDIAL ACTION PROGRAM.—Reprogramming of up to 15
percent of the base of the receiving project is
permitted.
(b) DE MINIMUS REPROGRAMMINGS.—In no
case should a reprogramming for less than
$50,000 be submitted to the Committees on
Appropriations of both Houses of Congress.
(c) CONTINUING AUTHORITIES PROGRAM.—
Subsection (a)(1) shall not apply to any
project or activity funded under the continuing authorities program.
(d) Not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall
submit a report to the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress to establish the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for
the current fiscal year which shall include:
(1) A table for each appropriation with a
separate column to display the President’s
budget request, adjustments made by Congress, adjustments due to enacted rescis-

sions, if applicable, and the fiscal year enacted level;
(2) A delineation in the table for each appropriation both by object class and program, project and activity as detailed in the
budget appendix for the respective appropriations; and
(3) An identification of items of special
congressional interest.
SEC. 102. The Secretary shall allocate funds
made available in this Act solely in accordance with the provisions of this Act and in
the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act), including the determination and designation of new starts.
SEC. 103. (a) None of the funds made available in this title may be used to award or
modify any contract that commits funds beyond the amounts appropriated for that program, project, or activity that remain unobligated, except that such amounts may include any funds that have been made available through reprogramming pursuant to
section 101.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to
projects with awarded integrated design and
construction contracts (IDaC) as of the date
of enactment of this Act: Provided, That the
Corps shall modify the existing IDaC contracts for such projects to incorporate the
authority provided in 33 U.S.C. 621 and
DFARS 252.232–7007 pursuant to DFARS
232.703–1(1)(ii)(B) within 60 days of the date of
enactment of this Act: Provided further, That
the Corps shall notify the Committees on
Appropriations of both Houses of Congress
upon execution of such modifications for
each project and upon commencement of
work addressed in such modification: Provided further, That the Corps shall fully obligate any funds previously designated in Public Law 117–58 or prior appropriations bill as
part of the modification, and as required supervision and administration associated with
that modification: Provided further, That
amounts repurposed pursuant to this section
shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public
Law 118–5.
SEC. 104. The Secretary of the Army may
transfer to the Fish and Wildlife Service, and
the Fish and Wildlife Service may accept and
expend, up to $8,733,000 of funds provided in
this title under the heading ‘‘Operation and
Maintenance’’ to mitigate for fisheries lost
due to Corps of Engineers projects.
SEC. 105. None of the funds in this Act shall
be used for an open lake placement alternative for dredged material, after evaluating
the least costly, environmentally acceptable
manner for the disposal or management of
dredged material originating from Lake Erie
or tributaries thereto, unless it is approved
under a State water quality certification
pursuant to section 401 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1341): Provided, That until an open lake placement alternative for dredged material is approved
under a State water quality certification,
the Corps of Engineers shall continue upland
placement of such dredged material consistent with the requirements of section 101
of the Water Resources Development Act of
1986 (33 U.S.C. 2211).
SEC. 106. Additional funding provided in
this Act shall be allocated only to projects
determined to be eligible by the Chief of Engineers.
SEC. 107. Subject to consultation with the
non-Federal sponsor and retaining sufficient
amounts for the Corps of Engineers to carry
out any of its responsibilities relating to the
project and using appropriations made available to the project prior to the enactment of
this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall
make advance payments to the non-Federal
sponsors for their use in completing con-

H169

struction of any project for flood risk management identified in implementation guidance for the Civil Works Public-Private
Partnership Pilot Program issued by the Director of Civil Works on January 8, 2019 and
that is under construction on the date of enactment of this Act and for which a prior executed Project Partnership Agreement, as
amended, specifically identifies Federal
Work, Non-Federal Work, and a Federal Participation Amount in excess of $700,000,000:
Provided, That amounts described in the
matter preceding this proviso shall be credited by the Secretary toward the Federal
Participation Amount: Provided further, That
prior to making any payments authorized in
the matter preceding the first proviso, the
Secretary and the non-Federal sponsors shall
amend the Project Partnership Agreement
executed for the project in order to implement any such payments and credits.
SEC. 108. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to carry out any
water supply reallocation study under the
Wolf Creek Dam, Lake Cumberland, Kentucky, project authorized under the Act of
July 24, 1946 (60 Stat. 636, ch. 595).
SEC. 109. Section 225(c)(2)(A)(ii) of the
Water Resources Development Act of 1992 (33
U.S.C. 2328(c)(2)(A)(ii)) is amended by striking ‘‘at recreation site at which the fee is
collected’’ and inserting ‘‘at any recreation
site or facility that is located at the civil
works project at which the fee is collected’’.
TITLE II
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
CENTRAL UTAH PROJECT
CENTRAL UTAH PROJECT COMPLETION ACCOUNT

For carrying out activities authorized by
the Central Utah Project Completion Act,
$23,000,000, to remain available until expended, of which $4,000,000 shall be deposited
into the Utah Reclamation Mitigation and
Conservation Account for use by the Utah
Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation
Commission: Provided, That of the amount
provided under this heading, $1,950,000 shall
be available until September 30, 2027, for expenses necessary in carrying out related responsibilities of the Secretary of the Interior: Provided further, That for fiscal year
2026, of the amount made available to the
Commission under this Act or any other Act,
the Commission may use an amount not to
exceed $2,186,000 for administrative expenses.
BUREAU OF RECLAMATION
The following appropriations shall be expended to execute authorized functions of
the Bureau of Reclamation:
WATER AND RELATED RESOURCES
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For management, development, and restoration of water and related natural resources and for related activities, including
the operation, maintenance, and rehabilitation of reclamation and other facilities, participation in fulfilling related Federal responsibilities to Native Americans, and related grants to, and cooperative and other
agreements with, State and local governments, federally recognized Indian Tribes,
and others, $1,465,630,000, to remain available
until expended, of which $23,899,000 shall be
available for transfer to the Upper Colorado
River Basin Fund and $7,679,000 shall be
available for transfer to the Lower Colorado
River Basin Development Fund; of which
such amounts as may be necessary may be
advanced to the Colorado River Dam Fund:
Provided, That such transfers may be increased or decreased within the overall appropriation under this heading: Provided further, That of the total appropriated, the
amount for program activities that can be financed by the Reclamation Fund, the Water

H170

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Storage Enhancement Receipts account established by section 4011(e) of Public Law
114–322, or the Bureau of Reclamation special
fee account established by 16 U.S.C. 6806
shall be derived from that Fund or account:
Provided further, That funds contributed
under 43 U.S.C. 395 are available until expended for the purposes for which the funds
were contributed: Provided further, That
funds advanced under 43 U.S.C. 397a shall be
credited to this account and are available
until expended for the same purposes as the
sums appropriated under this heading: Provided further, That of the amounts made
available under this heading, $3,237,000 shall
be deposited in the San Gabriel Basin Restoration Fund established by section 110 of
title I of division B of appendix D of Public
Law 106–554: Provided further, That in accordance with section 4007 of Public Law 114–322
and as recommended by the Secretary in a
letter dated January 2, 2026, funding provided for such purpose in fiscal year 2025
shall be made available to the Sites Reservoir Project and the B.F. Sisk Dam Raise
and Reservoir Expansion Project: Provided
further, That in accordance with section
4009(a) of Public Law 114–322 and as recommended by the Secretary in a letter dated
January 2, 2026, funding provided for such
purpose in fiscal year 2025 and prior fiscal
years shall be made available to the Kay Bailey Hutchison Expansion—Concentrate Pipeline Partial Replacement Project and the
McAllen Brackish Groundwater Treatment
Facility.
CENTRAL VALLEY PROJECT RESTORATION FUND

For carrying out the programs, projects,
plans, habitat restoration, improvement, and
acquisition provisions of the Central Valley
Project Improvement Act, such sums as may
be collected in fiscal year 2026 in the Central
Valley Project Restoration Fund pursuant to
sections 3407(d), 3404(c)(3), and 3405(f) of Public Law 102–575, to remain available until expended: Provided, That the Bureau of Reclamation is directed to assess and collect the
full amount of the additional mitigation and
restoration payments authorized by section
3407(d) of Public Law 102–575: Provided further, That none of the funds made available
under this heading may be used for the acquisition or leasing of water for in-stream
purposes if the water is already committed
to in-stream purposes by a court adopted decree or order.
CALIFORNIA BAY-DELTA RESTORATION
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For carrying out activities authorized by
the Water Supply, Reliability, and Environmental Improvement Act, consistent with
plans to be approved by the Secretary of the
Interior, $32,000,000, to remain available until
expended, of which such amounts as may be
necessary to carry out such activities may
be transferred to appropriate accounts of
other participating Federal agencies to carry
out authorized purposes: Provided, That
funds appropriated herein may be used for
the Federal share of the costs of CALFED
Program management: Provided further, That
CALFED implementation shall be carried
out in a balanced manner with clear performance measures demonstrating concurrent progress in achieving the goals and objectives of the Program.
POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION

For expenses necessary for policy, administration, and related functions in the Office of
the Commissioner, the Denver office, and offices in the six regions of the Bureau of Reclamation, to remain available until September 30, 2027, $64,000,000, to be derived from
the Reclamation Fund and be nonreimbursable as provided in 43 U.S.C. 377, of which not
to exceed $5,000 may be used for official re-

ception and representation expenses: Provided, That no part of any other appropriation in this Act shall be available for activities or functions budgeted as policy and administration expenses.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISION

Appropriations for the Bureau of Reclamation shall be available for purchase and replacement of not to exceed 30 motor vehicles, which are for replacement only.
GENERAL PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT
OF THE INTERIOR
SEC. 201. (a) None of the funds provided in
title II of this Act for Water and Related Resources, or provided by previous or subsequent appropriations Acts to the agencies or
entities funded in title II of this Act for
Water and Related Resources that remain
available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, shall be available for obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming of funds that—
(1) initiates or creates a new program,
project, or activity;
(2) eliminates a program, project, or activity;
(3) increases funds for any program,
project, or activity for which funds have
been denied or restricted by this Act, unless
prior approval is received from the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of
Congress;
(4) restarts or resumes any program,
project or activity for which funds are not
provided in this Act, unless prior approval is
received from the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress;
(5) transfers funds in excess of the following limits, unless prior approval is received from the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress:
(A) 15 percent for any program, project or
activity for which $2,000,000 or more is available at the beginning of the fiscal year; or
(B) $400,000 for any program, project or activity for which less than $2,000,000 is available at the beginning of the fiscal year;
(6) transfers more than $500,000 from either
the Facilities Operation, Maintenance, and
Rehabilitation category or the Resources
Management and Development category to
any program, project, or activity in the
other category, unless prior approval is received from the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress; or
(7) transfers, where necessary to discharge
legal obligations of the Bureau of Reclamation, more than $5,000,000 to provide adequate funds for settled contractor claims, increased contractor earnings due to accelerated rates of operations, and real estate deficiency judgments, unless prior approval is
received from the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress.
(b) Subsection (a)(5) shall not apply to any
transfer of funds within the Facilities Operation, Maintenance, and Rehabilitation category.
(c) For purposes of this section, the term
‘‘transfer’’ means any movement of funds
into or out of a program, project, or activity.
(d) Except as provided in subsections (a)
and (b), the amounts made available in this
title under the heading ‘‘Bureau of Reclamation—Water and Related Resources’’ shall be
expended for the programs, projects, and activities specified in the ‘‘Final Bill’’ columns
in the ‘‘Water and Related Resources’’ table
included under the heading ‘‘Title II—Department of the Interior’’ in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
(e) The Bureau of Reclamation shall submit reports on a quarterly basis to the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of
Congress detailing all the funds repro-

January 8, 2026

grammed between programs, projects, activities, or categories of funding. The first quarterly report shall be submitted not later
than 60 days after the date of enactment of
this Act.
SEC. 202. (a) None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this Act may
be used to determine the final point of discharge for the interceptor drain for the San
Luis Unit until development by the Secretary of the Interior and the State of California of a plan, which shall conform to the
water quality standards of the State of California as approved by the Administrator of
the Environmental Protection Agency, to
minimize any detrimental effect of the San
Luis drainage waters.
(b) The costs of the Kesterson Reservoir
Cleanup Program and the costs of the San
Joaquin Valley Drainage Program shall be
classified by the Secretary of the Interior as
reimbursable or nonreimbursable and collected until fully repaid pursuant to the
‘‘Cleanup Program—Alternative Repayment
Plan’’ and the ‘‘SJVDP—Alternative Repayment Plan’’ described in the report entitled
‘‘Repayment Report, Kesterson Reservoir
Cleanup Program and San Joaquin Valley
Drainage Program, February 1995’’, prepared
by the Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Reclamation. Any future obligations of funds
by the United States relating to, or providing for, drainage service or drainage studies for the San Luis Unit shall be fully reimbursable by San Luis Unit beneficiaries of
such service or studies pursuant to Federal
reclamation law.
SEC. 203. Section 9504(e) of the Omnibus
Public Land Management Act of 2009 (42
U.S.C. 10364(e)) is amended by striking
‘‘$920,000,000’’ and inserting ‘‘$1,000,000,000’’.
SEC. 204. (a) Title I of Public Law 108–361
(the Calfed Bay-Delta Authorization Act)
(118 Stat. 1681), as amended, shall be applied
by substituting ‘‘2026’’ for ‘‘2022’’ each place
it appears.
(b) Section 103(f)(4)(A) of Public Law 108–
361 (the Calfed Bay-Delta Authorization Act)
(118 Stat. 1681) is amended by striking
‘‘$30,000,000’’ and inserting ‘‘$32,600,000’’.
SEC. 205. Section 9106(g)(2) of the Omnibus
Public Land Management Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111–11) shall be applied by substituting
‘‘2026’’ for ‘‘2022’’.
SEC. 206. Section 301 of the Reclamation
States Emergency Drought Relief Act of 1991
(43 U.S.C. 2241) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘$130,000,000’’ for ‘‘$120,000,000’’.
SEC. 207. Section 9503(f) of the Omnibus
Public Land Management Act of 2009 (42
U.S.C. 10363(f)) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘2026’’ for ‘‘2023’’.
SEC. 208. In this fiscal year and each fiscal
year thereafter, notwithstanding the Act of
May 9, 1938, (43 U.S.C. 392a), all monies received by the United States in connection
with the repayment or reimbursement of
costs for all projects, including power, financed in whole or in part with money from
the Aging Infrastructure Account created
pursuant to section 9603(d) of the Omnibus
Public Land Management Act of 2009 (43
U.S.C. 510b(d)) shall be repaid and deposited
to that account.
SEC. 209. (a) Section 10609(a)(1) of the
Northwestern New Mexico Rural Water
Projects Act (subtitle B of title X of Public
Law 111–11)—
(1) is amended by striking ‘‘$870,000,000’’
and inserting ‘‘$1,815,000,000’’; and
(2) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘2026’’
for ‘‘2024’’.
(b) Section 10604(b)(3)(B) of the Northwestern New Mexico Rural Water Projects
Act (subtitle B of title X of Public Law 111–
11) is amended to read as follows: ‘‘MAXIMUM SHARE.—Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the repayment obligation of the
City shall not exceed $76,000,000’’.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

SEC. 210. Section 10 of Public Law 89–108, as
amended (79 Stat. 433; 100 Stat. 424; 106 Stat.
4669; 114 Stat. 2763A–291), is further amended—
(1) in subsection (b)(1), by—
(A) redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (D); and
(B) inserting after subparagraph (B), the
following:
‘‘(C) OTHER AMOUNTS.—In addition to the
amounts made available under subparagraphs (A) and (B), there is authorized to be
appropriated to carry out section 7(a)
$50,000,000.’’; and
(2) in subsection (e), by inserting prior to
the last sentence, the following: ‘‘Such indexing shall also be applied for the $50,000,000
amount under subsection (b)(1)(C) for costs
incurred after the date of enactment.’’.
TITLE III
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
ENERGY PROGRAMS
ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
For Department of Energy expenses including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment, and
other expenses necessary for energy efficiency and renewable energy activities in
carrying out the purposes of the Department
of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et
seq.), including the acquisition or condemnation of any real property or any facility or
for plant or facility acquisition, construction, or expansion, $3,100,000,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That of
such amount, $224,000,000 shall be available
until September 30, 2027, for program direction.
CYBERSECURITY, ENERGY SECURITY, AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
For Department of Energy expenses including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment, and
other expenses necessary for energy sector
cybersecurity, energy security, and emergency response activities in carrying out the
purposes of the Department of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), including the acquisition or condemnation of any
real property or any facility or for plant or
facility acquisition, construction, or expansion, $190,000,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That of such amount,
$24,000,000 shall be available until September
30, 2027, for program direction.
ELECTRICITY
For Department of Energy expenses including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment, and
other expenses necessary for electricity activities in carrying out the purposes of the
Department of Energy Organization Act (42
U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), including the acquisition
or condemnation of any real property or any
facility or for plant or facility acquisition,
construction, or expansion, $235,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided,
That of such amount, $19,700,000 shall be
available until September 30, 2027, for program direction.
GRID DEPLOYMENT
For Department of Energy expenses including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment, and
other expenses necessary for grid deployment in carrying out the purposes of the Department of Energy Organization Act (42
U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), including the acquisition
or condemnation of any real property or any
facility or for plant or facility acquisition,
construction, or expansion, $25,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided,
That of such amount, $6,000,000 shall be
available until September 30, 2027, for program direction.

NUCLEAR ENERGY
For Department of Energy expenses including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment, and
other expenses necessary for nuclear energy
activities in carrying out the purposes of the
Department of Energy Organization Act (42
U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), including the acquisition
or condemnation of any real property or any
facility or for plant or facility acquisition,
construction, or expansion, $1,785,000,000, to
remain available until expended: Provided,
That of such amount, $88,000,000 shall be
available until September 30, 2027, for program direction: Provided further, That for the
purpose of section 954(a)(7) of the Energy
Policy Act of 2005, as amended, the only
amount available shall be from the amount
specified as including that purpose in the
‘‘Final Bill’’ column in the ‘‘Department of
Energy’’ table included under the heading
‘‘Title III—Department of Energy’’ in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act).
FOSSIL ENERGY
For Department of Energy expenses necessary in carrying out fossil energy research
and development activities, under the authority of the Department of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), including
the acquisition of interest, including defeasible and equitable interests in any real
property or any facility or for plant or facility acquisition or expansion, and for conducting inquiries, technological investigations and research concerning the extraction, processing, use, and disposal of mineral
substances without objectionable social and
environmental costs (30 U.S.C. 3, 1602, and
1603), $720,000,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That of such amount
$70,000,000 shall be available until September
30, 2027, for program direction.
ENERGY PROJECTS
For Department of Energy expenses necessary in carrying out community project
funding activities, under the authority of the
Department of Energy Organization Act (42
U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), $97,557,000, to remain
available until expended, for projects, and in
the amounts, specified for this account in
the table entitled ‘‘Community Project
Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act).
NAVAL PETROLEUM AND OIL SHALE RESERVES
For Department of Energy expenses necessary to carry out naval petroleum and oil
shale reserve activities, $13,000,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That notwithstanding any other provision of law, unobligated funds remaining from prior years
shall be available for all naval petroleum
and oil shale reserve activities.
STRATEGIC PETROLEUM RESERVE
For Department of Energy expenses necessary for Strategic Petroleum Reserve facility development and operations and program
management activities pursuant to the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (42 U.S.C.
6201 et seq.), $206,325,000, to remain available
until expended.
SPR PETROLEUM ACCOUNT
For the acquisition, transportation, and
injection of petroleum products, and for
other necessary expenses pursuant to the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975, as
amended (42 U.S.C. 6201 et seq.), sections 403
and 404 of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015
(42 U.S.C. 6241, 6239 note), section 32204 of the
Fixing America’s Surface Transportation
Act (42 U.S.C. 6241 note), and section 30204 of
the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (42 U.S.C.

H171

6241 note), $100,000, to remain available until
expended.
NORTHEAST HOME HEATING OIL RESERVE
For Department of Energy expenses necessary for Northeast Home Heating Oil Reserve storage, operation, and management
activities pursuant to the Energy Policy and
Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6201 et seq.),
$7,150,000, to remain available until expended.
ENERGY INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION
For Department of Energy expenses necessary in carrying out the activities of the
Energy
Information
Administration,
$135,000,000, to remain available until expended.
NON-DEFENSE ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP
For Department of Energy expenses, including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment and
other expenses necessary for non-defense environmental cleanup activities in carrying
out the purposes of the Department of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.),
including the acquisition or condemnation of
any real property or any facility or for plant
or facility acquisition, construction, or expansion, $322,371,000, to remain available
until expended: Provided, That in addition,
fees collected pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of
section 5 of the Mercury Export Ban Act of
2008 (42 U.S.C. 6939f(b)(1)), and deposited
under this heading in fiscal year 2026 pursuant to section 309 of title III of division C of
Public Law 116–94 are appropriated, to remain available until expended, for mercury
storage costs.
URANIUM ENRICHMENT DECONTAMINATION AND
DECOMMISSIONING FUND
For Department of Energy expenses necessary in carrying out uranium enrichment
facility decontamination and decommissioning, remedial actions, and other activities of title II of the Atomic Energy Act of
1954, and title X, subtitle A, of the Energy
Policy Act of 1992, $865,000,000, to be deposited into and subsequently derived from the
Uranium Enrichment Decontamination and
Decommissioning Fund, to remain available
until expended, of which $0 shall be available
in accordance with title X, subtitle A, of the
Energy Policy Act of 1992.
SCIENCE
For Department of Energy expenses including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment, and
other expenses necessary for science activities in carrying out the purposes of the Department of Energy Organization Act (42
U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), including the acquisition
or condemnation of any real property or any
facility or for plant or facility acquisition,
construction, or expansion, and purchase of
not more than 35 passenger motor vehicles,
$8,400,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That of such amount,
$226,831,000 shall be available until September 30, 2027, for program direction.
NUCLEAR WASTE DISPOSAL
For Department of Energy expenses necessary for nuclear waste disposal activities
to carry out the purposes of the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act of 1982, Public Law 97–425,
as amended, $12,040,000, to remain available
until expended, which shall be derived from
the Nuclear Waste Fund.
ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY—
ENERGY
For Department of Energy expenses necessary in carrying out the activities authorized by section 5012 of the America COMPETES Act (Public Law 110–69), $350,000,000,
to remain available until expended: Provided,
That of such amount, $40,000,000 shall be

H172

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

available until September 30, 2027, for program direction.
TITLE 17 INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY LOAN
GUARANTEE PROGRAM
Such sums as are derived from amounts received from borrowers pursuant to section
1702(b) of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 under
this heading in prior Acts, shall be collected
in accordance with section 502(7) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974: Provided, That
for necessary administrative expenses of the
Title 17 Innovative Technology Loan Guarantee Program, as authorized, $35,000,000 is
appropriated, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided further, That up to
$35,000,000 of fees collected in fiscal year 2026
pursuant to section 1702(h) of the Energy
Policy Act of 2005 shall be credited as offsetting collections under this heading and used
for necessary administrative expenses in this
appropriation and shall remain available
until September 30, 2027: Provided further,
That to the extent that fees collected in fiscal year 2026 exceed $35,000,000, those excess
amounts shall be credited as offsetting collections under this heading and available in
future fiscal years only to the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts: Provided further, That the sum herein appropriated from the general fund shall be reduced (1) as such fees are received during fiscal year 2026 (estimated at $240,000,000) and
(2) to the extent that any remaining general
fund appropriations can be derived from fees
collected in previous fiscal years that are
not otherwise appropriated, so as to result in
a final fiscal year 2026 appropriation from
the general fund estimated at $0: Provided
further, That the Department of Energy shall
not subordinate any loan obligation to other
financing in violation of section 1702 of the
Energy Policy Act of 2005 or subordinate any
Guaranteed Obligation to any loan or other
debt obligations in violation of section 609.8
of title 10, Code of Federal Regulations.
In addition, $150,000,000, to remain available until expended, for the cost of loan
guarantees for the construction of small
modular reactors or advanced nuclear reactors eligible under section 1703(b)(4) of the
Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C.
16513(b)(4)): Provided, That the amounts provided under this paragraph are in addition to
those provided in any other Act: Provided
further, That for amounts collected pursuant
to section 1702(b)(2) of the Energy Policy Act
of 2005, the source of such payment received
from borrowers may not be a loan or other
debt obligation that is guaranteed by the
Federal Government: Provided further, That
none of such loan guarantee authority made
available under this paragraph shall be
available for commitments to guarantee
loans for any projects where funds, personnel, or property (tangible or intangible)
of any Federal agency, instrumentality, personnel, or affiliated entity are expected be
used (directly or indirectly) through acquisitions, contracts, demonstrations, exchanges,
grants, incentives, leases, procurements,
sales, other transaction authority, or other
arrangements, to support the project or to
obtain goods or services from the project:
Provided further, That the preceding proviso
shall not be interpreted as precluding the use
of the loan guarantee authority provided
under this paragraph for commitments to
guarantee loans for:
(1) projects as a result of such projects benefitting from otherwise allowable Federal income tax benefits;
(2) projects as a result of such projects benefitting from being located on Federal land
pursuant to a lease or right of-way agreement for which all consideration for all uses
is:
(A) paid exclusively in cash;

(B) deposited in the Treasury as offsetting
receipts; and
(C) equal to the fair market value as determined by the head of the relevant agency;
(3) projects as a result of such projects benefitting from Federal insurance programs,
including under section 170 of the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2210; commonly
known as the ‘‘Price-Anderson Act’’); or
(4) electric generation projects using transmission facilities owned or operated by a
Federal Power Marketing Administration or
the Tennessee Valley Authority that have
been authorized, approved, and financed
independent of the project receiving the
guarantee:
Provided further, That none of the loan guarantee authority made available under this
heading shall be available for any project unless the Director of the Office of Management and Budget has certified in advance in
writing that the loan guarantee and the
project comply with the provisions under
this heading.
ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY VEHICLES
MANUFACTURING LOAN PROGRAM
For Department of Energy administrative
expenses necessary in carrying out the Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing
Loan Program, $9,500,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027.
TRIBAL ENERGY LOAN GUARANTEE PROGRAM
For Department of Energy administrative
expenses necessary in carrying out the Tribal
Energy
Loan
Guarantee
Program,
$6,300,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
INDIAN ENERGY POLICY AND PROGRAMS
For necessary expenses for Indian Energy
activities in carrying out the purposes of the
Department of Energy Organization Act (42
U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), $75,000,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That of
the amount appropriated under this heading,
$14,000,000 shall be available until September
30, 2027, for program direction.
DEPARTMENTAL ADMINISTRATION
For salaries and expenses of the Department of Energy necessary for departmental
administration in carrying out the purposes
of the Department of Energy Organization
Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), $300,578,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, including the hire of passenger motor vehicles
and official reception and representation expenses not to exceed $30,000, plus such additional amounts as necessary to cover increases in the estimated amount of cost of
work for others notwithstanding the provisions of the Anti-Deficiency Act (31 U.S.C.
1511 et seq.): Provided, That such increases in
cost of work are offset by revenue increases
of the same or greater amount: Provided further, That moneys received by the Department for miscellaneous revenues estimated
to total $100,578,000 in fiscal year 2026 may be
retained and used for operating expenses
within this account, as authorized by section
201 of Public Law 95–238, notwithstanding the
provisions of 31 U.S.C. 3302: Provided further,
That the sum herein appropriated shall be
reduced as collections are received during
the fiscal year so as to result in a final fiscal
year 2026 appropriation from the general
fund estimated at not more than $200,000,000.
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
For expenses necessary for the Office of the
Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of the Inspector General Act of 1978,
$90,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.

January 8, 2026

ATOMIC ENERGY DEFENSE ACTIVITIES
NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION
WEAPONS ACTIVITIES
For Department of Energy expenses, including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment and
other incidental expenses necessary for
atomic energy defense weapons activities in
carrying out the purposes of the Department
of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et
seq.), including the acquisition or condemnation of any real property or any facility or
for plant or facility acquisition, construction, or expansion, $20,378,000,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That of
such amount, $149,244,000 shall be available
until September 30, 2027, for program direction.
DEFENSE NUCLEAR NONPROLIFERATION
For Department of Energy expenses, including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment and
other incidental expenses necessary for defense nuclear nonproliferation activities, in
carrying out the purposes of the Department
of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et
seq.), including the acquisition or condemnation of any real property or any facility or
for plant or facility acquisition, construction, or expansion, $2,367,000,000, to remain
available until expended.
NAVAL REACTORS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For Department of Energy expenses necessary for naval reactors activities to carry
out the Department of Energy Organization
Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), including the acquisition (by purchase, condemnation, construction, or otherwise) of real property,
plant, and capital equipment, facilities, and
facility expansion, $2,134,000,000, to remain
available until expended, of which, $96,740,000
shall be transferred to ‘‘Department of Energy—Energy Programs—Nuclear Energy’’,
for the Advanced Test Reactor: Provided,
That of such amount made available under
this heading, $61,540,000 shall be available
until September 30, 2027, for program direction.
FEDERAL SALARIES AND EXPENSES
For expenses necessary for Federal Salaries and Expenses in the National Nuclear
Security Administration, $525,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, including official reception and representation
expenses not to exceed $17,000.
ENVIRONMENTAL AND OTHER DEFENSE
ACTIVITIES
DEFENSE ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP
For Department of Energy expenses, including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment and
other expenses necessary for atomic energy
defense environmental cleanup activities in
carrying out the purposes of the Department
of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et
seq.), including the acquisition or condemnation of any real property or any facility or
for plant or facility acquisition, construction, or expansion, $7,375,000,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That of
such amount, $312,818,000 shall be available
until September 30, 2027, for program direction.
OTHER DEFENSE ACTIVITIES
For Department of Energy expenses, including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment and
other expenses, necessary for atomic energy
defense, other defense activities, and classified activities, in carrying out the purposes
of the Department of Energy Organization
Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), including the acquisition or condemnation of any real property or any facility or for plant or facility

January 8, 2026

H173

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

acquisition, construction, or expansion,
$1,170,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That of such amount,
$384,404,000 shall be available until September 30, 2027, for program direction.
POWER MARKETING ADMINISTRATIONS
BONNEVILLE POWER ADMINISTRATION FUND
Expenditures from the Bonneville Power
Administration Fund, established pursuant
to Public Law 93–454, are approved for: the
Rocky Reach Kelt Facility, the Colville Acclimation Building Enclosures, the Colville
Tribes Resident Fish Hatchery Expansion,
the Chief Joseph Hatchery Water Quality
Project, and the Umatilla Hatchery Facility
and Acclimation Facilities: Provided, That
expenditures are also approved for official
reception and representation expenses in an
amount not to exceed $5,000: Provided further,
That during fiscal year 2026, no new direct
loan obligations may be made.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, SOUTHEASTERN
POWER ADMINISTRATION
For expenses necessary for operation and
maintenance of power transmission facilities
and for marketing electric power and energy,
including transmission wheeling and ancillary services, pursuant to section 5 of the
Flood Control Act of 1944 (16 U.S.C. 825s), as
applied to the southeastern power area,
$9,285,000, including official reception and
representation expenses in an amount not to
exceed $1,500, to remain available until expended: Provided, That notwithstanding 31
U.S.C. 3302 and section 5 of the Flood Control
Act of 1944, up to $9,285,000 collected by the
Southeastern Power Administration from
the sale of power and related services shall
be credited to this account as discretionary
offsetting collections, to remain available
until expended for the sole purpose of funding the annual expenses of the Southeastern
Power Administration: Provided further, That
the sum herein appropriated for annual expenses shall be reduced as collections are received during the fiscal year so as to result
in a final fiscal year 2026 appropriation estimated at not more than $0: Provided further,
That notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302, up to
$81,819,000 collected by the Southeastern
Power Administration pursuant to the Flood
Control Act of 1944 to recover purchase
power and wheeling expenses shall be credited to this account as offsetting collections,
to remain available until expended for the
sole purpose of making purchase power and
wheeling expenditures: Provided further, That
for purposes of this appropriation, annual expenses means expenditures that are generally recovered in the same year that they
are incurred (excluding purchase power and
wheeling expenses).
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE,
SOUTHWESTERN POWER ADMINISTRATION
For expenses necessary for operation and
maintenance of power transmission facilities
and for marketing electric power and energy,
for construction and acquisition of transmission lines, substations and appurtenant
facilities, and for administrative expenses,
including official reception and representation expenses in an amount not to exceed
$1,500 in carrying out section 5 of the Flood
Control Act of 1944 (16 U.S.C. 825s), as applied
to the Southwestern Power Administration,
$59,766,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That notwithstanding 31
U.S.C. 3302 and section 5 of the Flood Control
Act of 1944 (16 U.S.C. 825s), up to $49,366,000
collected by the Southwestern Power Administration from the sale of power and related
services shall be credited to this account as
discretionary offsetting collections, to remain available until expended, for the sole
purpose of funding the annual expenses of
the Southwestern Power Administration:

Provided further, That the sum herein appropriated for annual expenses shall be reduced
as collections are received during the fiscal
year so as to result in a final fiscal year 2026
appropriation estimated at not more than
$10,400,000: Provided further, That notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302, up to $80,000,000 collected by the Southwestern Power Administration pursuant to the Flood Control Act of
1944 to recover purchase power and wheeling
expenses shall be credited to this account as
offsetting collections, to remain available
until expended for the sole purpose of making purchase power and wheeling expenditures: Provided further, That for purposes of
this appropriation, annual expenses means
expenditures that are generally recovered in
the same year that they are incurred (excluding purchase power and wheeling expenses).
CONSTRUCTION, REHABILITATION, OPERATION
AND MAINTENANCE, WESTERN AREA POWER
ADMINISTRATION
For carrying out the functions authorized
by title III, section 302(a)(1)(E) of the Act of
August 4, 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7152), and other related activities including conservation and
renewable resources programs as authorized,
$311,035,000, including official reception and
representation expenses in an amount not to
exceed $1,500, to remain available until expended, of which $311,035,000 shall be derived
from the Department of the Interior Reclamation Fund: Provided, That notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302, section 5 of the Flood
Control Act of 1944 (16 U.S.C. 825s), and section 1 of the Interior Department Appropriation Act, 1939 (43 U.S.C. 392a), up to
$247,663,000 collected by the Western Area
Power Administration from the sale of power
and related services shall be credited to this
account as discretionary offsetting collections, to remain available until expended, for
the sole purpose of funding the annual expenses of the Western Area Power Administration: Provided further, That the sum herein appropriated for annual expenses shall be
reduced as collections are received during
the fiscal year so as to result in a final fiscal
year 2026 appropriation estimated at not
more than $63,372,000, of which $63,372,000 is
derived from the Reclamation Fund: Provided
further, That notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302,
up to $475,000,000 collected by the Western
Area Power Administration pursuant to the
Flood Control Act of 1944 and the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 to recover purchase
power and wheeling expenses shall be credited to this account as offsetting collections,
to remain available until expended for the
sole purpose of making purchase power and
wheeling expenditures: Provided further, That
for purposes of this appropriation, annual expenses means expenditures that are generally recovered in the same year that they
are incurred (excluding purchase power and
wheeling expenses).
FALCON AND AMISTAD OPERATING AND
MAINTENANCE FUND
For operation, maintenance, and emergency costs for the hydroelectric facilities at
the Falcon and Amistad Dams, $6,510,000, to
remain available until expended, and to be
derived from the Falcon and Amistad Operating and Maintenance Fund of the Western
Area Power Administration, as provided in
section 2 of the Act of June 18, 1954 (68 Stat.
255): Provided, That notwithstanding the provisions of that Act and of 31 U.S.C. 3302, up
to $6,282,000 collected by the Western Area
Power Administration from the sale of power
and related services from the Falcon and
Amistad Dams shall be credited to this account as discretionary offsetting collections,
to remain available until expended for the
sole purpose of funding the annual expenses
of the hydroelectric facilities of these Dams

and associated Western Area Power Administration activities: Provided further, That the
sum herein appropriated for annual expenses
shall be reduced as collections are received
during the fiscal year so as to result in a
final fiscal year 2026 appropriation estimated
at not more than $228,000: Provided further,
That for purposes of this appropriation, annual expenses means expenditures that are
generally recovered in the same year that
they are incurred: Provided further, That for
fiscal year 2026, the Administrator of the
Western Area Power Administration may accept up to $1,072,000 in funds contributed by
United States power customers of the Falcon
and Amistad Dams for deposit into the Falcon and Amistad Operating and Maintenance
Fund, and such funds shall be available for
the purpose for which contributed in like
manner as if said sums had been specifically
appropriated for such purpose: Provided further, That any such funds shall be available
without further appropriation and without
fiscal year limitation for use by the Commissioner of the United States Section of the
International Boundary and Water Commission for the sole purpose of operating, maintaining, repairing, rehabilitating, replacing,
or upgrading the hydroelectric facilities at
these Dams in accordance with agreements
reached between the Administrator, Commissioner, and the power customers.
FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to carry out
the provisions of the Department of Energy
Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.), including services as authorized by 5 U.S.C.
3109, official reception and representation expenses not to exceed $3,000, and the hire of
passenger motor vehicles, $520,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided,
That notwithstanding any other provision of
law, not to exceed $520,000,000 of revenues
from fees and annual charges, and other
services and collections in fiscal year 2026
shall be retained and used for expenses necessary in this account, and shall remain
available until expended: Provided further,
That the sum herein appropriated from the
general fund shall be reduced as revenues are
received during fiscal year 2026 so as to result in a final fiscal year 2026 appropriation
from the general fund estimated at not more
than $0.
GENERAL PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT
OF ENERGY
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 301. (a) No appropriation, funds, or authority made available by this title for the
Department of Energy shall be used to initiate or resume any program, project, or activity or to prepare or initiate Requests For
Proposals or similar arrangements (including Requests for Quotations, Requests for Information, and Funding Opportunity Announcements) for a program, project, or activity if the program, project, or activity has
not been funded by Congress.
(b)(1) Unless the Secretary of Energy notifies the Committees on Appropriations of
both Houses of Congress at least 3 full business days in advance, none of the funds made
available in this title may be used to—
(A) make a grant allocation or discretionary grant award totaling $1,000,000 or
more;
(B) make a discretionary contract award or
Other Transaction Agreement totaling
$1,000,000 or more, including a contract covered by the Federal Acquisition Regulation;
(C)
provide
nonoperational
funding
through a competition restricted only to Department of Energy National Laboratories
totaling $1,000,000 or more;

H174

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(D) provide nonoperational funding directly to a Department of Energy National
Laboratory totaling $25,000,000 or more;
(E) issue a letter of intent to make an allocation, award, or Agreement in excess of the
limits in subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D);
(F) announce publicly the intention to
make an allocation, award, or Agreement in
excess of the limits in subparagraph (A), (B),
(C), or (D); or
(G) issue a letter to terminate an allocation, award, or Agreement in excess of the
limits in subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D).
(2) The Secretary of Energy shall submit to
the Committees on Appropriations of both
Houses of Congress within 15 days of the conclusion of each quarter a report detailing
each grant allocation or discretionary grant
award totaling less than $1,000,000 provided
during the previous quarter.
(3) The notification required by paragraph
(1) and the report required by paragraph (2)
shall include the recipient of the award, the
amount of the award, the fiscal year for
which the funds for the award were appropriated, the account and program, project, or
activity from which the funds are being
drawn, the title of the award, and a brief description of the activity for which the award
is made.
(c) The Department of Energy may not,
with respect to any program, project, or activity that uses budget authority made
available in this title under the heading ‘‘Department of Energy—Energy Programs’’,
enter into a multiyear contract, award a
multiyear grant, or enter into a multiyear
cooperative agreement unless—
(1) the contract, grant, or cooperative
agreement is funded for the full period of
performance as anticipated at the time of
award; or
(2) the contract, grant, or cooperative
agreement includes a clause conditioning the
Federal Government’s obligation on the
availability of future year budget authority
and the Secretary notifies the Committees
on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress at least 3 days in advance.
(d) Except as provided in subsections (e),
(f), and (g), the amounts made available by
this title shall be expended as authorized by
law for the programs, projects, and activities, and in the amounts, specified in the
‘‘Final Bill’’ column in the ‘‘Department of
Energy’’ table included under the heading
‘‘Title III—Department of Energy’’ in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act).
(e) The amounts made available by this
title may be reprogrammed for any program,
project, or activity, and the Department
shall notify, and obtain the prior approval
of, the Committees on Appropriations of
both Houses of Congress at least 30 days
prior to the use of any proposed reprogramming that would cause any program, project,
or activity funding level to increase or decrease by more than $5,000,000 or 10 percent,
whichever is less, during the time period covered by this Act.
(f) None of the funds provided in this title
shall be available for obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming of funds
that—
(1) creates, initiates, or eliminates a program, project, or activity;
(2) increases funds or personnel for any
program, project, or activity for which funds
are denied or restricted by this Act; or
(3) reduces funds that are directed to be
used for a specific program, project, or activity by this Act.
(g)(1) The Secretary of Energy may waive
any requirement or restriction in this section that applies to the use of funds made
available for the Department of Energy if

compliance with such requirement or restriction would pose a substantial risk to
human health, the environment, welfare, or
national security.
(2) The Secretary of Energy shall notify
the Committees on Appropriations of both
Houses of Congress of any waiver under paragraph (1) as soon as practicable, but not later
than 3 days after the date of the activity to
which a requirement or restriction would
otherwise have applied. Such notice shall include an explanation of the substantial risk
under paragraph (1) that permitted such
waiver.
(h) The unexpended balances of prior appropriations provided for activities in this
Act may be available to the same appropriation accounts for such activities established
pursuant to this title. Available balances
may be merged with funds in the applicable
established accounts and thereafter may be
accounted for as one fund for the same time
period as originally enacted.
SEC. 302. None of the funds made available
in this title shall be used for the construction of facilities classified as high-hazard nuclear facilities under 10 CFR Part 830 unless
independent oversight is conducted by the
Office of Enterprise Assessments to ensure
the project is in compliance with nuclear
safety requirements.
SEC. 303. None of the funds made available
in this title may be used to approve critical
decision-2 or critical decision-3 under Department of Energy Order 413.3B, or any successive departmental guidance, for construction projects where the total project cost exceeds $100,000,000, until a separate independent cost estimate has been developed for
the project for that critical decision.
SEC. 304. None of the funds made available
in this title may be used to support a grant
allocation award, discretionary grant award,
or cooperative agreement that exceeds
$100,000,000 in Federal funding unless the
project is carried out through internal independent project management procedures.
SEC. 305. No funds shall be transferred directly from ‘‘Department of Energy—Power
Marketing Administration—Colorado River
Basins Power Marketing Fund, Western Area
Power Administration’’ to the general fund
of the Treasury in the current fiscal year.
SEC. 306. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to draw down and
sell petroleum products from the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve (1) to any entity that is
under the ownership, control, or influence of
the Chinese Communist Party; or (2) except
on condition that such petroleum products
will not be exported to the People’s Republic
of China.
SEC. 307. (a) None of the funds made available by this Act may be used by the Secretary of Energy to award any grant, contract, cooperative agreement, or loan of
$10,000,000 or greater to an entity of concern
as defined in section 10114 of division B of
Public Law 117–167.
(b) The Secretary shall implement the requirements under subsection (a) using a riskbased approach and analytical tools to aggregate, link, analyze, and maintain information reported by an entity seeking or receiving such funds made available by this
Act.
(c) This section shall be applied in a manner consistent with the obligations of the
United States under applicable international
agreements.
(d) The Secretary shall have the authority
to require the submission to the agency, by
an entity seeking or receiving such funds
made available by this Act, documentation
necessary to implement the requirements
under subsection (a).
(e) Chapter 35 of title 44, United States
Code (commonly known as the ‘‘Paperwork

January 8, 2026

Reduction Act’’), shall not apply to the implementation of the requirements under this
section.
(f) The Secretary and other Federal agencies shall coordinate to share relevant information necessary to implement the requirements under subsection (a).
SEC. 308. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this Act may be
used to admit any non-U.S. citizen from Russia or China to any nuclear weapons production facility, as such term is defined in section 4002 of the Atomic Energy Defense Act
(50 U.S.C. 2501), other than areas accessible
to the general public, unless 30 days prior to
facility admittance, the Department of Energy provides notification to the Committees
on Appropriations and Armed Services of
both Houses of Congress.
SEC. 309. Funds made available in this title
under the headings ‘‘Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy’’, ‘‘Electricity’’, ‘‘Fossil
Energy’’, ‘‘Cybersecurity, Energy Security,
and Emergency Response’’, and ‘‘Science’’
that are allocated for the purposes of section
9 of the Small Business Act, as amended (15
U.S.C. 638), including for Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer activities, or for the purposes of section 1001 of the Energy Policy
Act of 2005, as amended (42 U.S.C. 16391), for
Technology Commercialization Fund activities, may be reprogrammed within each account without being subject to the restrictions in section 301 of this title: Provided,
That the administration and selection of
awards pursuant to such sections will be in
coordination with the offices that oversee
the appropriations accounts to which the relevant funding was originally appropriated.
SEC. 310. Section 15(g)(3) of Public Law 85–
536 (15 U.S.C. 644(g)(3)) is further amended by
inserting ‘‘and by site support prime contractors at the National Energy Technology
Laboratory’’ following ‘‘Department of Energy’’.
SEC. 311. (a) Of the amounts specified in
subsection (d), $3,100,000,000 shall be transferred to, and merged with, amounts provided in this Act under the heading ‘‘Nuclear
Energy’’ that remain available until expended, and in addition to amounts otherwise available, shall only be available for the
not more than two competitive awards for
Generation 3+ small modular reactor deployment
projects
described
in
section
311(a)(1)(A) of division D of the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118–42),
the two awards for demonstration projects
made prior to the date of enactment of this
Act under the Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program, as authorized under section
959A of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42
U.S.C. 16279a), and Risk Reduction for Future Demonstrations, as described under the
heading Advanced Reactor Demonstration
Program in the explanatory statement accompanying division C of the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020 (Public
Law 116–94).
(b) Of the amounts specified in subsection
(d), $375,000,000 shall be transferred to, and
merged with, amounts provided in this Act
under the heading ‘‘Grid Deployment Office’’
that remain available until expended, and in
addition to amounts otherwise available,
shall be available for necessary expenses to
carry out a program to enhance the domestic
supply chain for the manufacture of distribution and power transformers, components,
and materials, and electric grid components,
including financial assistance, technical assistance, and competitive awards for procurement and acquisition.
(c) Of the amounts provided in this title
that remain available until expended, the
following amounts shall be derived by transfer from the funds specified in subsection (d):

January 8, 2026

H175

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(1) $1,150,000,000 of the amounts provided
under the heading ‘‘Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy’’;
(2) $100,000,000 of the amounts provided
under the heading ‘‘Nuclear Energy’’;
(3) $140,000,000 of the amounts provided
under the heading ‘‘Fossil Energy’’;
(4) $150,000,000 of the amounts provided
under the heading ‘‘Science’’; and
(5) $150,000,000 of the amounts provided in
the second paragraph under the heading
‘‘Title 17 Innovative Technology Loan Guarantee Program’’.
(d) The funds specified in this subsection
are the unobligated balances, as of the date
of enactment of this Act, from amounts provided in title III of division J of Public Law
117–58, as follows:
(1) $1,281,141,701 of the amounts made available to carry out section 40323 of division D
of Public Law 117–58;
(2) $1,500,000,000 of the amounts made available to carry out subtitle J of title IX of the
Energy Policy Act of 2005;
(3) $1,040,000,000 of the amounts made available to carry out section 969D of the Energy
Policy Act of 2005;
(4) $950,000,000 of the amounts made available to carry out subparagraph (B) or subparagraph (C) of section 962(b)(2) of the Energy Policy Act of 2005; and
(5) $393,858,299 of the amounts provided
under the heading ‘‘Energy Programs—Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy’’.
(e) Not later than 15 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the
Department of Energy shall transmit to the
Committees on Appropriations of both
Houses of Congress a report that details the
amounts repurposed or transferred pursuant
to this section: Provided, That such report
shall be delineated by both source and destination by Treasury Appropriations Fund
Symbol and statutory authority (including
by subparagraph for funds specified in subsection (d)(4)).
(f) Amounts repurposed or transferred pursuant to this section shall continue to be
treated as amounts specified in section 103(b)
of division A of Public Law 118–5.
SEC. 312. Section 4(c)(10)(B) of the Pacific
Northwest Electric Power Planning and Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. 839b(c)(10)(B)) is
amended by striking the period at the end
and inserting ‘‘, adjusted for inflation.’’.
SEC. 313. In making Federal financial assistance, the Department of Energy shall
continue to apply the indirect cost rates, including negotiated indirect cost rates, as described in section 200.414 of title 2, Code of
Federal Regulations, including with respect
to the approval of deviations from negotiated indirect cost rates, to the same extent
and in the same manner as was applied in fiscal year 2024: Provided, That none of the
funds appropriated in this or prior Acts or
otherwise made available to the Department
of Energy may be used to develop, modify, or
implement changes to such negotiated indirect cost rates.
TITLE IV
INDEPENDENT AGENCIES
APPALACHIAN REGIONAL COMMISSION
For expenses necessary to carry out the
programs authorized by the Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1965, as amended,
and for expenses necessary for the Federal
Co-Chairman and the Alternate on the Appalachian Regional Commission, for payment
of the Federal share of the administrative
expenses of the Commission, including services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109, and hire
of passenger motor vehicles, $200,000,000, to
remain available until expended.
DEFENSE NUCLEAR FACILITIES SAFETY BOARD

activities authorized by the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended by Public Law 100–
456, section 1441, $42,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, of which not to
exceed $1,000 shall be available for official reception and representation expenses.
DELTA REGIONAL AUTHORITY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the Delta Regional Authority and to carry out its activities, as authorized by the Delta Regional Authority Act of 2000, notwithstanding sections
382F(d), 382M, and 382N of said Act,
$32,000,000, to remain available until expended.
DENALI COMMISSION
For expenses necessary for the Denali
Commission including the purchase, construction, and acquisition of plant and capital equipment as necessary and other expenses, $18,000,000, to remain available until
expended, notwithstanding the limitations
contained in section 306(g) of the Denali
Commission Act of 1998: Provided, That funds
shall be available for construction projects
for which the Denali Commission is the sole
or primary funding source in an amount not
to exceed 90 percent of total project cost for
distressed communities, as defined by such
section and by section 701 of appendix D,
title VII, Public Law 106–113 (113 Stat. 1501A–
280), and for Indian Tribes, as defined by section 5304(e) of title 25, United States Code,
and in an amount not to exceed 50 percent
for non-distressed communities: Provided further, That notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding payment of a non-Federal share in connection with a grant-in-aid
program, amounts under this heading shall
be available for the payment of such a nonFederal share for any project for which the
Denali Commission is not the sole or primary funding source, provided that such
project is consistent with the purposes of the
Commission.
NORTHERN BORDER REGIONAL COMMISSION
For expenses necessary for the Northern
Border Regional Commission in carrying out
activities authorized by subtitle V of title 40,
United States Code, $42,000,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That such
amounts shall be available for administrative expenses, notwithstanding section
15751(b) of title 40, United States Code.
NORTHWEST REGIONAL COMMISSION
For expenses necessary to establish a
Northwest Regional Commission located in
Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and Montana,
$1,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That amounts provided to
the Northwest Regional Commission shall be
used to carry out activities authorized for
other regional Commissions by subtitle V of
title 40, United States Code.
SOUTHEAST CRESCENT REGIONAL COMMISSION
For expenses necessary for the Southeast
Crescent Regional Commission in carrying
out activities authorized by subtitle V of
title 40, United States Code, $20,000,000, to remain available until expended.
SOUTHWEST BORDER REGIONAL COMMISSION
For expenses necessary for the Southwest
Border Regional Commission in carrying out
activities authorized by subtitle V of title 40,
United States Code, $5,500,000, to remain
available until expended.
GREAT LAKES AUTHORITY
For expenses necessary for the Great
Lakes Authority in carrying out activities
authorized by subtitle V of title 40, United
States Code, $5,000,000, to remain available
until expended.
NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board in carrying out

For expenses necessary for the Commission
in carrying out the purposes of the Energy

Reorganization Act of 1974 and the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, $952,700,000, including official representation expenses not to exceed
$30,000, to remain available until expended:
Provided, That of the amount appropriated
herein, not more than $11,494,000 may be
made available for salaries, travel, and other
support costs for the Office of the Commission, to remain available until September 30,
2027: Provided further, That revenues from licensing fees, inspection services, and other
services and collections estimated at
$804,509,977 in fiscal year 2026 shall be retained and used for necessary salaries and
expenses in this account, notwithstanding 31
U.S.C. 3302, and shall remain available until
expended: Provided further, That the sum
herein appropriated shall be reduced by the
amount of revenues received during fiscal
year 2026 so as to result in a final fiscal year
2026 appropriation estimated at not more
than $148,190,023.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For expenses necessary for the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of the Inspector General Act of 1978,
$18,795,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That revenues from
licensing fees, inspection services, and other
services and collections estimated at
$14,885,000 in fiscal year 2026 shall be retained
and be available until September 30, 2027, for
necessary salaries and expenses in this account, notwithstanding section 3302 of title
31, United States Code: Provided further, That
the sum herein appropriated shall be reduced
by the amount of revenues received during
fiscal year 2026 so as to result in a final fiscal
year 2026 appropriation estimated at not
more than $3,910,000: Provided further, That of
the amounts appropriated under this heading, $1,572,000 shall be for Inspector General
services for the Defense Nuclear Facilities
Safety Board.
NUCLEAR WASTE TECHNICAL REVIEW BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the Nuclear
Waste Technical Review Board, as authorized by Public Law 100–203, section 5051,
$4,000,000, to be derived from the Nuclear
Waste Fund, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
GENERAL PROVISIONS—INDEPENDENT
AGENCIES
SEC. 401. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission shall comply with the July 5, 2011,
version of Chapter VI of its Internal Commission Procedures when responding to Congressional requests for information, consistent with Department of Justice guidance
for all Federal agencies.
SEC. 402. (a) The amounts made available
by this title for the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission may be reprogrammed for any
program, project, or activity, and the Commission shall notify the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress at
least 30 days prior to the use of any proposed
reprogramming that would cause any program funding level to increase or decrease by
more than $500,000 or 10 percent, whichever is
less, during the time period covered by this
Act.
(b)(1) The Nuclear Regulatory Commission
may waive the notification requirement in
subsection (a) if compliance with such requirement would pose a substantial risk to
human health, the environment, welfare, or
national security.
(2) The Nuclear Regulatory Commission
shall notify the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress of any waiver under paragraph (1) as soon as practicable,
but not later than 3 days after the date of
the activity to which a requirement or restriction would otherwise have applied. Such

H176

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

notice shall include an explanation of the
substantial risk under paragraph (1) that
permitted such waiver and shall provide a
detailed report to the Committees of such
waiver and changes to funding levels to programs, projects, or activities.
(c) Except as provided in subsections (a),
(b), and (d), the amounts made available by
this title for ‘‘Nuclear Regulatory Commission—Salaries and Expenses’’ shall be expended as directed in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
(d) None of the funds provided for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission shall be available for obligation or expenditure through a
reprogramming of funds that increases funds
or personnel for any program, project, or activity for which funds are denied or restricted by this Act.
(e) The Commission shall provide a monthly report to the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of Congress, which includes the following for each program,
project, or activity, including any prior year
appropriations—
(1) total budget authority;
(2) total unobligated balances; and
(3) total unliquidated obligations.
TITLE V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 501. None of the funds appropriated by
this Act may be used in any way, directly or
indirectly, to influence congressional action
on any legislation or appropriation matters
pending before Congress, other than to communicate to Members of Congress as described in 18 U.S.C. 1913.
SEC. 502. (a) None of the funds made available in title III of this Act may be transferred to any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States Government,
except pursuant to a transfer made by or
transfer authority provided in this Act or
any other appropriations Act for any fiscal
year, transfer authority referenced in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act), or any authority whereby
a department, agency, or instrumentality of
the United States Government may provide
goods or services to another department,
agency, or instrumentality.
(b) None of the funds made available for
any department, agency, or instrumentality
of the United States Government may be
transferred to accounts funded in title III of
this Act, except pursuant to a transfer made
by or transfer authority provided in this Act
or any other appropriations Act for any fiscal year, transfer authority referenced in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act), or any authority whereby
a department, agency, or instrumentality of
the United States Government may provide
goods or services to another department,
agency, or instrumentality.
(c) The head of any relevant department or
agency funded in this Act utilizing any
transfer authority shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of both Houses of
Congress a semiannual report detailing the
transfer authorities, except for any authority whereby a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States Government
may provide goods or services to another department, agency, or instrumentality, used
in the previous 6 months and in the year-todate. This report shall include the amounts
transferred and the purposes for which they
were transferred, and shall not replace or
modify existing notification requirements
for each authority.
SEC. 503. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to maintain or

establish a computer network unless such
network blocks the viewing, downloading,
and exchanging of pornography.
(b) Nothing in subsection (a) shall limit
the use of funds necessary for any Federal,
State, Tribal, or local law enforcement agency or any other entity carrying out criminal
investigations, prosecution, or adjudication
activities.
This division may be cited as the ‘‘Energy
and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
DIVISION C—DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED
AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
TITLE I
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT
MANAGEMENT OF LANDS AND RESOURCES

For necessary expenses for protection, use,
improvement, development, disposal, cadastral surveying, classification, acquisition of
easements and other interests in lands, and
performance of other functions, including
maintenance of facilities, as authorized by
law, in the management of lands and their
resources under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management, including the
general administration of the Bureau, and
assessment of mineral potential of public
lands pursuant to section 1010(a) of Public
Law 96–487 (16 U.S.C. 3150(a)), $1,260,166,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027; of
which $48,560,000 for annual maintenance and
deferred
maintenance
programs
and
$144,000,000 for the wild horse and burro program, as authorized by Public Law 92–195 (16
U.S.C. 1331 et seq.), shall remain available
until expended: Provided, That amounts in
the fee account of the BLM Permit Processing Improvement Fund may be used for
any bureau-related expenses associated with
the processing of oil and gas applications for
permits to drill and related use of authorizations: Provided further, That of the amounts
made available under this heading, up to
$1,000,000 may be made available for the purposes described in section 122(e)(1)(A) of division G of Public Law 115–31 (43 U.S.C.
1748c(e)(1)(A)): Provided further, That of the
amounts made available under this heading,
not to exceed $15,000 may be for official reception and representation expenses: Provided further, That of the amounts made
available under this heading, $3,246,000 is for
projects specified for Land Management Priorities in the table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment
Incorporation
of
Community
Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending Items’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act): Provided
further, That of the amounts made available
under this heading, up to $3,000,000 of the
amounts made available for Wildlife habitat
management shall be available in fiscal year
2026 subject to a match by at least an equal
amount by the National Fish and Wildlife
Foundation for cost-shared projects supporting conservation of Bureau lands; and
such funds shall be advanced to the Foundation as a lump-sum grant without regard to
when expenses are incurred.
In addition, $42,696,000 is for Mining Law
Administration program operations, including the cost of administering the mining
claim fee program, to remain available until
expended, to be reduced by amounts collected by the Bureau and credited to this appropriation from mining claim maintenance
fees and location fees that are hereby authorized for fiscal year 2026, so as to result in
a final appropriation estimated at not more
than $1,260,166,000, and $2,000,000, to remain
available until expended, from communica-

January 8, 2026

tion site rental fees established by the Bureau for the cost of administering communication site activities.
OREGON AND CALIFORNIA GRANT LANDS

For expenses necessary for management,
protection, and development of resources and
for construction, operation, and maintenance of access roads, reforestation, and
other improvements on the revested Oregon
and California Railroad grant lands, on other
Federal lands in the Oregon and California
land-grant counties of Oregon, and on adjacent rights-of-way; and acquisition of lands
or interests therein, including existing connecting roads on or adjacent to such grant
lands; $115,521,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That the Bureau of Land
Management shall maintain the current
Western Oregon Operating Plan and will
fully participate in a unified wildfire protection system.
RANGE IMPROVEMENTS

For rehabilitation, protection, and acquisition of lands and interests therein, and improvement of Federal rangelands pursuant to
section 401 of the Federal Land Policy and
Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1751), notwithstanding any other Act, sums equal to 50
percent of all moneys received during the
prior fiscal year under sections 3 and 15 of
the Taylor Grazing Act (43 U.S.C. 315b, 315m)
and the amount designated for range improvements from grazing fees and mineral
leasing receipts from Bankhead-Jones lands
transferred to the Department of the Interior pursuant to law, but not less than
$10,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That not to exceed $600,000
shall be available for administrative expenses.
SERVICE CHARGES, DEPOSITS, AND FORFEITURES
For administrative expenses and other
costs related to processing application documents and other authorizations for use and
disposal of public lands and resources, for
costs of providing copies of official public
land documents, for monitoring construction, operation, and termination of facilities
in conjunction with use authorizations, and
for rehabilitation of damaged property, such
amounts as may be collected under Public
Law 94–579 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), and under
section 28 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30
U.S.C. 185), to remain available until expended: Provided, That notwithstanding any
provision to the contrary of section 305(a) of
Public Law 94–579 (43 U.S.C. 1735(a)), any
moneys that have been or will be received
pursuant to that section, whether as a result
of forfeiture, compromise, or settlement, if
not appropriate for refund pursuant to section 305(c) of that Act (43 U.S.C. 1735(c)),
shall be available and may be expended
under the authority of this Act by the Secretary of the Interior to improve, protect, or
rehabilitate any public lands administered
through the Bureau of Land Management
which have been damaged by the action of a
resource developer, purchaser, permittee, or
any unauthorized person, without regard to
whether all moneys collected from each such
action are used on the exact lands damaged
which led to the action: Provided further,
That any such moneys that are in excess of
amounts needed to repair damage to the
exact land for which funds were collected
may be used to repair other damaged public
lands.
MISCELLANEOUS TRUST FUNDS

In addition to amounts authorized to be
expended under existing laws, there is hereby
appropriated such amounts as may be contributed under section 307 of Public Law 94–
579 (43 U.S.C. 1737), and such amounts as may
be advanced for administrative costs, surveys, appraisals, and costs of making conveyances of omitted lands under section

January 8, 2026

H177

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

211(b) of that Act (43 U.S.C. 1721(b)), to remain available until expended.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

The Bureau of Land Management may
carry out the operations funded under this
Act by direct expenditure, contracts, grants,
cooperative agreements, and reimbursable
agreements with public and private entities,
including with States. Appropriations for the
Bureau shall be available for purchase, erection, and dismantlement of temporary structures, and alteration and maintenance of
necessary buildings and appurtenant facilities to which the United States has title; up
to $100,000 for payments, at the discretion of
the Secretary, for information or evidence
concerning violations of laws administered
by the Bureau; miscellaneous and emergency
expenses of enforcement activities authorized or approved by the Secretary and to be
accounted for solely on the Secretary’s certificate, not to exceed $10,000: Provided, That
notwithstanding Public Law 90–620 (44 U.S.C.
501), the Bureau may, under cooperative
cost-sharing and partnership arrangements
authorized by law, procure printing services
from cooperators in connection with jointly
produced publications for which the cooperators share the cost of printing either in cash
or in services, and the Bureau determines
the cooperator is capable of meeting accepted quality standards: Provided further, That
projects to be funded pursuant to a written
commitment by a State government to provide an identified amount of money in support of the project may be carried out by the
Bureau on a reimbursable basis: Provided further, That the Bureau of Land Management
shall maintain staffing levels in order to fulfill the mission required under title 16, title
30, title 43, and title 54, United States Code,
including to protect natural and cultural resources, provide and maintain appropriate
access and recreation for visitors, provide
safety precautions for visitors and staff,
maintain physical and natural infrastructure, provide information and respond to
stakeholders and the general public, conduct
tribal consultation, provide for administrative support, manage energy and minerals
resources, and carry out other activities in
support of effectively managing the National
Conservation Lands and other public lands in
a timely manner.
UNITED STATES FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service, as authorized by law, and for scientific and economic
studies, general administration, and for the
performance of other authorized functions
related to such resources, $1,451,515,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, of
which not to exceed $15,000 may be for official reception and representation expenses:
Provided, That not to exceed $14,000,000 shall
be used for implementing subsections (a), (b),
(c), and (e) of section 4 of the Endangered
Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1533) (except for
processing petitions, developing and issuing
proposed and final regulations, and taking
any other steps to implement actions described in subsection (c)(2)(A), (c)(2)(B)(i), or
(c)(2)(B)(ii) of such section): Provided further,
That of the amount appropriated under this
heading, $19,115,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2028, shall be for projects specified for Stewardship Priorities in the table
titled ‘‘Interior and Environment Incorporation of Community Project Funding Items/
Congressionally Directed Spending Items’’
included for this division in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided further, That amounts in the

preceding proviso may be transferred to the
appropriate program, project, or activity
under this heading and shall continue to
only be available for the purposes and in
such amounts as such funds were originally
appropriated.
CONSTRUCTION

For construction, improvement, acquisition, or removal of buildings and other facilities required in the conservation, management, investigation, protection, and utilization of fish and wildlife resources, and
the acquisition of lands and interests therein; $14,709,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That of the amounts made
available under this heading, $1,000,000 is for
the project specified for Line Item Construction Projects in the table titled ‘‘Interior
and Environment Incorporation of Community Project Funding Items/Congressionally
Directed Spending Items’’ included for this
division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act).
COOPERATIVE ENDANGERED SPECIES
CONSERVATION FUND

For expenses necessary to carry out section 6 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973
(16 U.S.C. 1535), $22,202,000, to remain available until expended, to be derived from the
Cooperative Endangered Species Conservation Fund.
NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE FUND

For expenses necessary to implement the
Act of October 17, 1978 (16 U.S.C. 715s),
$13,228,000.
NORTH AMERICAN WETLANDS CONSERVATION
FUND

For expenses necessary to carry out the
provisions of the North American Wetlands
Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. 4401 et seq.),
$49,000,000, to remain available until expended.
NEOTROPICAL MIGRATORY BIRD CONSERVATION

For expenses necessary to carry out the
Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation
Act (16 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.), $5,000,000, to remain available until expended.
MULTINATIONAL SPECIES CONSERVATION FUND

For expenses necessary to carry out the
African Elephant Conservation Act (16 U.S.C.
4201 et seq.), the Asian Elephant Conservation Act of 1997 (16 U.S.C. 4261 et seq.), the
Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Act of
1994 (16 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.), the Great Ape
Conservation Act of 2000 (16 U.S.C. 6301 et
seq.), and the Marine Turtle Conservation
Act of 2004 (16 U.S.C. 6601 et seq.), $21,000,000,
to remain available until expended.
STATE AND TRIBAL WILDLIFE GRANTS

For wildlife conservation grants to States
and to the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
Guam, the United States Virgin Islands, the
Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa,
and Indian tribes under the provisions of the
Fish and Wildlife Act of 1956 and the Fish
and Wildlife Coordination Act, for the development and implementation of programs for
the benefit of wildlife and their habitat, including species that are not hunted or fished,
$73,812,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That of the amount provided herein, $6,200,000 is for a competitive
grant program for Indian tribes not subject
to the remaining provisions of this appropriation: Provided further, That $7,612,000 is
for a competitive grant program to implement approved plans for States, territories,
and other jurisdictions and at the discretion
of affected States, the regional Associations
of fish and wildlife agencies, not subject to
the remaining provisions of this appropriation: Provided further, That the Secretary
shall, after deducting $13,812,000 and adminis-

trative expenses, apportion the amount provided herein in the following manner: (1) to
the District of Columbia and to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, each a sum equal
to not more than one-half of 1 percent thereof; and (2) to Guam, American Samoa, the
United States Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
each a sum equal to not more than onefourth of 1 percent thereof: Provided further,
That the Secretary of the Interior shall apportion the remaining amount in the following manner: (1) one-third of which is
based on the ratio to which the land area of
such State bears to the total land area of all
such States; and (2) two-thirds of which is
based on the ratio to which the population of
such State bears to the total population of
all such States: Provided further, That the
amounts apportioned under this paragraph
shall be adjusted equitably so that no State
shall be apportioned a sum which is less than
1 percent of the amount available for apportionment under this paragraph for any fiscal
year or more than 5 percent of such amount:
Provided further, That the Federal share of
planning grants shall not exceed 75 percent
of the total costs of such projects and the
Federal share of implementation grants
shall not exceed 65 percent of the total costs
of such projects: Provided further, That the
non-Federal share of such projects may not
be derived from Federal grant programs: Provided further, That any amount apportioned
in 2026 to any State, territory, or other jurisdiction that remains unobligated as of September 30, 2027, shall be reapportioned, together with funds appropriated in 2028, in the
manner provided herein.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

The United States Fish and Wildlife Service may carry out the operations of Service
programs by direct expenditure, contracts,
grants, cooperative agreements and reimbursable agreements with public and private
entities. Appropriations and funds available
to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall be available for repair of damage to
public roads within and adjacent to reservation areas caused by operations of the Service; options for the purchase of land at not to
exceed one dollar for each option; facilities
incident to such public recreational uses on
conservation areas as are consistent with
their primary purpose; and the maintenance
and improvement of aquaria, buildings, and
other facilities under the jurisdiction of the
Service and to which the United States has
title, and which are used pursuant to law in
connection with management, and investigation of fish and wildlife resources: Provided,
That notwithstanding 44 U.S.C. 501, the Service may, under cooperative cost sharing and
partnership arrangements authorized by law,
procure printing services from cooperators
in connection with jointly produced publications for which the cooperators share at
least one-half the cost of printing either in
cash or services and the Service determines
the cooperator is capable of meeting accepted quality standards: Provided further, That
the Service may accept donated aircraft as
replacements for existing aircraft: Provided
further, That notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302,
all fees collected for non-toxic shot review
and approval shall be deposited under the
heading ‘‘United States Fish and Wildlife
Service—Resource Management’’ and shall
be available to the Secretary, without further appropriation, to be used for expenses of
processing of such non-toxic shot type or
coating applications and revising regulations
as necessary, and shall remain available
until expended: Provided further, That the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall
maintain staffing levels in order to fulfill
the mission required under title 16, title 43,

H178

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

and title 54, United States Code, including to
protect natural and cultural resources, provide and maintain appropriate access and
recreation for visitors, provide safety precautions for visitors and staff, maintain
physical and natural infrastructure, provide
information and respond to stakeholders and
the general public, conduct tribal consultation, provide for administrative support, enforce Federal wildlife laws, protect species,
uphold Acts, treaties, conventions and agreements to conserve, protect, and enhance fish,
wildlife, plants, and their habitats, providing
professional expertise to other agencies and
international and private partners, and carry
out other activities in support of effectively
operating the National Fish Hatchery System and National Wildlife Refuge System
and carrying out programs administered by
the United States Fish and Wildlife Service
in a timely manner.
NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
OPERATION OF THE NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM

For expenses necessary for the management, operation, protection, and maintenance of areas and facilities administered by
the National Park Service and for the general administration of the National Park
Service, $2,877,195,000, of which $11,661,000 for
planning and interagency coordination in
support of Everglades restoration and
$148,285,000 for maintenance, repair, or rehabilitation projects for constructed assets and
$157,950,000 for cyclic maintenance projects
for constructed assets and cultural resources
and $12,500,000 for uses authorized by section
101122 of title 54, United States Code shall remain available until September 30, 2027, and
not to exceed $15,000 may be for official reception and representative expenses: Provided, That funds appropriated under this
heading in this Act are available for the purposes of section 5 of Public Law 95–348: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 9
of the 400 Years of African-American History
Commission Act (36 U.S.C. note prec. 101;
Public Law 115–102), $3,300,000 of the funds
provided under this heading shall be made
available for the purposes specified by that
Act: Provided further, That sections 7(b) and
8 of that Act shall be amended by striking
‘‘July 1, 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘July 1, 2027’’.
In addition, for purposes described in section 2404 of Public Law 116–9, an amount
equal to the amount deposited in this fiscal
year into the National Park Medical Services Fund established pursuant to such section of such Act, to remain available until
expended, shall be derived from such Fund.
NATIONAL RECREATION AND PRESERVATION

For expenses necessary to carry out recreation programs, natural programs, cultural
programs, heritage partnership programs,
environmental compliance and review, international park affairs, and grant administration, not otherwise provided for, $91,596,000,
to remain available until September 30, 2027,
of which $250,000 shall be for projects specified for Statutory and Contractual Aid in the
table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment Incorporation of Community Project Funding
Items/Congressionally Directed Spending
Items’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act).
HISTORIC PRESERVATION FUND

For expenses necessary in carrying out the
National Historic Preservation Act (division
A of subtitle III of title 54, United States
Code), $205,059,000, to be derived from the
Historic Preservation Fund and to remain
available until September 30, 2027, of which
$25,500,000 shall be for Save America’s Treasures grants for preservation of nationally
significant sites, structures and artifacts as

authorized by section 7303 of the Omnibus
Public Land Management Act of 2009 (54
U.S.C. 3089): Provided, That an individual
Save America’s Treasures grant shall be
matched by non-Federal funds: Provided further, That individual projects shall only be
eligible for one grant: Provided further, That
all projects to be funded shall be approved by
the Secretary of the Interior in consultation
with the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations: Provided further,That of the
funds provided for the Historic Preservation
Fund, $1,250,000 is for competitive grants for
the survey and nomination of properties to
the National Register of Historic Places and
as National Historic Landmarks associated
with communities currently under-represented, as determined by the Secretary;
$24,000,000 is for competitive grants to preserve the sites and stories of the African
American Civil Rights movement; $5,000,000
is for competitive grants to preserve sites related to the struggle of all people to achieve
equal rights in America; $11,000,000 is for
grants to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities; $7,906,000 is for competitive
grants for the restoration of historic properties of national, State, and local significance listed on or eligible for inclusion on
the National Register of Historic Places, to
be made without imposing the usage or direct grant restrictions of section 101(e)(3) (54
U.S.C. 302904) of the National Historic Preservation Act; $4,907,000 is for a competitive
grant
program
to
honor
the
semiquincentennial
anniversary
of
the
United States by restoring and preserving
sites and structures listed on the National
Register of Historic Places that commemorate the founding of the nation; $62,150,000 is
for State Historic Preservation Offices;
$23,750,000 is for Tribal Historic Preservation
Offices; and $15,596,000 is for projects specified for the Historic Preservation Fund in
the table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment
Incorporation of Community Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending
Items’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act): Provided further, That
such competitive grants shall be made without imposing the matching requirements in
section 302902(b)(3) of title 54, United States
Code to States and Indian tribes as defined
in chapter 3003 of such title, Native Hawaiian
organizations, local governments, including
Certified Local Governments, and non-profit
organizations.
CONSTRUCTION

For construction, improvements, repair, or
replacement of physical facilities, and related equipment, and compliance and planning for programs and areas administered by
the National Park Service, $88,461,000, of
which $3,190,000 is for projects specified for
Line item construction and maintenance in
the table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment
Incorporation of Community Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending
Items’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act), to remain available until
expended: Provided, That notwithstanding
any other provision of law, for any project
initially funded in fiscal year 2026 with a future phase indicated in the National Park
Service 5–Year Line Item Construction Plan,
a single procurement may be issued which
includes the full scope of the project: Provided further, That the solicitation and contract shall contain the clause availability of
funds found at 48 CFR 52.232–18: Provided further, That National Park Service Donations,
Park Concessions Franchise Fees, and Recreation Fees may be made available for the

January 8, 2026

cost of adjustments and changes within the
original scope of effort for projects funded by
the National Park Service Construction appropriation: Provided further, That the Secretary of the Interior shall consult with the
Committees on Appropriations, in accordance with current reprogramming thresholds, prior to making any changes authorized
by this section.
CENTENNIAL CHALLENGE

For expenses necessary to carry out the
provisions of section 101701 of title 54, United
States Code, relating to challenge cost share
agreements, $5,000,000, to remain available
until expended, for Centennial Challenge
projects and programs: Provided, That not
less than 50 percent of the total cost of each
project or program shall be derived from
non-Federal sources in the form of donated
cash, assets, or a pledge of donation guaranteed by an irrevocable letter of credit.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

In addition to other uses set forth in section 101917(c)(2) of title 54, United States
Code, franchise fees credited to a sub-account shall be available for expenditure by
the Secretary, without further appropriation, for use at any unit within the National
Park System to extinguish or reduce liability for Possessory Interest or leasehold surrender interest. Such funds may only be used
for this purpose to the extent that the benefitting unit anticipated franchise fee receipts
over the term of the contract at that unit
exceed the amount of funds used to extinguish or reduce liability. Franchise fees at
the benefitting unit shall be credited to the
sub-account of the originating unit over a
period not to exceed the term of a single contract at the benefitting unit, in the amount
of funds so expended to extinguish or reduce
liability.
For the costs of administration of the
Land and Water Conservation Fund grants
authorized by section 105(a)(2)(B) of Public
Law 109–432 (43 U.S.C. 1331 note), the National Park Service may retain up to 3 percent of the amounts which are authorized to
be disbursed under such section, such retained amounts to remain available until expended.
National Park Service funds may be transferred to the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), Department of Transportation,
for purposes authorized under 23 U.S.C. 203.
Transfers may include a reasonable amount
for FHWA administrative support costs.
The National Park Service shall maintain
staffing levels in order to fulfill the mission
required under title 16, title 43, and title 54,
United States Code, including to protect natural and cultural resources, provide and
maintain appropriate access and recreation
for visitors, provide safety precautions for
visitors and staff, maintain physical and natural infrastructure, provide information and
respond to stakeholders and the general public, conduct tribal consultation, provide for
administrative support, administer historic
and other preservation programs, and carry
out other activities in support of effectively
operating the National Park System and carrying out programs administered by the National Park Service in a timely manner.
UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
SURVEYS, INVESTIGATIONS, AND RESEARCH
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For expenses necessary for the United
States Geological Survey to perform surveys, investigations, and research covering
topography, geology, hydrology, biology, and
the mineral and water resources of the
United States, its territories and possessions, and other areas as authorized by 43

January 8, 2026

H179

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

U.S.C. 31, 1332, and 1340; classify lands as to
their mineral and water resources; give engineering supervision to power permittees and
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission licensees; administer the minerals exploration
program (30 U.S.C. 641); conduct inquiries
into the economic conditions affecting mining and materials processing industries (30
U.S.C. 3, 21a, and 1603; 50 U.S.C. 98g(a)(1)) and
related purposes as authorized by law; and to
publish and disseminate data relative to the
foregoing activities; $1,420,433,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027; of which
$95,334,000 shall remain available until expended for satellite operations; and of which
$74,840,000 shall be available until expended
for deferred maintenance and capital improvement projects that exceed $100,000 in
cost: Provided, That none of the funds provided for the ecosystem research activity
shall be used to conduct new surveys on private property, unless specifically authorized
in writing by the property owner: Provided
further, That no part of this appropriation
shall be used to pay more than one-half the
cost of topographic mapping or water resources data collection and investigations
carried on in cooperation with States and
municipalities: Provided further, That of the
amount appropriated under this heading,
$2,250,000 shall be for projects specified for
Special Initiatives in the table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment Incorporation of Community Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending Items’’ included for
this division in the explanatory statement
described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act):
Provided further, That amounts in the preceding proviso may be transferred to the appropriate program, project, or activity under
this heading and shall continue to only be
available for the purposes and in such
amounts as such funds were originally appropriated: Provided further, That of the amount
appropriated under this heading, not to exceed $15,000 may be for official reception and
representation expenses.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

From within the amount appropriated for
activities of the United States Geological
Survey such sums as are necessary shall be
available for contracting for the furnishing
of topographic maps and for the making of
geophysical or other specialized surveys
when it is administratively determined that
such procedures are in the public interest;
construction and maintenance of necessary
buildings and appurtenant facilities; acquisition of lands for gauging stations, observation wells, and seismic equipment; expenses
of the United States National Committee for
Geological Sciences; and payment of compensation and expenses of persons employed
by the Survey duly appointed to represent
the United States in the negotiation and administration of interstate compacts: Provided, That activities funded by appropriations herein made may be accomplished
through the use of contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements (including noncompetitive cooperative agreements with tribes) as
defined in section 6302 of title 31, United
States Code: Provided further, That the
United States Geological Survey may enter
into contracts or cooperative agreements directly with individuals or indirectly with institutions or nonprofit organizations, without regard to 41 U.S.C. 6101, for the temporary or intermittent services of students
or recent graduates, who shall be considered
employees for the purpose of chapters 57 and
81 of title 5, United States Code, relating to
compensation for travel and work injuries,
and chapter 171 of title 28, United States
Code, relating to tort claims, but shall not
be considered to be Federal employees for
any other purposes.

BUREAU OF OCEAN ENERGY MANAGEMENT
OCEAN ENERGY MANAGEMENT

For expenses necessary for granting and
administering leases, easements, rights-ofway, and agreements for use for oil and gas,
other minerals, energy, and marine-related
purposes on the Outer Continental Shelf and
approving operations related thereto, as authorized by law; for environmental studies,
as authorized by law; for implementing other
laws and to the extent provided by Presidential or Secretarial delegation; and for
matching grants or cooperative agreements,
$191,128,000, of which $133,128,000 is to remain
available until September 30, 2027, and of
which $58,000,000 is to remain available until
expended: Provided, That this total appropriation shall be reduced by amounts collected by the Secretary of the Interior and
credited to this appropriation from additions
to receipts resulting from increases to lease
rental rates in effect on August 5, 1993, and
from cost recovery fees from activities conducted by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management pursuant to the Outer Continental
Shelf Lands Act, including studies, assessments, analysis, and miscellaneous administrative activities: Provided further, That the
sum herein appropriated shall be reduced as
such collections are received during the fiscal year, so as to result in a final fiscal year
2026 appropriation estimated at not more
than $133,128,000: Provided further, That not
to exceed $3,000 shall be available for reasonable expenses related to promoting volunteer
beach and marine cleanup activities: Provided further, That not to exceed $5,000 shall
be available for official reception and representation expenses.
BUREAU OF SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
ENFORCEMENT
OFFSHORE SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
ENFORCEMENT

For expenses necessary for the regulation
of operations related to leases, easements,
rights-of-way, and agreements for use for oil
and gas, other minerals, energy, and marinerelated purposes on the Outer Continental
Shelf, as authorized by law; for enforcing and
implementing laws and regulations as authorized by law and to the extent provided
by Presidential or Secretarial delegation;
and for matching grants or cooperative
agreements, $160,751,000, of which $128,871,000,
including not to exceed $3,000 for official reception and representation expenses, is to remain available until September 30, 2027, and
of which $31,880,000 is to remain available
until expended, including $2,880,000 for offshore decommissioning activities: Provided,
That this total appropriation shall be reduced by amounts collected by the Secretary
of the Interior and credited to this appropriation from additions to receipts resulting
from increases to lease rental rates in effect
on August 5, 1993, and from cost recovery
fees from activities conducted by the Bureau
of Safety and Environmental Enforcement
pursuant to the Outer Continental Shelf
Lands Act, including studies, assessments,
analysis, and miscellaneous administrative
activities: Provided further, That the sum
herein appropriated shall be reduced as such
collections are received during the fiscal
year, so as to result in a final fiscal year 2026
appropriation estimated at not more than
$131,751,000.
For an additional amount, $36,000,000, to
remain available until expended, to be reduced by amounts collected by the Secretary
and credited to this appropriation, which
shall be derived from non-refundable inspection fees collected in fiscal year 2026, as provided in this Act: Provided, That for fiscal
year 2026, not less than 50 percent of the inspection fees expended by the Bureau of

Safety and Environmental Enforcement will
be used to fund personnel and mission-related costs to expand capacity and expedite
the orderly development, subject to environmental safeguards, of the Outer Continental
Shelf pursuant to the Outer Continental
Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.), including the review of applications for permits to drill.
OIL SPILL RESEARCH

For necessary expenses to carry out title I,
section 1016; title IV, sections 4202 and 4303;
title VII; and title VIII, section 8201 of the
Oil Pollution Act of 1990, $15,099,000, which
shall be derived from the Oil Spill Liability
Trust Fund, to remain available until expended.
OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION AND
ENFORCEMENT
REGULATION AND TECHNOLOGY

For necessary expenses to carry out the
provisions of the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act of 1977, Public Law 95–87,
$117,575,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, of which $63,700,000 shall be
available for State and tribal regulatory
grants, and of which not to exceed $5,000 may
be for official reception and representation
expenses: Provided, That appropriations for
the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement may provide for the travel
and per diem expenses of State and tribal
personnel attending Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement sponsored
training.
In addition, for costs to review, administer, and enforce permits issued by the Office pursuant to section 507 of Public Law 95–
87 (30 U.S.C. 1257), $40,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That fees assessed and collected by the Office pursuant
to such section 507 shall be credited to this
account as discretionary offsetting collections, to remain available until expended:
Provided further, That the sum herein appropriated from the general fund shall be reduced as collections are received during the
fiscal year, so as to result in a fiscal year
2026 appropriation estimated at not more
than $117,575,000.
ABANDONED MINE RECLAMATION FUND

For necessary expenses to carry out title
IV of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, Public Law 95–87,
$32,975,000, to be derived from receipts of the
Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund and to
remain available until expended: Provided,
That pursuant to Public Law 97–365, the Department of the Interior is authorized to use
up to 20 percent from the recovery of the delinquent debt owed to the United States Government to pay for contracts to collect these
debts: Provided further, That funds made
available under title IV of Public Law 95–87
may be used for any required non-Federal
share of the cost of projects funded by the
Federal Government for the purpose of environmental restoration related to treatment
or abatement of acid mine drainage from
abandoned mines: Provided further, That such
projects must be consistent with the purposes and priorities of the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act: Provided further, That amounts provided under this heading may be used for the travel and per diem
expenses of State and tribal personnel attending Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement sponsored training:
Provided further, That of the amounts provided under this heading, not to exceed $5,000
shall be available for official reception and
representation expenses.
In addition, $134,000,000, to remain available until expended, for payments to States
and federally recognized Indian tribes for
reclamation of abandoned mine lands and

H180

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

other related activities in accordance with
the terms and conditions described in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act): Provided, That such additional amount shall be used for economic
and community development in conjunction
with the priorities described in section 403(a)
of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 U.S.C. 1233(a)): Provided
further, That of such additional amount,
$88,500,000 shall be distributed in equal
amounts to the three Appalachian States
with the greatest amount of unfunded needs
to meet the priorities described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of such section, $33,750,000
shall be distributed in equal amounts to the
three Appalachian States with the subsequent greatest amount of unfunded needs to
meet such priorities, and $11,750,000 shall be
for grants to federally recognized Indian
tribes, without regard to their status as certified or uncertified under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30
U.S.C. 1233(a)), for reclamation of abandoned
mine lands and other related activities in accordance with the terms and conditions described in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act) and shall
be used for economic and community development in conjunction with the priorities in
section 403(a) of the Surface Mining Control
and Reclamation Act of 1977: Provided further, That such payments shall be made to
States and federally recognized Indian tribes
not later than 90 days after the date of the
enactment of this Act: Provided further, That
if payments have not been made by the date
specified in the preceding proviso, the
amount appropriated for salaries and expenses under the heading ‘‘Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement’’ shall
be reduced by $100,000 per day until such payments have been made.
INDIAN AFFAIRS
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
OPERATION OF INDIAN PROGRAMS
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For expenses necessary for the operation of
Indian programs, as authorized by law, including the Snyder Act of November 2, 1921
(25 U.S.C. 13) and the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975 (25
U.S.C. 5301 et seq.), $1,933,200,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, except as
otherwise provided herein; of which not to
exceed $15,000 may be for official reception
and representation expenses; of which not to
exceed $78,494,000 shall be for welfare assistance payments: Provided, That in cases of
designated Federal disasters, the Secretary
of the Interior may exceed such cap for welfare payments from the amounts provided
herein, to provide for disaster relief to Indian communities affected by the disaster:
Provided further, That federally recognized
Indian tribes and tribal organizations of federally recognized Indian tribes may use their
tribal priority allocations for unmet welfare
assistance costs: Provided further, That not
to exceed $71,495,000 shall remain available
until expended for housing improvement,
road maintenance, land acquisition, attorney
fees, litigation support, land records improvement, hearings and appeals, and the
Navajo-Hopi Settlement Program: Provided
further, That of the amount appropriated
under this heading, $8,491,000 shall be for
projects specified for Special Initiatives
(CDS) in the table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment
Incorporation
of
Community
Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending Items’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding

division A of this consolidated Act): Provided
further, That any forestry funds allocated to
a federally recognized tribe which remain
unobligated as of September 30, 2027, may be
transferred during fiscal year 2028 to an Indian forest land assistance account established for the benefit of the holder of the
funds within the holder’s trust fund account:
Provided further, That any such unobligated
balances not so transferred shall expire on
September 30, 2028: Provided further, That in
order to enhance the safety of Bureau field
employees, the Bureau may use funds to purchase uniforms or other identifying articles
of clothing for personnel: Provided further,
That not to exceed $7,096,000 of funds made
available under this heading may, as needed,
be transferred to ‘‘Office of the Secretary—
Departmental Operations’’ for trust, probate,
and administrative functions: Provided further, That the Bureau of Indian Affairs may
accept transfers of funds from United States
Customs and Border Protection to supplement any other funding available for reconstruction or repair of roads owned by the Bureau of Indian Affairs as identified on the
National Tribal Transportation Facility Inventory, 23 U.S.C. 202(b)(1).
INDIAN LAND CONSOLIDATION

For the acquisition of fractional interests
to further land consolidation as authorized
under the Indian Land Consolidation Act
Amendments of 2000 (Public Law 106–462),
and the American Indian Probate Reform
Act of 2004 (Public Law 108–374), $4,000,000, to
remain available until expended: Provided,
That any provision of the Indian Land Consolidation Act Amendments of 2000 (Public
Law 106–462) that requires or otherwise relates to application of a lien shall not apply
to the acquisitions funded herein.
CONTRACT SUPPORT COSTS

For payments to tribes and tribal organizations for contract support costs associated
with Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act agreements with the
Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Bureau of
Indian Education for fiscal year 2026, such
sums as may be necessary, which shall be
available for obligation through September
30, 2027: Provided, That notwithstanding any
other provision of law, no amounts made
available under this heading shall be available for transfer to another budget account.
PAYMENTS FOR TRIBAL LEASES

For payments to tribes and tribal organizations for leases pursuant to section 105(l)
of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5324(l)) for
fiscal year 2026, such sums as may be necessary, which shall be available for obligation through September 30, 2027: Provided,
That notwithstanding any other provision of
law, no amounts made available under this
heading shall be available for transfer to another budget account.
CONSTRUCTION
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For construction, repair, improvement,
and maintenance of irrigation and power systems, buildings, utilities, and other facilities, including architectural and engineering
services by contract; acquisition of lands,
and interests in lands; and preparation of
lands for farming, and for construction of
the Navajo Indian Irrigation Project pursuant to Public Law 87–483; $135,780,000, to remain available until expended: Provided,
That such amounts as may be available for
the construction of the Navajo Indian Irrigation Project may be transferred to the Bureau of Reclamation: Provided further, That
any funds provided for the Safety of Dams
program pursuant to the Indian Dams Safety
Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 3804), shall be made

January 8, 2026

available on a nonreimbursable basis: Provided further, That this appropriation may be
reimbursed from the Bureau of Trust Funds
Administration appropriation for the appropriate share of construction costs for space
expansion needed in agency offices to meet
trust reform implementation: Provided further, That of the funds made available under
this heading, $10,000,000 shall be derived from
the Indian Irrigation Fund established by
section 3211 of the WIIN Act (Public Law 114–
322): Provided further, That amounts provided
under this heading are made available for
the modernization of Federal field communication capabilities, in addition to amounts
otherwise made available for such purpose.
INDIAN LAND AND WATER CLAIM SETTLEMENTS
AND MISCELLANEOUS PAYMENTS TO INDIANS

For payments and necessary administrative expenses for implementation of Indian
land and water claim settlements pursuant
to Public Laws 99–264, 101–618, and 117–349
and for implementation of other land and
water rights settlements, $976,000, to remain
available until expended.
INDIAN GUARANTEED LOAN PROGRAM ACCOUNT

For the cost of guaranteed loans and insured loans, $13,329,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027, of which $2,125,000 is
for administrative expenses, as authorized by
the Indian Financing Act of 1974: Provided,
That such costs, including the cost of modifying such loans, shall be as defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of
1974: Provided further, That these funds are
available to subsidize total loan principal,
any part of which is to be guaranteed or insured, not to exceed $227,318,923.
BUREAU OF INDIAN EDUCATION
OPERATION OF INDIAN EDUCATION PROGRAMS

For expenses necessary for the operation of
Indian education programs, as authorized by
law, including the Snyder Act of November 2,
1921 (25 U.S.C. 13), the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of
1975 (25 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.), the Education
Amendments of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 2001–2019), and
the Tribally Controlled Schools Act of 1988
(25 U.S.C. 2501 et seq.), $1,131,617,000 to remain available until September 30, 2027, except as otherwise provided herein: Provided,
That federally recognized Indian tribes and
tribal organizations of federally recognized
Indian tribes may use their tribal priority
allocations for unmet welfare assistance
costs: Provided further, That not to exceed
$833,592,000 for school operations costs of Bureau-funded schools and other education programs shall become available on June 1, 2026,
and shall remain available until September
30, 2027: Provided further, That notwithstanding any other provision of law, including but not limited to the Indian Self–Determination Act of 1975 (25 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.)
and section 1128 of the Education Amendments of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 2008), not to exceed
$95,822,000 within and only from such
amounts made available for school operations shall be available for administrative
cost grants associated with grants approved
prior to June 1, 2026: Provided further, That in
order to enhance the safety of Bureau field
employees, the Bureau may use funds to purchase uniforms or other identifying articles
of clothing for personnel.
EDUCATION CONSTRUCTION

For construction, repair, improvement,
and maintenance of buildings, utilities, and
other facilities necessary for the operation
of Indian education programs, including architectural and engineering services by contract; acquisition of lands, and interests in
lands; $234,725,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That in order to ensure
timely completion of construction projects,

January 8, 2026

H181

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

the Secretary of the Interior may assume
control of a project and all funds related to
the project, if, not later than 18 months after
the date of the enactment of this Act, any
Public Law 100–297 (25 U.S.C. 2501, et seq.)
grantee receiving funds appropriated in this
Act or in any prior Act, has not completed
the planning and design phase of the project
and commenced construction.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

The Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Bureau of Indian Education may carry out the
operation of Indian programs by direct expenditure, contracts, cooperative agreements, compacts, and grants, either directly
or in cooperation with States and other organizations.
Notwithstanding Public Law 87–279 (25
U.S.C. 15), the Bureau of Indian Affairs may
contract for services in support of the management, operation, and maintenance of the
Power Division of the San Carlos Irrigation
Project.
Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, no funds available to the Bureau of Indian Affairs or the Bureau of Indian Education for central office oversight and Executive Direction and Administrative Services
(except Executive Direction and Administrative Services funding for Tribal Priority Allocations, regional offices, and facilities operations and maintenance) shall be available
for contracts, grants, compacts, or cooperative agreements with the Bureau of Indian
Affairs or the Bureau of Indian Education
under the provisions of the Indian Self-Determination Act or the Tribal Self-Governance Act of 1994 (Public Law 103–413).
In the event any tribe returns appropriations made available by this Act to the Bureau of Indian Affairs or the Bureau of Indian Education, this action shall not diminish the Federal Government’s trust responsibility to that tribe, or the government-togovernment relationship between the United
States and that tribe, or that tribe’s ability
to access future appropriations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, no funds available to the Bureau of Indian Education, other than the amounts provided herein for assistance to public schools
under 25 U.S.C. 5342 et seq., shall be available
to support the operation of any elementary
or secondary school in the State of Alaska.
No funds available to the Bureau of Indian
Education shall be used to support expanded
grades for any school or dormitory beyond
the grade structure in place or approved by
the Secretary of the Interior at each school
in the Bureau of Indian Education school
system as of October 1, 1995, except that the
Secretary of the Interior may waive this prohibition to support expansion of up to one
additional grade when the Secretary determines such waiver is needed to support accomplishment of the mission of the Bureau
of Indian Education, or more than one grade
to expand the elementary grade structure for
Bureau-funded schools with a K–2 grade
structure on October 1, 1996. Appropriations
made available in this or any prior Act for
schools funded by the Bureau shall be available, in accordance with the Bureau’s funding formula, only to the schools in the Bureau school system as of September 1, 1996,
and to any school or school program that
was reinstated in fiscal year 2012. Funds
made available under this Act may not be
used to establish a charter school at a Bureau-funded school (as that term is defined
in section 1141 of the Education Amendments
of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 2021)), except that a charter
school that is in existence on the date of the
enactment of this Act and that has operated
at a Bureau-funded school before September
1, 1999, may continue to operate during that
period, but only if the charter school pays to

the Bureau a pro rata share of funds to reimburse the Bureau for the use of the real and
personal property (including buses and vans),
the funds of the charter school are kept separate and apart from Bureau funds, and the
Bureau does not assume any obligation for
charter school programs of the State in
which the school is located if the charter
school loses such funding. Employees of Bureau-funded schools sharing a campus with a
charter school and performing functions related to the charter school’s operation and
employees of a charter school shall not be
treated as Federal employees for purposes of
chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code.
Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, including section 113 of title I of appendix C of Public Law 106–113, if in fiscal year
2003 or 2004 a grantee received indirect and
administrative costs pursuant to a distribution formula based on section 5(f) of Public
Law 101–301, the Secretary shall continue to
distribute indirect and administrative cost
funds to such grantee using the section 5(f)
distribution formula.
Funds available under this Act may not be
used to establish satellite locations of
schools in the Bureau school system as of
September 1, 1996, except that the Secretary
may waive this prohibition in order for an
Indian tribe to provide language and cultural
immersion educational programs for nonpublic schools located within the jurisdictional area of the tribal government which
exclusively serve tribal members, do not include grades beyond those currently served
at the existing Bureau-funded school, provide an educational environment with educator presence and academic facilities comparable to the Bureau-funded school, comply
with all applicable Tribal, Federal, or State
health and safety standards, and the Americans with Disabilities Act, and demonstrate
the benefits of establishing operations at a
satellite location in lieu of incurring extraordinary costs, such as for transportation
or other impacts to students such as those
caused by busing students extended distances: Provided, That no funds available
under this Act may be used to fund operations, maintenance, rehabilitation, construction, or other facilities-related costs for
such assets that are not owned by the Bureau: Provided further, That the term ‘‘satellite school’’ means a school location physically separated from the existing Bureau
school by more than 50 miles but that forms
part of the existing school in all other respects.
Funds made available for Tribal Priority
Allocations within Operation of Indian Programs and Operation of Indian Education
Programs may be used to execute requested
adjustments in tribal priority allocations
initiated by an Indian tribe.
BUREAU OF TRUST FUNDS ADMINISTRATION
FEDERAL TRUST PROGRAMS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the operation of trust programs for Indians by direct expenditure, contracts, cooperative agreements, compacts, and grants,
$100,009,000, to remain available until expended, of which not to exceed $17,152,000
from this or any other Act, may be available
for settlement support: Provided, That funds
for trust management improvements and
litigation support may, as needed, be transferred to or merged with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, ‘‘Operation of Indian Programs’’ and Bureau of Indian Education,
‘‘Operation of Indian Education Programs’’
accounts; the Office of the Solicitor, ‘‘Salaries and Expenses’’ account; and the Office of
the Secretary, ‘‘Departmental Operations’’
account: Provided further, That funds made
available through contracts or grants obligated during fiscal year 2026, as authorized

by the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975 (25 U.S.C. 5301
et seq.), shall remain available until expended by the contractor or grantee: Provided further, That notwithstanding any
other provision of law, the Secretary shall
not be required to provide a quarterly statement of performance for any Indian trust account that has not had activity for at least
15 months and has a balance of $15 or less:
Provided further, That the Secretary shall
issue an annual account statement and
maintain a record of any such accounts and
shall permit the balance in each such account to be withdrawn upon the express written request of the account holder: Provided
further, That not to exceed $100,000 is available for the Secretary to make payments to
correct administrative errors of either disbursements from or deposits to Individual
Indian Money or Tribal accounts after September 30, 2002: Provided further, That erroneous payments that are recovered shall be
credited to and remain available in this account for this purpose: Provided further, That
the Secretary shall not be required to reconcile Special Deposit Accounts with a balance of less than $500 unless the Bureau of
Trust Funds Administration receives proof
of ownership from a Special Deposit Accounts claimant: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 102 of the American Indian Trust Fund Management Reform Act of
1994 (Public Law 103–412) or any other provision of law, the Secretary may aggregate the
trust accounts of individuals whose whereabouts are unknown for a continuous period
of at least 5 years and shall not be required
to generate periodic statements of performance for the individual accounts: Provided
further, That with respect to the preceding
proviso, the Secretary shall continue to
maintain sufficient records to determine the
balance of the individual accounts, including
any accrued interest and income, and such
funds shall remain available to the individual account holders.
DEPARTMENTAL OFFICES
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
DEPARTMENTAL OPERATIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses for management of
the Department of the Interior and for
grants and cooperative agreements, as authorized by law, $131,012,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027; of which not to
exceed $15,000 may be for official reception
and representation expenses; of which up to
$1,000,000 shall be available for workers compensation payments and unemployment
compensation payments associated with the
orderly closure of the United States Bureau
of Mines; and of which $14,295,000 for Indian
land, mineral, and resource valuation activities shall remain available until expended:
Provided, That funds for Indian land, mineral, and resource valuation activities may,
as needed, be transferred to and merged with
the Bureau of Indian Affairs ‘‘Operation of
Indian Programs’’ and Bureau of Indian Education ‘‘Operation of Indian Education Programs’’ accounts and the Bureau of Trust
Funds Administration ‘‘Federal Trust Programs’’ account: Provided further, That funds
made available through contracts or grants
obligated during fiscal year 2026, as authorized by the Indian Self-Determination Act of
1975 (25 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.), shall remain
available until expended by the contractor or
grantee.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

For fiscal year 2026, up to $550,000 of the
payments authorized by chapter 69 of title
31, United States Code, may be retained for
administrative expenses of the Payments in
Lieu of Taxes Program: Provided, That the

H182

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

amounts provided under this Act specifically
for the Payments in Lieu of Taxes program
are the only amounts available for payments
authorized under chapter 69 of title 31,
United States Code: Provided further, That in
the event the sums appropriated for any fiscal year for payments pursuant to this chapter are insufficient to make the full payments authorized by that chapter to all
units of local government, then the payment
to each local government shall be made proportionally: Provided further, That the Secretary may make adjustments to payment to
individual units of local government to correct for prior overpayments or underpayments: Provided further, That no payment
shall be made pursuant to that chapter to
otherwise eligible units of local government
if the computed amount of the payment is
less than $100.
INSULAR AFFAIRS
ASSISTANCE TO TERRITORIES

For expenses necessary for assistance to
territories under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior and other jurisdictions identified in section 104(e) of Public
Law 108–188, $117,217,000, of which: (1)
$105,395,000 shall remain available until expended for territorial assistance, including
general technical assistance, maintenance
assistance, disaster assistance, coral reef initiative and natural resources activities, and
brown tree snake control and research;
grants to the judiciary in American Samoa
for compensation and expenses, as authorized by law (48 U.S.C. 1661(c)); grants to the
Government of American Samoa, in addition
to current local revenues, for construction
and support of governmental functions;
grants to the Government of the Virgin Islands, as authorized by law; grants to the
Government of Guam, as authorized by law;
and grants to the Government of the Northern Mariana Islands, as authorized by law
(Public Law 94–241; 90 Stat. 272); and (2)
$11,822,000 shall be available until September
30, 2027, for salaries and expenses of the Office of Insular Affairs: Provided, That all financial transactions of the territorial and
local governments herein provided for, including such transactions of all agencies or
instrumentalities established or used by
such governments, may be audited by the
Government Accountability Office, at its
discretion, in accordance with chapter 35 of
title 31, United States Code: Provided further,
That Northern Mariana Islands Covenant
grant funding shall be provided according to
those terms of the Agreement of the Special
Representatives on Future United States Financial Assistance for the Northern Mariana
Islands approved by Public Law 104–134: Provided further, That the funds for the program
of operations and maintenance improvement
are appropriated to institutionalize routine
operations and maintenance improvement of
capital infrastructure with territorial participation and cost sharing to be determined
by the Secretary based on the grantee’s commitment to timely maintenance of its capital assets: Provided further, That any appropriation for disaster assistance under this
heading in this Act or previous appropriations Acts may be used as non-Federal
matching funds for the purpose of hazard
mitigation grants provided pursuant to section 404 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42
U.S.C. 5170c).
COMPACT OF FREE ASSOCIATION

For grants and necessary expenses,
$813,000, to remain available until expended,
to support Federal services and programs
provided to the Republic of Palau, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Federated States of Micronesia.

ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

At the request of the Governor of Guam,
the Secretary may transfer discretionary
funds or mandatory funds provided under
section 104(e) of Public Law 108–188 and Public Law 104–134, that are allocated for Guam,
to the Secretary of Agriculture for the subsidy cost of direct or guaranteed loans, plus
not to exceed three percent of the amount of
the subsidy transferred for the cost of loan
administration, for the purposes authorized
by the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 and
section 306(a)(1) of the Consolidated Farm
and Rural Development Act for construction
and repair projects in Guam, and such funds
shall remain available until expended: Provided, That such costs, including the cost of
modifying such loans, shall be as defined in
section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act
of 1974: Provided further, That such loans or
loan guarantees may be made without regard
to the population of the area, credit elsewhere requirements, and restrictions on the
types of eligible entities under the Rural
Electrification Act of 1936 and section
306(a)(1) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural
Development Act: Provided further, That any
funds transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture shall be in addition to funds otherwise made available to make or guarantee
loans under such authorities.
OFFICE OF THE SOLICITOR
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Office of the
Solicitor, $84,181,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General, $65,000,000.
DEPARTMENT-WIDE PROGRAMS
WILDLAND FIRE MANAGEMENT
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses for fire preparedness, fire suppression operations, fire science
and research, emergency rehabilitation,
fuels management activities, and rural fire
assistance by the Department of the Interior, $1,147,171,000, of which $383,657,000 shall
remain available until expended, of which
not to exceed $10,000,000 shall be for the renovation or construction of fire facilities: Provided, That such funds are also available for
repayment of advances to other appropriation accounts from which funds were previously transferred for such purposes: Provided further, That of the funds provided
$214,450,000 is for fuels management activities: Provided further, That of the funds provided, $10,000,000 is for burned area rehabilitation: Provided further, That persons hired
pursuant to 43 U.S.C. 1469 may be furnished
subsistence and lodging without cost from
funds available from this appropriation: Provided further, That notwithstanding 42 U.S.C.
1856d, sums received by a bureau or office of
the Department of the Interior for fire protection rendered pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1856 et
seq., protection of United States property,
may be credited to the appropriation from
which funds were expended to provide that
protection, and are available without fiscal
year limitation: Provided further, That using
the amounts designated under this title of
this Act, the Secretary of the Interior may
enter into procurement contracts, grants, or
cooperative agreements, for fuels management activities, and for training and monitoring associated with such fuels management activities on Federal land, or on adjacent non-Federal land for activities that benefit resources on Federal land: Provided further, That the costs of implementing any cooperative agreement between the Federal

January 8, 2026

Government and any non-Federal entity may
be shared, as mutually agreed on by the affected parties: Provided further, That notwithstanding requirements of the Competition in Contracting Act, the Secretary, for
purposes of fuels management activities,
may obtain maximum practicable competition among: (1) local private, nonprofit, or
cooperative entities; (2) Youth Conservation
Corps crews, Public Lands Corps (Public Law
109–154), or related partnerships with State,
local, or nonprofit youth groups; (3) small or
micro-businesses; or (4) other entities that
will hire or train locally a significant percentage, defined as 50 percent or more, of the
project workforce to complete such contracts: Provided further, That in implementing this section, the Secretary shall develop written guidance to field units to ensure accountability and consistent application of the authorities provided herein: Provided further, That funds appropriated under
this heading may be used to reimburse the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service and
the National Marine Fisheries Service for
the costs of carrying out their responsibilities under the Endangered Species Act of
1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) to consult and
conference, as required by section 7 of such
Act, in connection with wildland fire management activities: Provided further, That
the Secretary of the Interior may use
wildland fire appropriations to enter into
leases of real property with local governments, at or below fair market value, to construct capitalized improvements for fire facilities on such leased properties, including
but not limited to fire guard stations, retardant stations, and other initial attack
and fire support facilities, and to make advance payments for any such lease or for
construction activity associated with the
lease: Provided further, That the Secretary of
the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture
may authorize the transfer of funds appropriated for wildland fire management, in an
aggregate amount not to exceed $50,000,000
between the Departments when such transfers would facilitate and expedite wildland
fire management programs and projects: Provided further, That funds provided for wildfire
suppression shall be available for support of
Federal emergency response actions: Provided further, That funds appropriated under
this heading shall be available for assistance
to or through the Department of State in
connection with forest and rangeland research, technical information, and assistance in foreign countries, and, with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, shall be
available to support forestry, wildland fire
management, and related natural resource
activities outside the United States and its
territories and possessions, including technical assistance, education and training, and
cooperation with United States and international organizations: Provided further,
That of the funds provided under this heading, $383,657,000 shall be available for wildfire
suppression operations, and is provided to
meet the terms of section 4004(b)(5)(B) of S.
Con. Res. 14 (117th Congress), the concurrent
resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2022,
and to legislation establishing fiscal year
2026 budget enforcement in the House of Representatives.
WILDFIRE SUPPRESSION OPERATIONS RESERVE
FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

In addition to the amounts provided under
the heading ‘‘Department of the Interior—
Department-Wide Programs—Wildland Fire
Management’’ for wildfire suppression operations, $370,000,000, to remain available until
transferred, is additional new budget authority as specified for purposes of section
4004(b)(5) of S. Con. Res. 14 (117th Congress),

January 8, 2026

H183

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

the concurrent resolution on the budget for
fiscal year 2022, and to legislation establishing fiscal year 2026 budget enforcement
in the House of Representatives: Provided,
That such amounts may be transferred to
and merged with amounts made available
under the headings ‘‘Department of Agriculture—Forest Service—Wildland Fire Management’’ and ‘‘Department of the Interior—
Department-Wide Programs—Wildland Fire
Management’’ for wildfire suppression operations in the fiscal year in which such
amounts are transferred: Provided further,
That amounts may be transferred to the
‘‘Wildland Fire Management’’ accounts in
the Department of Agriculture or the Department of the Interior only upon the notification of the House and Senate Committees
on Appropriations that all wildfire suppression operations funds appropriated under
that heading in this and prior appropriations
Acts to the agency to which the funds will be
transferred will be obligated within 30 days:
Provided further, That the transfer authority
provided under this heading is in addition to
any other transfer authority provided by
law: Provided further, That, in determining
whether all wildfire suppression operations
funds appropriated under the heading
‘‘Wildland Fire Management’’ in this and
prior appropriations Acts to either the Department of Agriculture or the Department
of the Interior will be obligated within 30
days pursuant to the preceding proviso, any
funds transferred or permitted to be transferred pursuant to any other transfer authority provided by law shall be excluded.
CENTRAL HAZARDOUS MATERIALS FUND

For necessary expenses of the Department
of the Interior and any of its component offices and bureaus for the response action, including associated activities, performed pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
(42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.), $9,031,000, to remain
available until expended.
ENERGY COMMUNITY REVITALIZATION PROGRAM
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Department
of the Interior to inventory, assess, decommission, reclaim, respond to hazardous substance releases, remediate lands pursuant to
section 40704 of Public Law 117–58 (30 U.S.C.
1245), and carry out the purposes of section
349 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C.
15907), as amended, $4,700,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That such
amount shall be in addition to amounts otherwise available for such purposes: Provided
further, That amounts appropriated under
this heading are available for program management and oversight of these activities:
Provided further, That the Secretary may
transfer the funds provided under this heading in this Act to any other account in the
Department to carry out such purposes, and
may expend such funds directly, or through
grants: Provided further, That these amounts
are not available to fulfill Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.) obligations agreed to in settlement or imposed by
a court, whether for payment of funds or for
work to be performed.
NATURAL RESOURCE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT AND
RESTORATION
NATURAL RESOURCE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT FUND

To conduct natural resource damage assessment, restoration activities, and onshore
oil spill preparedness by the Department of
the Interior necessary to carry out the provisions of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
(42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.), the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.),
the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (33 U.S.C. 2701 et

seq.), and 54 U.S.C. 100721 et seq., $6,500,000,
to remain available until expended.
WORKING CAPITAL FUND

For the operation and maintenance of a departmental financial and business management system, data management, information
technology improvements of general benefit
to the Department, cybersecurity, and the
consolidation of facilities and operations
throughout the Department, $90,775,000, to
remain available until expended: Provided,
That none of the funds appropriated in this
Act or any other Act may be used to establish reserves in the Working Capital Fund
account other than for accrued annual leave
and depreciation of equipment without prior
approval of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate: Provided further, That the Secretary of the Interior may assess reasonable
charges to State, local, and tribal government employees for training services provided by the National Indian Program Training Center, other than training related to
Public Law 93–638: Provided further, That the
Secretary may lease or otherwise provide
space and related facilities, equipment, or
professional services of the National Indian
Program Training Center to State, local and
tribal government employees or persons or
organizations engaged in cultural, educational, or recreational activities (as defined in section 3306(a) of title 40, United
States Code) at the prevailing rate for similar space, facilities, equipment, or services
in the vicinity of the National Indian Program Training Center: Provided further, That
all funds received pursuant to the two preceding provisos shall be credited to this account, shall be available until expended, and
shall be used by the Secretary for necessary
expenses of the National Indian Program
Training Center: Provided further, That the
Secretary may enter into grants and cooperative agreements to support the Office of
Natural Resource Revenue’s collection and
disbursement of royalties, fees, and other
mineral revenue proceeds, as authorized by
law.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISION

There is hereby authorized for acquisition
from available resources within the Working
Capital Fund, aircraft which may be obtained by donation, purchase, or through
available excess surplus property: Provided,
That existing aircraft being replaced may be
sold, with proceeds derived or trade-in value
used to offset the purchase price for the replacement aircraft.
OFFICE OF NATURAL RESOURCES REVENUE

For necessary expenses for management of
the collection and disbursement of royalties,
fees, and other mineral revenue proceeds,
and for grants and cooperative agreements,
as authorized by law, $159,850,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027; of which
$55,916,000 shall remain available until expended for the purpose of mineral revenue
management activities: Provided, That notwithstanding any other provision of law,
$50,000 shall be available for refunds of overpayments in connection with certain Indian
leases in which the Secretary of the Interior
concurred with the claimed refund due, to
pay amounts owed to Indian allottees or
tribes, or to correct prior unrecoverable erroneous payments.
GENERAL PROVISIONS, DEPARTMENT OF THE
INTERIOR
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)
EMERGENCY TRANSFER AUTHORITY—INTRABUREAU

SEC. 101. Appropriations made in this title
shall be available for expenditure or transfer
(within each bureau or office), with the ap-

proval of the Secretary of the Interior, for
the emergency reconstruction, replacement,
or repair of aircraft, buildings, utilities, or
other facilities or equipment damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, storm, or other unavoidable causes: Provided, That no funds
shall be made available under this authority
until funds specifically made available to the
Department of the Interior for emergencies
shall have been exhausted: Provided further,
That all funds used pursuant to this section
must be replenished by a supplemental appropriation, which must be requested as
promptly as possible.
EMERGENCY TRANSFER AUTHORITY—
DEPARTMENT-WIDE
SEC. 102. The Secretary of the Interior may
authorize the expenditure or transfer of any
no year appropriation in this title, in addition to the amounts included in the budget
programs of the several agencies, for the suppression
or
emergency
prevention
of
wildland fires on or threatening lands under
the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior; for the emergency rehabilitation of
burned-over lands under its jurisdiction; for
emergency actions related to potential or actual earthquakes, floods, volcanoes, storms,
or other unavoidable causes; for contingency
planning subsequent to actual oil spills; for
response and natural resource damage assessment activities related to actual oil
spills or releases of hazardous substances
into the environment; for the prevention,
suppression, and control of actual or potential grasshopper and Mormon cricket outbreaks on lands under the jurisdiction of the
Secretary, pursuant to the authority in section 417(b) of Public Law 106–224 (7 U.S.C.
7717(b)); for emergency reclamation projects
under section 410 of Public Law 95–87; and
shall transfer, from any no year funds available to the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, such funds as
may be necessary to permit assumption of
regulatory authority in the event a primacy
State is not carrying out the regulatory provisions of the Surface Mining Act: Provided,
That appropriations made in this title for
wildland fire operations shall be available
for the payment of obligations incurred during the preceding fiscal year, and for reimbursement to other Federal agencies for destruction of vehicles, aircraft, or other
equipment in connection with their use for
wildland fire operations, with such reimbursement to be credited to appropriations
currently available at the time of receipt
thereof: Provided further, That for wildland
fire operations, no funds shall be made available under this authority until the Secretary
determines that funds appropriated for
‘‘wildland fire suppression’’ shall be exhausted within 30 days: Provided further,
That all funds used pursuant to this section
must be replenished by a supplemental appropriation, which must be requested as
promptly as possible: Provided further, That
such replenishment funds shall be used to reimburse, on a pro rata basis, accounts from
which emergency funds were transferred.
AUTHORIZED USE OF FUNDS

SEC. 103. Appropriations made to the Department of the Interior in this title shall be
available for services as authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, when
authorized by the Secretary of the Interior,
in total amount not to exceed $500,000; purchase and replacement of motor vehicles, including specially equipped law enforcement
vehicles; hire, maintenance, and operation of
aircraft; hire of passenger motor vehicles;
purchase of reprints; payment for telephone
service in private residences in the field,
when authorized under regulations approved
by the Secretary; and the payment of dues,

H184

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

when authorized by the Secretary, for library membership in societies or associations which issue publications to members
only or at a price to members lower than to
subscribers who are not members.
AUTHORIZED USE OF FUNDS, INDIAN TRUST
MANAGEMENT

SEC. 104. Appropriations made in this Act
under the headings Bureau of Indian Affairs
and Bureau of Indian Education, and Bureau
of Trust Funds Administration and any unobligated balances from prior appropriations
Acts made under the same headings shall be
available for expenditure or transfer for Indian trust management and reform activities. Total funding for settlement support
activities shall not exceed amounts specifically designated in this Act for such purpose.
The Secretary shall notify the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations within 60 days of the expenditure or transfer of
any funds under this section, including the
amount expended or transferred and how the
funds will be used.
REDISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS, BUREAU OF INDIAN
AFFAIRS

SEC. 105. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Interior is
authorized to redistribute any Tribal Priority Allocation funds, including tribal base
funds, to alleviate tribal funding inequities
by transferring funds to address identified,
unmet needs, dual enrollment, overlapping
service areas or inaccurate distribution
methodologies. No tribe shall receive a reduction in Tribal Priority Allocation funds
of more than 10 percent in fiscal year 2026.
Under circumstances of dual enrollment,
overlapping service areas or inaccurate distribution methodologies, the 10 percent limitation does not apply.
ELLIS, GOVERNORS, AND LIBERTY ISLANDS
SEC. 106. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Interior is
authorized to acquire lands, waters, or interests therein, including the use of all or part
of any pier, dock, or landing within the
State of New York and the State of New Jersey, for the purpose of operating and maintaining facilities in the support of transportation and accommodation of visitors to
Ellis, Governors, and Liberty Islands, and of
other program and administrative activities,
by donation or with appropriated funds, including franchise fees (and other monetary
consideration), or by exchange; and the Secretary is authorized to negotiate and enter
into leases, subleases, concession contracts,
or other agreements for the use of such facilities on such terms and conditions as the
Secretary may determine reasonable: Provided, That for purposes of 54 U.S.C. 200306(a),
such lands, waters, or interests acquired
under this heading shall be considered to be
within the exterior boundary of a System
unit authorized or established.
OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF INSPECTION FEES

SEC. 107. (a) In fiscal year 2026, the Secretary of the Interior shall collect a nonrefundable inspection fee, which shall be deposited in the ‘‘Offshore Safety and Environmental Enforcement’’ account, from the designated operator for facilities subject to inspection under 43 U.S.C. 1348(c).
(b) Annual fees shall be collected for facilities that are above the waterline, excluding
drilling rigs, and are in place at the start of
the fiscal year. Fees for fiscal year 2026 shall
be—
(1) $10,500 for facilities with no wells, but
with processing equipment or gathering
lines;
(2) $17,000 for facilities with 1 to 10 wells,
with any combination of active or inactive
wells; and

(3) $31,500 for facilities with more than 10
wells, with any combination of active or inactive wells.
(c) Fees for drilling rigs shall be assessed
for all inspections completed in fiscal year
2026. Fees for fiscal year 2026 shall be—
(1) $30,500 per inspection for rigs operating
in water depths of 500 feet or more; and
(2) $16,700 per inspection for rigs operating
in water depths of less than 500 feet.
(d) Fees for inspection of well operations
conducted via non-rig units as outlined in
title 30 CFR 250 subparts D, E, F, and Q shall
be assessed for all inspections completed in
fiscal year 2026. Fees for fiscal year 2026 shall
be—
(1) $13,260 per inspection for non-rig units
operating in water depths of 2,500 feet or
more;
(2) $11,530 per inspection for non-rig units
operating in water depths between 500 and
2,499 feet; and
(3) $4,470 per inspection for non-rig units
operating in water depths of less than 500
feet.
(e) The Secretary shall bill designated operators under subsection (b) quarterly, with
payment required within 30 days of billing.
The Secretary shall bill designated operators
under subsection (c) within 30 days of the
end of the month in which the inspection occurred, with payment required within 30
days of billing. The Secretary shall bill designated operators under subsection (d) with
payment required by the end of the following
quarter.
CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS FOR WILD HORSE
AND BURRO HOLDING FACILITIES

SEC. 108. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior
may enter into multiyear cooperative agreements with nonprofit organizations and
other appropriate entities, and may enter
into multiyear contracts in accordance with
the provisions of section 3903 of title 41,
United States Code (except that the 5-year
term restriction in subsection (a) shall not
apply), for the long-term care and maintenance of excess wild free roaming horses and
burros by such organizations or entities on
private land. Such cooperative agreements
and contracts may not exceed 10 years, subject to renewal at the discretion of the Secretary.
MASS MARKING OF SALMONIDS

SEC. 109. The United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall, in carrying out its responsibilities to protect threatened and endangered species of salmon, implement a system
of mass marking of salmonid stocks, intended for harvest, that are released from
federally operated or federally financed
hatcheries including but not limited to fish
releases of coho, chinook, and steelhead species. Marked fish must have a visible mark
that can be readily identified by commercial
and recreational fishers.
CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS WITH INDIAN
AFFAIRS

SEC. 110. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, during fiscal year 2026, in carrying out work involving cooperation with
State, local, and tribal governments or any
political subdivision thereof, Indian Affairs
may record obligations against accounts receivable from any such entities, except that
total obligations at the end of the fiscal year
shall not exceed total budgetary resources
available at the end of the fiscal year.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR EXPERIENCED
SERVICES PROGRAM

SEC. 111. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law relating to Federal grants
and cooperative agreements, the Secretary
of the Interior is authorized to make grants
to, or enter into cooperative agreements

January 8, 2026

with, private nonprofit organizations designated by the Secretary of Labor under title
V of the Older Americans Act of 1965 to utilize the talents of older Americans in programs authorized by other provisions of law
administered by the Secretary and consistent with such provisions of law.
(b) Prior to awarding any grant or agreement under subsection (a), the Secretary
shall ensure that the agreement would not—
(1) result in the displacement of individuals currently employed by the Department,
including partial displacement through reduction of non-overtime hours, wages, or employment benefits;
(2) result in the use of an individual under
the Department of the Interior Experienced
Services Program for a job or function in a
case in which a Federal employee is in a layoff status from the same or substantially
equivalent job within the Department; or
(3) affect existing contracts for services.
OBLIGATION OF FUNDS

SEC. 112. Amounts appropriated by this Act
to the Department of the Interior shall be
available for obligation and expenditure not
later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEPARATION OF ACCOUNTS

SEC. 113. The Secretary of the Interior, in
order to implement an orderly transition to
separate accounts of the Bureau of Indian
Affairs and the Bureau of Indian Education,
may transfer funds among and between the
successor offices and bureaus affected by the
reorganization only in conformance with the
reprogramming guidelines described in this
Act.
PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF TAXES (PILT)

SEC. 114. Section 6906 of title 31, United
States Code, shall be applied by substituting
‘‘fiscal year 2026’’ for ‘‘fiscal year 2019’’.
DISCLOSURE OF DEPARTURE OR ALTERNATE
PROCEDURE APPROVAL

SEC. 115. (a) Subject to subsection (b), in
any case in which the Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement or the Bureau
of Ocean Energy Management prescribes or
approves any departure or use of alternate
procedure or equipment, in regards to a plan
or permit, under 30 CFR 585.103; 30 CFR
550.141; 30 CFR 550.142; 30 CFR 250.141; or 30
CFR 250.142, the head of such bureau shall
post a description of such departure or alternate procedure or equipment use approval on
such bureau’s publicly available website not
more than 15 business days after such
issuance.
(b) The head of each bureau may exclude
confidential business information.
LONG BRIDGE PROJECT

SEC. 116. (a) AUTHORIZATION OF CONVEYANCE.—Hereafter, until the expiration of authority pursuant to subsection (e), on request by the State of Virginia or the District
of Columbia for the purpose of the construction of rail and other infrastructure relating
to the Long Bridge Project, the Secretary of
the Interior may convey to the State or the
District of Columbia, as applicable, all right,
title, and interest of the United States in
and to any portion of the approximately 4.4
acres of National Park Service land depicted
as ‘‘Permanent Impact to NPS Land’’ on the
Map dated May 15, 2020, that is identified by
the State or the District of Columbia.
(b) TERMS AND CONDITIONS.—Such conveyance of the National Park Service land under
subsection (a) shall be subject to any terms
and conditions that the Secretary may require. If such conveyed land is no longer
being used for the purposes specified in this
section, the lands or interests therein shall
revert to the National Park Service after
they have been restored or remediated to the
satisfaction of the Secretary.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(c) CORRECTIONS.—The Secretary and the
State or the District of Columbia, as applicable, by mutual agreement, may—
(1) make minor boundary adjustments to
the National Park Service land to be conveyed to the State or the District of Columbia under subsection (a); and
(2) correct any minor errors in the Map referred to in subsection (a).
(d) DEFINITIONS.—For purposes of this section:
(1) LONG BRIDGE PROJECT.—The term ‘‘Long
Bridge Project’’ means the rail project, as
identified by the Federal Railroad Administration, from Rosslyn (RO) Interlocking in
Arlington, Virginia, to L’Enfant (LE) Interlocking in Washington, DC, which includes a
bicycle and pedestrian bridge.
(2) SECRETARY.—The term ‘‘Secretary’’
means the Secretary of the Interior, acting
through the Director of the National Park
Service.
(3) STATE.—The term ‘‘State’’ means the
State of Virginia.
(e) TERMINATION OF AUTHORITY.—The authority provided by this section shall expire
once the conveyance described in subsection
(a) has been completed.

and execute agreements to achieve operating
efficiencies among and between two or more
component bureaus and offices through the
following activities:
(1) co-locating in offices and facilities
leased or owned by any such component and
sharing related utilities and equipment;
(2) detailing or assigning staff on a non-reimbursable basis for up to 5 business days;
and
(3) sharing staff and equipment necessary
to meet mission requirements.
(b) The authority provided by subsection
(a) is to support areas of mission alignment
between and among component bureaus and
offices or where geographic proximity allows
for efficiencies.
(c) Bureaus and offices entering into agreements authorized under subsections (a)(1)
and (a)(3) shall bear costs for such agreements in a manner that reflects their approximate benefit and share of total costs,
which may or may not include indirect costs.
(d) In furtherance of the requirement in
subsection (c), the Secretary of the Interior
may make transfers of funds in advance or
on a reimbursable basis.

INTERAGENCY MOTOR POOL

SEC. 123. Section 103101 of title 54, United
States Code, is amended in subsection (c)(1)
by
striking
‘‘$250,000’’
and
inserting
‘‘$500,000’’.

SEC. 117. Notwithstanding any other provision of law or Federal regulation, federally
recognized Indian tribes or authorized tribal
organizations that receive Tribally-Controlled School Grants pursuant to Public
Law 100–297 may obtain interagency motor
vehicles and related services for performance
of any activities carried out under such
grants to the same extent as if they were
contracting under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
APPRAISER PAY AUTHORITY

SEC. 118. For fiscal year 2026, funds made
available in this or any other Act or otherwise made available to the Department of
the Interior for the Appraisal and Valuation
Services Office may be used by the Secretary
of the Interior to establish higher minimum
rates of basic pay for employees of the Department of the Interior in the Appraiser
(GS–1171) job series at grades 11 through 15
carrying out appraisals of real property and
appraisal reviews conducted in support of the
Department’s realty programs at rates no
greater than 15 percent above the minimum
rates of basic pay normally scheduled, and
such higher rates shall be consistent with
subsections (e) through (h) of section 5305 of
title 5, United States Code.
SAGE-GROUSE
SEC. 119. None of the funds made available
by this or any other Act may be used by the
Secretary of the Interior to write or issue
pursuant to section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1533)—
(1) a proposed rule for greater sage-grouse
(Centrocercus urophasianus);
(2) a proposed rule for the Columbia basin
distinct population segment of greater sagegrouse.
STATE CONSERVATION GRANTS

SEC. 120. For expenses necessary to carry
out section 200305 of title 54, United States
Code, the National Park Service may retain
up to 7 percent of the State Conservation
Grants program to provide to States, the
District of Columbia, and insular areas, as
matching grants to support state program
administrative costs.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION FUND DEPOSITS

SEC. 121. Section 303102 of title 54, United
States Code, shall be applied by substituting
‘‘fiscal year 2026’’ for ‘‘fiscal year 2023’’.
INTERIOR AUTHORITY FOR OPERATING
EFFICIENCIES

SEC. 122. (a) In fiscal years 2026 and 2027,
the Secretary of the Interior may authorize

EMERGENCY LAW ENFORCEMENT CEILING

CONTRIBUTION AUTHORITY EXTENSION

SEC. 124. Section 113 of division G of Public
Law 113–76, as amended by Public Law 116–6,
is further amended by striking ‘‘2024’’ and inserting ‘‘2030’’.
LIMITATION

SEC. 125. If requested by the claimant of
any mining claim located within the area
covered by Public Land Order 7921, the Bureau of Land Management shall prioritize
completion of a validity determination for
such claim. The Bureau of Land Management
shall strive to complete any such validity determination not later than 3 years of receipt
of the request.
RENEWAL

SEC. 126. The first section of Public Law 99–
338 (100 Stat. 641) is amended—
(1) by striking ‘‘3 renewals’’ and inserting
‘‘7 renewals’’; and
(2) by striking ‘‘of Southern California Edison Company’’.
FIELD UNIT LOCAL HIRING

SEC. 127. The Secretary of the Interior may
recruit and directly appoint qualified individuals into the competitive service who are
certified as maintaining a permanent and exclusive residence in the vicinity of a field
unit, into any position at or below grades
GS–9 or WG–15 or equivalent within such
field unit: Provided, That any action authorized herein shall be consistent with the
merit principles of section 2301 of such title
5, and with the public notice requirements of
section 3327 of such title 5: Provided further,
That appointments under this authority
shall be considered compliant with all applicable provisions of chapter 33 of title 5.
GRANT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS

SEC. 128. Section 1521 of the American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian
Culture and Art Development Act (20 U.S.C.
4441) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a), in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ‘‘private,’’;
and
(2) in subsection (c)(2)—
(A) in subparagraph (A)—
(i) by striking ‘‘be Native Hawaiians or’’
and inserting ‘‘include Native Hawaiians
and’’; and
(ii) by striking the comma at the end and
inserting ‘‘; and’’;

H185

(B) by striking subparagraphs (B) through
(D);
(C) in subparagraph (E), by striking ‘‘of office’’; and
(D) by redesignating subparagraph (E) as
subparagraph (B).
TITLE II
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
For science and technology, including research and development activities, which
shall include research and development activities under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980; necessary expenses for personnel and related costs and travel expenses;
procurement of laboratory equipment and
supplies; hire, maintenance, and operation of
aircraft; and other operating expenses in
support of research and development,
$744,195,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That of the funds
included under this heading, $27,253,000 shall
be for Research: National Priorities as specified in the explanatory statement described
in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act), of which
$6,278,000 shall be for projects specified for
Science and Technology in the table titled
‘‘Interior and Environment Incorporation of
Community Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending Items’’ included
for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS AND MANAGEMENT
For environmental programs and management, including necessary expenses not otherwise provided for, for personnel and related
costs and travel expenses; hire of passenger
motor vehicles; hire, maintenance, and operation of aircraft; purchase of reprints; library memberships in societies or associations which issue publications to members
only or at a price to members lower than to
subscribers who are not members; administrative costs of the brownfields program
under the Small Business Liability Relief
and Brownfields Revitalization Act of 2002;
implementation of a coal combustion residual permit program under section 2301 of the
Water and Waste Act of 2016; and not to exceed $40,000 for official reception and representation expenses, $3,114,671,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That of amounts made available for
Environmental Programs and Management,
not less than $33,024,000 is to carry out the
Energy Star Program pursuant to section
324(c) of the Energy Policy and Conservation
Act (42 U.S.C. 6294a(c)): Provided further,
That of the funds included under this heading, $30,000,000 shall be for grants, including
for projects and implementation and training: Provided further, That for the funds provided in the preceding proviso not less than
10 percent shall be for any county that has
had 20 percent or more of its population living in poverty over the past 30 years, as
measured by the 1993 Small Area Income and
Poverty Estimates, the 2000 decennial census, and the most recent Small Area Income
and Poverty Estimates, or any territory or
possession of the United States: Provided further, That of the funds included under this
heading—
(1) $30,700,000 shall be for Environmental
Protection: National Priorities as specified
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act);
(2) $690,202,000 shall be for Geographic Programs as specified in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act); and

H186

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(3) $20,000,000, to remain available until expended, shall be for grants, including grants
that may be awarded on a non-competitive
basis, interagency agreements, and associated program support costs to establish and
implement a program to assist Alaska Native Regional Corporations, Alaskan Native
Village Corporations, federally-recognized
tribes in Alaska, Alaska Native Non-Profit
Organizations and Alaska Native Nonprofit
Associations, and intertribal consortia comprised of Alaskan tribal entities to address
contamination on lands conveyed under or
pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) that were
or are contaminated at the time of conveyance and are on an inventory of such lands
developed and maintained by the Environmental Protection Agency: Provided, That
grants awarded using funds made available
in this paragraph may be used by a recipient
to supplement other funds provided by the
Environmental Protection Agency through
individual media or multi-media grants or
cooperative agreements: Provided further,
That of the amounts made available in this
paragraph, in addition to amounts otherwise
available for such purposes, the Environmental Protection Agency may reserve up to
$2,000,000 for salaries, expenses, and administration of the program and for grants related
to such program that address contamination
on lands conveyed under or pursuant to the
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43
U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) that were or are contaminated at the time of conveyance and are on
the EPA inventory of such lands.
In addition, $9,000,000, to remain available
until expended, for necessary expenses of activities described in section 26(b)(1) of the
Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C.
2625(b)(1)): Provided, That fees collected pursuant to that section of that Act and deposited in the ‘‘TSCA Service Fee Fund’’ as discretionary offsetting receipts in fiscal year
2026 shall be retained and used for necessary
salaries and expenses in this appropriation
and shall remain available until expended:
Provided further, That the sum herein appropriated in this paragraph from the general
fund for fiscal year 2026 shall be reduced by
the amount of discretionary offsetting receipts received during fiscal year 2026, so as
to result in a final fiscal year 2026 appropriation from the general fund estimated at not
more than $0: Provided further, That to the
extent that amounts realized from such receipts exceed $9,000,000, those amounts in excess of $9,000,000 shall be deposited in the
‘‘TSCA Service Fee Fund’’ as discretionary
offsetting receipts in fiscal year 2026, shall be
retained and used for necessary salaries and
expenses in this account, and shall remain
available until expended: Provided further,
That of the funds included in the first paragraph under this heading, the Chemical Risk
Review and Reduction program project shall
be allocated for this fiscal year, excluding
the amount of any fees appropriated, not less
than the amount of appropriations for that
program project for fiscal year 2014.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of the Inspector General Act of 1978,
$43,250,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That the Office of
Inspector General shall be subject to the
terms, conditions, and requirements specified under this heading in Senate Report 118–
83.
BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES
For construction, repair, improvement, extension, alteration, and purchase of fixed
equipment or facilities of, or for use by, the
Environmental
Protection
Agency,
$40,676,000, to remain available until expended.

HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SUPERFUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses to carry out the
Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980
(CERCLA), including sections 111(c)(3), (c)(5),
(c)(6), and (e)(4) (42 U.S.C. 9611), and hire,
maintenance, and operation of aircraft,
$282,749,000, to remain available until expended, consisting of such sums as are available in the Trust Fund on September 30, 2025,
and not otherwise appropriated from the
Trust Fund, as authorized by section 517(a)
of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA) and up to
$282,749,000 as a payment from general revenues to the Hazardous Substance Superfund
for purposes as authorized by section 517(b)
of SARA: Provided, That funds appropriated
under this heading may be allocated to other
Federal agencies in accordance with section
111(a) of CERCLA: Provided further, That of
the funds appropriated under this heading,
$11,328,000 shall be paid to the ‘‘Office of Inspector General’’ appropriation to remain
available until September 30, 2027, and
$17,607,000 shall be paid to the ‘‘Science and
Technology’’ appropriation to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided further, That section 122(b)(3) of CERCLA (42
U.S.C. 9622(b)(3)) shall be applied in this fiscal year by inserting before the period: ‘‘, including for the hire, maintenance, and operation of aircraft’’: Provided further, That the
matter preceding the first proviso in section
443(b) of title IV of division G of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 (Public Law
117–328) shall be applied in this fiscal year by
inserting before the semicolon ‘‘, including
for the hire, maintenance, and operation of
aircraft’’: Provided further, That amounts
repurposed pursuant to the preceding proviso
shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public
Law 118–5.
LEAKING UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK TRUST
FUND PROGRAM
For necessary expenses to carry out leaking underground storage tank cleanup activities authorized by subtitle I of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, $88,903,000, to remain
available until expended, of which $64,583,000
shall be for carrying out leaking underground storage tank cleanup activities authorized by section 9003(h) of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act; and $24,320,000 shall be for carrying out the other provisions of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act specified in section
9508(c) of the Internal Revenue Code: Provided, That the Administrator is authorized
to use appropriations made available under
this heading to implement section 9013 of the
Solid Waste Disposal Act to provide financial assistance to federally recognized Indian
tribes for the development and implementation of programs to manage underground
storage tanks.
INLAND OIL SPILL PROGRAMS
For expenses necessary to carry out the
Environmental Protection Agency’s responsibilities under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990,
including hire, maintenance, and operation
of aircraft, $20,561,000, to be derived from the
Oil Spill Liability trust fund, to remain
available until expended.
STATE AND TRIBAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS
For environmental programs and infrastructure assistance, including capitalization grants for State revolving funds and
performance
partnership
grants,
$4,409,609,000, to remain available until expended, of which—
(1) $1,638,861,000 shall be for making capitalization grants for the Clean Water State
Revolving Funds under title VI of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act; and of

January 8, 2026

which $1,126,101,000 shall be for making capitalization grants for the Drinking Water
State Revolving Funds under section 1452 of
the Safe Drinking Water Act: Provided, That
$892,762,272 of the funds made available for
capitalization grants for the Clean Water
State Revolving Funds and $715,364,627 of the
funds made available for capitalization
grants for the Drinking Water State Revolving Funds shall be for the construction of
drinking water, wastewater, and storm water
infrastructure and for water quality protection in accordance with the terms and conditions specified for such grants in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in
the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act) for projects specified for
‘‘STAG—Drinking Water State Revolving
Fund’’ and ‘‘STAG—Clean Water State Revolving Fund’’ in the table titled ‘‘Interior
and Environment Incorporation of Community Project Funding Items/Congressionally
Directed Spending Items’’ included for this
division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act), and, for
purposes of these grants, each grantee shall
contribute not less than 20 percent of the
cost of the project unless the grantee is approved for a waiver by the Agency: Provided
further, That $13,300,000 of the funds appropriated under this heading for capitalization
grants for the Clean Water State Revolving
Funds and for capitalization grants for the
Drinking Water State Revolving Funds, in
addition to amounts otherwise available for
such purposes, may be used by the Administrator for salaries, expenses, and administration for Community Project Funding Items/
Congressionally Directed Spending Items:
Provided further, That for fiscal year 2026, to
the extent there are sufficient eligible
project applications and projects are consistent with State Intended Use Plans, not
less than 10 percent of the funds made available under this title to each State for Clean
Water State Revolving Fund capitalization
grants shall be used by the State for projects
to address green infrastructure, water or energy efficiency improvements, or other environmentally innovative activities: Provided
further, That for fiscal year 2026, funds made
available under this title to each State for
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund capitalization grants may, at the discretion of
each State, be used for projects to address
green infrastructure, water or energy efficiency improvements, or other environmentally innovative activities: Provided further, That the Administrator is authorized to
use up to $1,500,000 of funds made available
for the Clean Water State Revolving Funds
under this heading under title VI of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
1381) to conduct the Clean Watersheds Needs
Survey: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 603(d)(7) of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, the limitation
on the amounts in a State water pollution
control revolving fund that may be used by
a State to administer the fund shall not
apply to amounts included as principal in
loans made by such fund in fiscal year 2026
and prior years where such amounts represent costs of administering the fund to the
extent that such amounts are or were
deemed reasonable by the Administrator, accounted for separately from other assets in
the fund, and used for eligible purposes of
the fund, including administration: Provided
further, That for fiscal year 2026, notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (g)(1),
(h), and (l) of section 201 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, grants made
under title II of such Act for American
Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the
Northern Marianas, the United States Virgin
Islands, and the District of Columbia may

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

also be made for the purpose of providing assistance: (1) solely for facility plans, design
activities, or plans, specifications, and estimates for any proposed project for the construction of treatment works; and (2) for the
construction, repair, or replacement of privately owned treatment works serving one
or more principal residences or small commercial establishments: Provided further,
That for fiscal year 2026, notwithstanding
the provisions of such subsections (g)(1), (h),
and (l) of section 201 and section 518(c) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, funds
reserved by the Administrator for grants
under section 518(c) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act may also be used to
provide assistance: (1) solely for facility
plans, design activities, or plans, specifications, and estimates for any proposed project
for the construction of treatment works; and
(2) for the construction, repair, or replacement of privately owned treatment works
serving one or more principal residences or
small commercial establishments: Provided
further, That for fiscal year 2026, notwithstanding any provision of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act and regulations issued
pursuant thereof, up to a total of $2,000,000 of
the funds reserved by the Administrator for
grants under section 518(c) of such Act may
also be used for grants for training, technical
assistance, and educational programs relating to the operation and management of the
treatment works specified in section 518(c) of
such Act: Provided further, That for fiscal
year 2026, funds reserved under section 518(c)
of such Act shall be available for grants only
to Indian tribes, as defined in section 518(h)
of such Act and former Indian reservations
in Oklahoma (as determined by the Secretary of the Interior) and Native Villages as
defined in Public Law 92–203: Provided further, That for fiscal year 2026, notwithstanding the limitation on amounts in section 518(c) of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, up to a total of 2 percent of the
funds appropriated, or $30,000,000, whichever
is greater, and notwithstanding the limitation on amounts in section 1452(i) of the Safe
Drinking Water Act, up to a total of 2 percent of the funds appropriated, or $20,000,000,
whichever is greater, for State Revolving
Funds under such Acts may be reserved by
the Administrator for grants under section
518(c) and section 1452(i) of such Acts: Provided further, That for fiscal year 2026, notwithstanding the amounts specified in section 205(c) of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, up to 1.5 percent of the aggregate funds appropriated for the Clean Water
State Revolving Fund program under the
Act less any sums reserved under section
518(c) of the Act, may be reserved by the Administrator for grants made under title II of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act for
American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth
of the Northern Marianas, and United States
Virgin Islands: Provided further, That for fiscal year 2026, notwithstanding the limitations on amounts specified in section 1452(j)
of the Safe Drinking Water Act, up to 1.5
percent of the funds appropriated for the
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund programs under the Safe Drinking Water Act
may be reserved by the Administrator for
grants made under section 1452(j) of the Safe
Drinking Water Act: Provided further, That 10
percent of the funds made available under
this title to each State for Clean Water
State Revolving Fund capitalization grants
and 14 percent of the funds made available
under this title to each State for Drinking
Water State Revolving Fund capitalization
grants shall be used by the State to provide
additional subsidy to eligible recipients in
the form of forgiveness of principal, negative
interest loans, or grants (or any combination
of these), and shall be so used by the State

only where such funds are provided as initial
financing for an eligible recipient or to buy,
refinance, or restructure the debt obligations
of eligible recipients only where such debt
was incurred on or after the date of enactment of this Act, or where such debt was incurred prior to the date of enactment of this
Act if the State, with concurrence from the
Administrator, determines that such funds
could be used to help address a threat to public health from heightened exposure to lead
in drinking water or if a Federal or State
emergency declaration has been issued due
to a threat to public health from heightened
exposure to lead in a municipal drinking
water supply before the date of enactment of
this Act: Provided further, That in a State in
which such an emergency declaration has
been issued, the State may use more than 14
percent of the funds made available under
this title to the State for Drinking Water
State Revolving Fund capitalization grants
to provide additional subsidy to eligible recipients: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 1452(o) of the Safe Drinking
Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300j–12(o)), the Administrator shall reserve up to $12,000,000 of the
amounts made available for fiscal year 2026
for making capitalization grants for the
Drinking Water State Revolving Funds to
pay the costs of monitoring for unregulated
contaminants under section 1445(a)(2)(C) of
such Act: Provided further, That the funds
made available under this heading for Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending grants in this or prior appropriations Acts are not subject to compliance with Federal procurement requirements
for competition and methods of procurement
applicable to Federal financial assistance, if
a Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending recipient has procured services or products through contracts
entered into prior to the date of enactment
of this legislation that complied with state
and/or local laws governing competition;
(2) $35,000,000 shall be for architectural, engineering, planning, design, construction and
related activities in connection with the
construction of high priority water and
wastewater facilities in the area of the
United States-Mexico Border, after consultation with the appropriate border commission: Provided, That no funds provided by
this appropriations Act to address the water,
wastewater and other critical infrastructure
needs of the colonias in the United States
along the United States-Mexico border shall
be made available to a county or municipal
government unless that government has established an enforceable local ordinance, or
other zoning rule, which prevents in that jurisdiction the development or construction
of any additional colonia areas, or the development within an existing colonia the construction of any new home, business, or
other structure which lacks water, wastewater, or other necessary infrastructure;
(3) $39,000,000 shall be for grants to the
State of Alaska to address drinking water
and wastewater infrastructure needs of rural
and Alaska Native Villages: Provided, That of
these funds: (A) the State of Alaska shall
provide a match of 25 percent; (B) no more
than 5 percent of the funds may be used for
administrative and overhead expenses; and
(C) the State of Alaska shall make awards
consistent with the Statewide priority list
established in conjunction with the Agency
and the U.S. Department of Agriculture for
all water, sewer, waste disposal, and similar
projects carried out by the State of Alaska
that are funded under section 221 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
1301) or the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 U.S.C. 1921 et seq.) which
shall allocate not less than 25 percent of the

H187

funds provided for projects in regional hub
communities;
(4) $98,000,000 shall be to carry out section
104(k) of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
of 1980 (CERCLA), including grants, interagency agreements, and associated program
support costs: Provided, That at least 10 percent shall be allocated for assistance in persistent poverty counties: Provided further,
That for purposes of this section, the term
‘‘persistent poverty counties’’ means any
county that has had 20 percent or more of its
population living in poverty over the past 30
years, as measured by the 1993 Small Area
Income and Poverty Estimates, the 2000 decennial census, and the most recent Small
Area Income and Poverty Estimates, or any
territory or possession of the United States;
(5) $90,000,000 shall be for grants under title
VII, subtitle G of the Energy Policy Act of
2005;
(6) $67,800,000 shall be for targeted airshed
grants in accordance with the terms and conditions in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act);
(7) $28,500,000 shall be for grants under subsections (a) through (j) of section 1459A of
the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300j–
19a): Provided, That for fiscal year 2026, funds
provided under subsections (a) through (j) of
such section of such Act may be used—
(A) by a State to provide assistance to benefit one or more owners of drinking water
wells that are not public water systems or
connected to a public water system for necessary and appropriate activities related to a
contaminant pursuant to subsection (j) of
such section of such Act; and
(B) to support a community described in
subsection (c)(2) of such section of such Act;
(8) $28,000,000 shall be for grants under section 1464(d) of the Safe Drinking Water Act
(42 U.S.C. 300j–24(d));
(9) $22,000,000 shall be for grants under section 1459B of the Safe Drinking Water Act (42
U.S.C. 300j–19b);
(10) $6,500,000 shall be for grants under section 1459A(l) of the Safe Drinking Water Act
(42 U.S.C. 300j–19a(l));
(11) $25,500,000 shall be for grants under section 104(b)(8) of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1254(b)(8));
(12) $41,000,000 shall be for grants under section 221 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1301);
(13) $5,400,000 shall be for grants under section 4304(b) of the America’s Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–270);
(14) $3,500,000 shall be for carrying out section 302(a) of the Save Our Seas 2.0 Act (33
U.S.C. 4282(a)), of which not more than 2 percent shall be for administrative costs to
carry out such section: Provided, That notwithstanding section 302(a) of such Act, the
Administrator may also provide grants pursuant to such authority to intertribal consortia consistent with the requirements in 40
CFR 35.504(a), to former Indian reservations
in Oklahoma (as determined by the Secretary of the Interior), and Alaska Native
Villages as defined in Public Law 92–203;
(15) $8,500,000 shall be for grants under section 103(b)(3) of the Clean Air Act for wildfire
smoke preparedness grants in accordance
with the terms and conditions in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in
the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act): Provided, That not more than
3 percent shall be for administrative costs to
carry out such section;
(16) $20,364,000 shall be for State and Tribal
Assistance Grants to be allocated in the
amounts specified for those projects and for
the purposes delineated in the table titled
‘‘Interior and Environment Incorporation of

H188

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Community Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending Items’’ included
for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act) for remediation, construction, and related environmental management activities
in accordance with the terms and conditions
specified for such grants in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act);
(17) $2,250,000 shall be for grants under section 1459F of the Safe Drinking Water Act (42
U.S.C. 300j–19g);
(18) $4,000,000 shall be for carrying out section 2001 of the America’s Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–270, 42 U.S.C.
300j–3c note): Provided, That the Administrator may award grants to and enter into
contracts with tribes, intertribal consortia,
public or private agencies, institutions, organizations, and individuals, without regard to
section 3324(a) and (b) of title 31 and section
6101 of title 41, United States Code, and enter
into interagency agreements as appropriate;
(19) $2,000,000 shall be for grants under section 50217(b) of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (33 U.S.C. 1302f(b); Public
Law 117–58);
(20) $3,500,000 shall be for grants under section 124 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1276);
(21) $2,000,000 shall be for grants for remediation of above ground leaking fuel tanks pursuant to Public Law 106–554;
(22) $2,000,000 shall be for grants under section 220 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1300); and
(23) $1,109,833,000 shall be for grants, including associated program support costs, to
States, federally recognized tribes, interstate agencies, tribal consortia, and air pollution control agencies for multi-media or
single media pollution prevention, control
and abatement, and related activities, including activities pursuant to the provisions
set forth under this heading in Public Law
104–134, and for making grants under section
103 of the Clean Air Act for particulate matter monitoring and data collection activities
subject to terms and conditions specified by
the Administrator, and under section 2301 of
the Water and Waste Act of 2016 to assist
States in developing and implementing programs for control of coal combustion residuals, of which: $46,250,000 shall be for carrying
out section 128 of CERCLA; $9,500,000 shall be
for Environmental Information Exchange
Network grants, including associated program support costs; $1,475,000 shall be for
grants to States under section 2007(f)(2) of
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, which shall be
in addition to funds appropriated under the
heading ‘‘Leaking Underground Storage
Tank Trust Fund Program’’ to carry out the
provisions of the Solid Waste Disposal Act
specified in section 9508(c) of the Internal
Revenue Code other than section 9003(h) of
the Solid Waste Disposal Act; $18,512,000 of
the funds available for grants under section
106 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act shall be for State participation in
national- and State-level statistical surveys
of water resources and enhancements to
State monitoring programs.
WATER INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE AND
INNOVATION PROGRAM ACCOUNT
For the cost of direct loans and for the cost
of guaranteed loans, as authorized by the
Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014, $64,634,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That such
costs, including the cost of modifying such
loans, shall be as defined in section 502 of the
Congressional Budget Act of 1974: Provided
further, That these funds are available to

subsidize gross obligations for the principal
amount of direct loans, including capitalized
interest, and total loan principal, including
capitalized interest, any part of which is to
be guaranteed, not to exceed $12,500,000,000:
Provided further, That of the funds made
available under this heading, $5,000,000 shall
be used solely for the cost of direct loans and
for the cost of guaranteed loans for projects
described in section 5026(9) of the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of
2014 to State infrastructure financing authorities, as authorized by section 5033(e) of
such Act: Provided further, That the use of direct loans or loan guarantee authority under
this heading for direct loans or commitments to guarantee loans for any project
shall be in accordance with the criteria published in the Federal Register on June 30,
2020 (85 FR 39189) pursuant to the fourth proviso under the heading ‘‘Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Program Account’’ in division D of the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020 (Public Law
116–94): Provided further, That none of the direct loans or loan guarantee authority made
available under this heading shall be available for any project unless the Administrator and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget have certified in advance in writing that the direct loan or loan
guarantee, as applicable, and the project
comply with the criteria referenced in the
previous proviso: Provided further, That, for
the purposes of carrying out the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, the Director of the
Congressional Budget Office may request,
and the Administrator shall promptly provide, documentation and information relating to a project identified in a Letter of Interest submitted to the Administrator pursuant to a Notice of Funding Availability for
applications for credit assistance under the
Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act Program, including with respect to
a project that was initiated or completed before the date of enactment of this Act.
In addition, fees authorized to be collected
pursuant to sections 5029 and 5030 of the
Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014 shall be deposited in this account, to remain available until expended.
In addition, for administrative expenses to
carry out the direct and guaranteed loan
programs, notwithstanding section 5033 of
the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014, $7,640,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For fiscal year 2026, notwithstanding 31
U.S.C. 6303(1) and 6305(1), the Administrator
of the Environmental Protection Agency, in
carrying out the Agency’s function to implement directly Federal environmental programs required or authorized by law in the
absence of an acceptable tribal program,
may award cooperative agreements to federally recognized Indian tribes or Intertribal
consortia, if authorized by their member
tribes, to assist the Administrator in implementing Federal environmental programs
for Indian tribes required or authorized by
law, except that no such cooperative agreements may be awarded from funds designated for State financial assistance agreements.
The Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency is authorized to collect
and obligate pesticide registration service
fees in accordance with section 33 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act (7 U.S.C. 136w–8), to remain available
until expended.
Notwithstanding section 33(d)(2) of the
Federal
Insecticide,
Fungicide,
and

January 8, 2026

Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) (7 U.S.C. 136w–
8(d)(2)), the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency may assess fees
under section 33 of FIFRA (7 U.S.C. 136w–8)
for fiscal year 2026.
The Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency is authorized to collect
and obligate fees in accordance with section
3024 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42
U.S.C. 6939g) for fiscal year 2026, to remain
available until expended.
The Administrator is authorized to transfer up to $369,000,000 of the funds appropriated for the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative under the heading ‘‘Environmental
Programs and Management’’ to the head of
any Federal department or agency, with the
concurrence of such head, to carry out activities that would support the Great Lakes
Restoration Initiative and Great Lakes
Water
Quality
Agreement
programs,
projects, or activities; to enter into an interagency agreement with the head of such Federal department or agency to carry out these
activities; and to make grants to governmental entities, nonprofit organizations, institutions, and individuals for planning, research, monitoring, outreach, and implementation in furtherance of the Great Lakes
Restoration Initiative and the Great Lakes
Water Quality Agreement.
The Science and Technology, Environmental Programs and Management, Office of
Inspector General, Hazardous Substance
Superfund, and Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund Program Accounts, are
available for the construction, alteration, repair, rehabilitation, and renovation of facilities, provided that the cost does not exceed
$300,000 per project.
For fiscal year 2026, and notwithstanding
section 518(f) of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1377(f)), the Administrator is authorized to use the amounts appropriated for any fiscal year under section
319 of the Act to make grants to Indian
tribes pursuant to sections 319(h) and 518(e)
of that Act.
The Administrator is authorized to use the
amounts appropriated under the heading
‘‘Environmental Programs and Management’’ for fiscal year 2026 to provide grants
to implement the Southeast New England
Watershed Restoration Program.
Notwithstanding
the
limitations
on
amounts in section 320(i)(2)(B) of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, not less than
$2,500,000 of the funds made available under
this title for the National Estuary Program
shall be for making competitive awards described in section 320(g)(4).
For fiscal year 2026, the Office of Chemical
Safety and Pollution Prevention and the Office of Water may, using funds appropriated
under the headings ‘‘Environmental Programs and Management’’ and ‘‘Science and
Technology’’, contract directly with individuals or indirectly with institutions or nonprofit organizations, without regard to 41
U.S.C. 5, for the temporary or intermittent
personal services of students or recent graduates, who shall be considered employees for
the purposes of chapters 57 and 81 of title 5,
United States Code, relating to compensation for travel and work injuries, and chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, relating to tort claims, but shall not be considered to be Federal employees for any other
purpose: Provided, That amounts used for
this purpose by the Office of Chemical Safety
and Pollution Prevention and the Office of
Water collectively may not exceed $2,000,000.
In this fiscal year and each fiscal year
through 2031, the Administrator may, after
consultation with the Office of Personnel
Management, employ up to 100 persons at
any one time at the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the authority provided in 42 U.S.C. 209.

January 8, 2026

H189

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The Environmental Protection Agency
shall maintain staffing levels in order to fulfill the mission and statutory obligations of
the agency, including Section 2(f) of the Environmental Research, Development, and
Demonstration Authorization Act of 1981 (42
U.S.C. 4363).
The Environmental Protection agency
shall provide the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
Senate with copies of any available Department of Treasury quarterly certification of
trust fund receipts collected from section
13601 of Public Law 117–169 and section 80201
of Public Law 117–58, an annual operating
plan for such receipts showing amounts allocated by program area and program project,
and quarterly reports for such receipts of obligated balances by program area and program project.
TITLE III
RELATED AGENCIES
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY FOR
NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

For necessary expenses of the Office of the
Under Secretary for Natural Resources and
Environment, $780,000: Provided, That funds
made available by this Act to any agency in
the Natural Resources and Environment mission area for salaries and expenses are available to fund up to one administrative support staff for the office.
FOREST SERVICE
FOREST SERVICE OPERATIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Forest Service, not otherwise provided for, $1,090,600,000,
of which $944,114,000 shall remain available
through September 30, 2029: Provided, That a
portion of the funds made available under
this heading shall be for the base salary and
expenses of employees in the Chief’s Office,
the Work Environment and Performance Office, the Business Operations Deputy Area,
and the Chief Financial Officer’s Office to
carry out administrative and general management support functions: Provided further,
That funds provided under this heading shall
be available for the costs of facility maintenance, repairs, and leases for buildings and
sites where these administrative, general
management and other Forest Service support functions take place; the costs of all
utility and telecommunication expenses of
the Forest Service, as well as business services; and, for information technology, including cybersecurity requirements: Provided
further, That funds provided under this heading may be used for necessary expenses to
carry out administrative and general management support functions of the Forest
Service not otherwise provided for and necessary for its operation.
FOREST AND RANGELAND RESEARCH

For necessary expenses of forest and rangeland research as authorized by law,
$308,697,000, to remain available through September 30, 2029: Provided, That of the funds
provided, $32,197,000 is for the forest inventory and analysis program: Provided further,
That all authorities for the use of funds, including the use of contracts, grants, and cooperative agreements, available to execute
amounts made available under this heading,
are also available in the utilization of funds
for Fire Science Research.
STATE, PRIVATE, AND TRIBAL FORESTRY
For necessary expenses of cooperating with
and providing technical and financial assistance to States, territories, possessions,
tribes, and others, and for forest health management, including for invasive plants, and
conducting an international program and

trade compliance activities as authorized,
$310,594,000, to remain available through September 30, 2029, as authorized by law, of
which $18,094,000 shall be for projects specified for Forest Resource Information and
Analysis in the table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment Incorporation of Community
Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending Items’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act).
NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM

For necessary expenses of the Forest Service, not otherwise provided for, for management, protection, improvement, and utilization of the National Forest System, and for
hazardous fuels management on or adjacent
to such lands, $1,857,843,000, to remain available through September 30, 2029: Provided,
That of the funds provided, $31,000,000 shall
be deposited in the Collaborative Forest
Landscape Restoration Fund for ecological
restoration treatments as authorized by 16
U.S.C. 7303(f): Provided further, That for the
funds provided in the preceding proviso, section 4003(d)(3)(A) of the Omnibus Public Land
Management
Act
of
2009
(16
U.S.C.
7303(d)(3)(A)) shall be applied by substituting
‘‘20’’ for ‘‘10’’ and section 4003(d)(3)(B) of the
Omnibus Public Land Management Act of
2009 (16 U.S.C. 7303(d)(3)(B)) shall be applied
by substituting ‘‘4’’ for ‘‘2’’: Provided further,
That of the funds provided, $39,000,000 shall
be for forest products: Provided further, That
of the funds provided, $176,850,000 shall be for
hazardous fuels management activities, of
which not to exceed $30,000,000 may be used
to make grants, using any authorities available to the Forest Service under the ‘‘State,
Private, and Tribal Forestry’’ appropriation,
for the purpose of creating incentives for increased use of biomass from National Forest
System
lands:
Provided
further,
That
$20,000,000 may be used by the Secretary of
Agriculture to enter into procurement contracts or cooperative agreements or to issue
grants for hazardous fuels management activities, and for training or monitoring associated with such hazardous fuels management activities on Federal land, or on nonFederal land if the Secretary determines
such activities benefit resources on Federal
land: Provided further, That funds made
available to implement the Community Forest Restoration Act, Public Law 106–393, title
VI, shall be available for use on non-Federal
lands in accordance with authorities made
available to the Forest Service under the
‘‘State, Private, and Tribal Forestry’’ appropriation: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 33 of the Bankhead Jones
Farm Tenant Act (7 U.S.C. 1012), the Secretary of Agriculture, in calculating a fee for
grazing on a National Grassland, may provide a credit of up to 50 percent of the calculated fee to a Grazing Association or direct permittee for a conservation practice
approved by the Secretary in advance of the
fiscal year in which the cost of the conservation practice is incurred, and that the
amount credited shall remain available to
the Grazing Association or the direct permittee, as appropriate, in the fiscal year in
which the credit is made and each fiscal year
thereafter for use on the project for conservation practices approved by the Secretary: Provided further, That funds appropriated to this account shall be available for
the base salary and expenses of employees
that carry out the functions funded by the
‘‘Capital Improvement and Maintenance’’ account, the ‘‘Range Betterment Fund’’ account, and the ‘‘Management of National
Forest Lands for Subsistence Uses’’ account.

CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Forest Service, not otherwise provided for, $153,250,000,
to remain available through September 30,
2029, for construction, capital improvement,
maintenance, and acquisition of buildings
and other facilities and infrastructure; for
construction, reconstruction, and decommissioning of roads that are no longer needed,
including unauthorized roads that are not
part of the transportation system; and for
maintenance of forest roads and trails by the
Forest Service as authorized by 16 U.S.C.
532–538 and 23 U.S.C. 101 and 205: Provided,
That $6,000,000 shall be for activities authorized by 16 U.S.C. 538(a): Provided further, That
$20,850,000 shall be for projects specified for
Construction Projects in the table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment Incorporation of
Community Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending Items’’ included
for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided further, That funds becoming
available in fiscal year 2026 under the Act of
March 4, 1913 (16 U.S.C. 501) shall be transferred to the General Fund of the Treasury
and shall not be available for transfer or obligation for any other purpose unless the
funds are appropriated.
ACQUISITION OF LANDS FOR NATIONAL FORESTS
SPECIAL ACTS

For acquisition of lands within the exterior boundaries of the Cache, Uinta, and
Wasatch National Forests, Utah; the Toiyabe
National Forest, Nevada; and the Angeles,
San Bernardino, Sequoia, and Cleveland National Forests, California; and the Ozark-St.
Francis and Ouachita National Forests, Arkansas; as authorized by law, $664,000, to be
derived from forest receipts.
ACQUISITION OF LANDS TO COMPLETE LAND
EXCHANGES

For acquisition of lands, such sums, to be
derived from funds deposited by State, county, or municipal governments, public school
districts, or other public school authorities,
and for authorized expenditures from funds
deposited by non-Federal parties pursuant to
Land Sale and Exchange Acts, pursuant to
the Act of December 4, 1967 (16 U.S.C. 484a),
to remain available through September 30,
2029, (16 U.S.C. 516–617a, 555a; Public Law 96–
586; Public Law 76–589, Public Law 76–591; and
Public Law 78–310).
RANGE BETTERMENT FUND

For necessary expenses of range rehabilitation, protection, and improvement, 50 percent of all moneys received during the prior
fiscal year, as fees for grazing domestic livestock on lands in National Forests in the 16
Western States, pursuant to section 401(b)(1)
of Public Law 94–579, to remain available
through September 30, 2029, of which not to
exceed 6 percent shall be available for administrative expenses associated with onthe-ground range rehabilitation, protection,
and improvements.
GIFTS, DONATIONS AND BEQUESTS FOR FOREST
AND RANGELAND RESEARCH

For expenses authorized by 16 U.S.C.
1643(b), $45,000, to remain available through
September 30, 2029, to be derived from the
fund established pursuant to the above Act.
MANAGEMENT OF NATIONAL FOREST LANDS FOR
SUBSISTENCE USES

For necessary expenses of the Forest Service to manage Federal lands in Alaska for
subsistence uses under title VIII of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act
(16 U.S.C. 3111 et seq.), $1,099,000, to remain
available through September 30, 2029.

H190

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
WILDLAND FIRE MANAGEMENT

(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses for forest fire
presuppression activities on National Forest
System lands, for emergency wildland fire
suppression on or adjacent to such lands or
other lands under fire protection agreement,
and for emergency rehabilitation of burnedover National Forest System lands and
water, $2,426,111,000, to remain available
until expended: Provided, That such funds,
including unobligated balances under this
heading, are available for repayment of advances from other appropriations accounts
previously transferred for such purposes:
Provided further, That any unobligated funds
appropriated in a previous fiscal year for
hazardous fuels management may be transferred to the ‘‘National Forest System’’ account: Provided further, That such funds shall
be available to reimburse State and other cooperating entities for services provided in response to wildfire and other emergencies or
disasters to the extent such reimbursements
by the Forest Service for non-fire emergencies are fully repaid by the responsible
emergency management agency: Provided
further, That funds provided shall be available for support to Federal emergency response: Provided further, That the costs of
implementing any cooperative agreement between the Federal Government and any nonFederal entity may be shared, as mutually
agreed on by the affected parties: Provided
further, That of the funds provided under this
heading, $1,011,000,000 shall be available for
wildfire suppression operations, and is provided to meet the terms of section
4004(b)(5)(B) of S. Con. Res. 14 (117th Congress), the concurrent resolution on the
budget for fiscal year 2022, and to legislation
establishing fiscal year 2026 budget enforcement in the House of Representatives.
WILDFIRE SUPPRESSION OPERATIONS RESERVE
FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

In addition to the amounts provided under
the heading ‘‘Department of Agriculture—
Forest Service—Wildland Fire Management’’
for
wildfire
suppression
operations,
$2,480,000,000, to remain available until transferred, is additional new budget authority as
specified for purposes of section 4004(b)(5) of
S. Con. Res. 14 (117th Congress), the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year
2022, and to legislation establishing fiscal
year 2026 budget enforcement in the House of
Representatives:
Provided,
That
such
amounts may be transferred to and merged
with amounts made available under the
headings ‘‘Department of the Interior—Department-Wide Programs—Wildland Fire
Management’’ and ‘‘Department of Agriculture—Forest Service—Wildland Fire Management’’ for wildfire suppression operations
in the fiscal year in which such amounts are
transferred: Provided further, That amounts
may be transferred to the ‘‘Wildland Fire
Management’’ accounts in the Department of
the Interior or the Department of Agriculture only upon the notification of the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations that all wildfire suppression operations
funds appropriated under that heading in
this and prior appropriations Acts to the
agency to which the funds will be transferred
will be obligated within 30 days: Provided further, That the transfer authority provided
under this heading is in addition to any
other transfer authority provided by law:
Provided further, That, in determining whether all wildfire suppression operations funds
appropriated under the heading ‘‘Wildland
Fire Management’’ in this and prior appropriations Acts to either the Department of
Agriculture or the Department of the Inte-

rior will be obligated within 30 days pursuant to the preceding proviso, any funds
transferred or permitted to be transferred
pursuant to any other transfer authority
provided by law shall be excluded.
COMMUNICATIONS SITE ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

Amounts collected in this fiscal year pursuant to section 8705(f)(2) of the Agriculture
Improvement Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–
334), shall be deposited in the special account
established by section 8705(f)(1) of such Act,
shall be available to cover the costs described in subsection (c)(3) of such section of
such Act, and shall remain available until
expended: Provided, That such amounts shall
be transferred to the ‘‘National Forest System’’ account.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FOREST SERVICE
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

Appropriations to the Forest Service for
the current fiscal year shall be available for:
(1) purchase of passenger motor vehicles; acquisition of passenger motor vehicles from
excess sources, and hire of such vehicles;
purchase, lease, operation, maintenance, and
acquisition of aircraft to maintain the operable fleet for use in Forest Service wildland
fire programs and other Forest Service programs; notwithstanding other provisions of
law, existing aircraft being replaced may be
sold, with proceeds derived or trade-in value
used to offset the purchase price for the replacement aircraft; (2) services pursuant to 7
U.S.C. 2225, and not to exceed $100,000 for employment under 5 U.S.C. 3109; (3) purchase,
erection, and alteration of buildings and
other public improvements (7 U.S.C. 2250); (4)
acquisition of land, waters, and interests
therein pursuant to 7 U.S.C. 428a; (5) for expenses pursuant to the Volunteers in the National Forest Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 558a, 558d,
and 558a note); (6) the cost of uniforms as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 5901–5902; and (7) for debt
collection contracts in accordance with 31
U.S.C. 3718(c).
Funds made available to the Forest Service in this Act may be transferred between
accounts affected by the Forest Service
budget restructure outlined in section 435 of
division D of the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020 (Public Law 116–94):
Provided, That any transfer of funds pursuant
to this paragraph shall not increase or decrease the funds appropriated to any account
in this fiscal year by more than ten percent:
Provided further, That such transfer authority is in addition to any other transfer authority provided by law.
Any appropriations or funds available to
the Forest Service may be transferred to the
Wildland Fire Management appropriation for
forest firefighting, emergency rehabilitation
of burned-over or damaged lands or waters
under its jurisdiction, and fire preparedness
due to severe burning conditions upon the
Secretary of Agriculture’s notification of the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations that all fire suppression funds appropriated under the heading ‘‘Wildland Fire
Management’’ will be obligated within 30
days: Provided, That all funds used pursuant
to this paragraph must be replenished by a
supplemental appropriation which must be
requested as promptly as possible.
Not more than $50,000,000 of funds appropriated to the Forest Service shall be available for expenditure or transfer to the Department of the Interior for wildland fire
management, hazardous fuels management,
and State fire assistance when such transfers
would facilitate and expedite wildland fire
management programs and projects.
Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Act, the Forest Service may transfer unobligated balances of discretionary funds ap-

January 8, 2026

propriated to the Forest Service by this Act
to or within the National Forest System Account, or reprogram funds to be used for the
purposes of hazardous fuels management and
urgent rehabilitation of burned-over National Forest System lands and water: Provided, That such transferred funds shall remain available through September 30, 2029:
Provided further, That none of the funds
transferred pursuant to this paragraph shall
be available for obligation without written
notification to and the prior approval of the
Committees on Appropriations of both
Houses of Congress.
Funds appropriated to the Forest Service
shall be available for assistance to or
through the U.S. Department of State and
other Federal agencies in connection with
forest and rangeland research, technical information, and assistance in foreign countries, and shall be available to support forestry and related natural resource activities
outside the United States and its territories
and possessions, including technical assistance, education and training, and cooperation with United States government, private
sector, and international organizations: Provided, That amounts made available for
International Programs and Trade may utilize all authorities related to forestry, research, and cooperative assistance regardless
of program designations.
Funds appropriated to the Forest Service
shall be available to enter into a cooperative
agreement with the section 509(a)(3) Supporting Organization, ‘‘Forest Service International Foundation’’ to assist the Foundation in meeting administrative, project, and
other expenses, and may provide the Foundation’s use of Forest Service personnel and facilities.
Funds appropriated to the Forest Service
shall be available for expenditure or transfer
to the Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Land Management, for removal, preparation,
and adoption of excess wild horses and burros from National Forest System lands, and
for the performance of cadastral surveys to
designate the boundaries of such lands.
None of the funds made available to the
Forest Service in this Act or any other Act
with respect to any fiscal year shall be subject to transfer under the provisions of section 702(b) of the Department of Agriculture
Organic Act of 1944 (7 U.S.C. 2257), section 442
of Public Law 106–224 (7 U.S.C. 7772), or section 10417(b) of Public Law 107–171 (7 U.S.C.
8316(b)).
Not more than $82,000,000 of funds available
to the Forest Service shall be transferred to
the Working Capital Fund of the Department
of Agriculture and not more than $14,500,000
of funds available to the Forest Service shall
be transferred to the Department of Agriculture for Department Reimbursable Programs, commonly referred to as Greenbook
charges: Provided, That nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit or limit the use of reimbursable agreements requested by the Forest
Service in order to obtain information technology services, including telecommunications and system modifications or enhancements, from the Working Capital Fund
of the Department of Agriculture.
Of the funds available to the Forest Service, up to $5,000,000 shall be available for priority projects within the scope of the approved budget, which shall be carried out by
the Youth Conservation Corps and shall be
carried out under the authority of the Public
Lands Corps Act of 1993 (16 U.S.C. 1721 et
seq.).
Of the funds available to the Forest Service, $4,000 is available to the Chief of the Forest Service for official reception and representation expenses.
Pursuant to sections 405(b) and 410(b) of
Public Law 101–593, of the funds available to

January 8, 2026

H191

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

the Forest Service, up to $3,000,000 may be
advanced in a lump sum to the National Forest Foundation to aid conservation partnership projects in support of the Forest Service
mission, without regard to when the Foundation incurs expenses, for projects on or benefitting National Forest System lands or related to Forest Service programs: Provided,
That of the Federal funds made available to
the Foundation, no more than $300,000 shall
be available for administrative expenses:
Provided further, That the Foundation shall
obtain, by the end of the period of Federal financial assistance, private contributions to
match funds made available by the Forest
Service on at least a one-for-one basis: Provided further, That the Foundation may
transfer Federal funds to a Federal or a nonFederal recipient for a project at the same
rate that the recipient has obtained the nonFederal matching funds.
Pursuant to section 2(b)(2) of Public Law
98–244, up to $3,000,000 of the funds available
to the Forest Service may be advanced to
the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation in
a lump sum to aid cost-share conservation
projects, without regard to when expenses
are incurred, on or benefitting National Forest System lands or related to Forest Service
programs: Provided, That such funds shall be
matched on at least a one-for-one basis by
the Foundation or its sub-recipients: Provided further, That the Foundation may
transfer Federal funds to a Federal or nonFederal recipient for a project at the same
rate that the recipient has obtained the nonFederal matching funds.
Any amounts made available to the Forest
Service in this fiscal year, including available collections, may be used by the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the
Chief of the Forest Service, to enter into
Federal financial assistance grants and cooperative agreements to support forest or
grassland collaboratives in the accomplishment of activities benefitting both the public and the National Forest System, Federal
lands and adjacent non-Federal lands. Eligible activities are those that will improve or
enhance Federal investments, resources, or
lands, including for collaborative and collaboration-based activities, including but
not limited to facilitation, planning, and implementing projects, technical assistance,
administrative functions, operational support, participant costs, and other capacity
support needs, as identified by the Forest
Service. Eligible recipients are Indian tribal
entities (defined at 25 U.S.C. 5304(e)), state
government, local governments, private and
nonprofit entities, for-profit organizations,
and educational institutions. The Secretary
of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of
the Forest Service, may enter into such cooperative agreements notwithstanding chapter 63 of title 31 when the Secretary determines that the public interest will be benefited and that there exists a mutual interest
other than monetary considerations. Transactions subject to Title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations shall be publicly advertised
and require competition when required by
such Title 2. For those transactions not subject to Title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the agency may require public advertising and competition when deemed appropriate. The term ‘‘forest and grassland
collaboratives’’ means groups of individuals
or entities with diverse interests participating in a cooperative process to share
knowledge, ideas, and resources about the
protection, restoration, or enhancement of
natural and other resources on Federal and
adjacent non-Federal lands, the improvement or maintenance of public access to
Federal lands, or the reduction of risk to
such lands caused by natural disasters.
The 19th unnumbered paragraph under the
heading ‘‘Administrative Provisions, Forest

Service’’ in title III of Public Law 109–54 is
amended in the first sentence by inserting
‘‘and future Acts’’ after ‘‘funds available to
the Forest Service in this Act’’ and by striking ‘‘prior to the date of enactment of this
Act’’.
Funds appropriated to the Forest Service
shall be available for interactions with and
providing technical assistance to rural communities and natural resource-based businesses for sustainable rural development
purposes.
Funds appropriated to the Forest Service
shall be available for payments to counties
within the Columbia River Gorge National
Scenic Area, pursuant to section 14(c)(1) and
(2), and section 16(a)(2) of Public Law 99–663.
Any funds appropriated to the Forest Service may be used to meet the non-Federal
share requirement in section 502(c) of the
Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C.
3056(c)(2)).
The Forest Service shall not assess funds
for the purpose of performing fire, administrative, and other facilities maintenance and
decommissioning.
Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, of any appropriations or funds available
to the Forest Service, not to exceed $500,000
may be used to reimburse the Office of the
General Counsel (OGC), Department of Agriculture, for travel and related expenses incurred as a result of OGC assistance or participation requested by the Forest Service at
meetings, training sessions, management reviews, land purchase negotiations, and similar matters unrelated to civil litigation: Provided, That future budget justifications for
both the Forest Service and the Department
of Agriculture should clearly display the
sums previously transferred and the sums requested for transfer.
An eligible individual who is employed in
any project funded under title V of the Older
Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3056 et seq.)
and administered by the Forest Service shall
be considered to be a Federal employee for
purposes of chapter 171 of title 28, United
States Code.
The Forest Service may employ or contract with an individual who is enrolled in a
training program at a longstanding Civilian
Conservation Center (as defined in section
147(d) of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3197(d))) at regular
rates of pay for necessary hours of work on
National Forest System lands.
Funds appropriated to the Forest Service
shall be available to pay, from a single account, the base salary and expenses of employees who carry out functions funded by
other accounts for Enterprise Program,
Geospatial Technology and Applications
Center, National Applications Liaison Office,
Job Corps, and National Technology and Development Program.
The Forest Service shall maintain staffing
levels in order to fulfill the mission required
under title 7, title 16, title 30, title 43, and
title 54, United States Code, including to
protect natural and cultural resources, provide and maintain appropriate access and
recreation for visitors, provide safety precautions for visitors and staff, maintain
physical and natural infrastructure, provide
information and respond to stakeholders and
the general public, conduct tribal consultation, provide for administrative support, administer forestry assistance programs, provide technical assistance to states, tribes
and private landowners, manage energy and
minerals resources, and carry out other activities in support of effectively operating
the National Forest System and carrying out
programs administered by the Forest Service
in a timely manner.

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES
INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE
INDIAN HEALTH SERVICES

For expenses necessary to carry out the
Act of August 5, 1954 (68 Stat. 674), the Indian
Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, and titles II and III of the Public
Health Service Act with respect to the Indian Health Service, $66,993,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, except as
otherwise provided herein, which shall be in
addition to funds previously appropriated
under this heading that became available on
October 1, 2025; in addition, $264,702,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, for
the Electronic Health Record System and
the Indian Healthcare Improvement Fund, of
which $74,138,000 is for the Indian Health
Care Improvement Fund and may be used, as
needed, to carry out activities typically
funded under the Indian Health Facilities account; and, in addition, $4,789,731,000, which
shall become available on October 1, 2026,
and remain available through September 30,
2028, except as otherwise provided herein; together with payments received during the
fiscal year pursuant to sections 231(b) and 233
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.
238(b) and 238b), for services furnished by the
Indian Health Service: Provided, That funds
made available to tribes and tribal organizations through contracts, grant agreements,
or any other agreements or compacts authorized by the Indian Self-Determination
and Education Assistance Act of 1975 (25
U.S.C. 5301 et seq.), shall be deemed to be obligated at the time of the grant or contract
award and thereafter shall remain available
to the tribe or tribal organization without
fiscal year limitation: Provided further, That
from the amounts that become available on
October 1, 2026, $2,500,000 shall be available
for grants or contracts with public or private
institutions to provide alcohol or drug treatment services to Indians, including alcohol
detoxification services: Provided further,
That from the amounts that become available on October 1, 2026, $996,755,000 shall remain available until expended for Purchased/
Referred Care: Provided further, That of the
total amount specified in the preceding proviso for Purchased/Referred Care, $54,000,000
shall be for the Indian Catastrophic Health
Emergency Fund: Provided further, That from
the amounts that become available on October 1, 2026, up to $53,000,000 shall remain
available until expended for implementation
of the loan repayment program under section
108 of the Indian Health Care Improvement
Act: Provided further, That from the amounts
that become available on October 1, 2026,
$58,000,000, to remain available until expended, shall be for costs related to or resulting from accreditation emergencies, including supplementing activities funded
under the heading ‘‘Indian Health Facilities’’, of which up to $4,000,000 may be used
to supplement amounts otherwise available
for Purchased/Referred Care: Provided further, That the amounts collected by the Federal Government as authorized by sections
104 and 108 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1613a and 1616a)
during the preceding fiscal year for breach of
contracts shall be deposited in the Fund authorized by section 108A of that Act (25
U.S.C. 1616a–1) and shall remain available
until expended and, notwithstanding section
108A(c) of that Act (25 U.S.C. 1616a–1(c)),
funds shall be available to make new awards
under the loan repayment and scholarship
programs under sections 104 and 108 of that
Act (25 U.S.C. 1613a and 1616a): Provided further, That the amounts made available within this account for the Substance Abuse and

H192

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Suicide Prevention Program, for Opioid Prevention, Treatment and Recovery Services,
for the Domestic Violence Prevention Program, for the Zero Suicide Initiative, for the
housing subsidy authority for civilian employees, for Aftercare Pilot Programs at
Youth Regional Treatment Centers, for
transformation and modernization costs of
the Indian Health Service Electronic Health
Record system, for national quality and
oversight activities, to improve collections
from public and private insurance at Indian
Health Service and tribally operated facilities, for an initiative to treat or reduce the
transmission of HIV and HCV, for a maternal
health initiative, for the Telebehaviorial
Health Center of Excellence, for Alzheimer’s
activities, for Village Built Clinics, for a
produce prescription pilot, and for accreditation emergencies shall be allocated at the
discretion of the Director of the Indian
Health Service and shall remain available
until expended: Provided further, That funds
provided in this Act may be used for annual
contracts and grants that fall within 2 fiscal
years, provided the total obligation is recorded in the year the funds are appropriated: Provided further, That the amounts
collected by the Secretary of Health and
Human Services under the authority of title
IV of the Indian Health Care Improvement
Act (25 U.S.C. 1613) shall remain available
until expended for the purpose of achieving
compliance with the applicable conditions
and requirements of titles XVIII and XIX of
the Social Security Act, except for those related to the planning, design, or construction of new facilities: Provided further, That
funding contained herein for scholarship programs under the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1613) shall remain
available until expended: Provided further,
That amounts received by tribes and tribal
organizations under title IV of the Indian
Health Care Improvement Act shall be reported and accounted for and available to
the receiving tribes and tribal organizations
until expended: Provided further, That the
Bureau of Indian Affairs may collect from
the Indian Health Service, and from tribes
and tribal organizations operating health facilities pursuant to Public Law 93–638, such
individually identifiable health information
relating to disabled children as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out its
functions under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.):
Provided further, That none of the funds provided that become available on October 1,
2026, may be used for implementation of the
Electronic Health Record System or the Indian Health Care Improvement Fund: Provided further, That none of the funds appropriated by this Act, or any other Act, to the
Indian Health Service for the Electronic
Health Record system shall be available for
obligation or expenditure for the selection or
implementation of a new Information Technology infrastructure system, unless the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate are consulted 90 days in advance of such obligation.
CONTRACT SUPPORT COSTS

For payments to tribes and tribal organizations for contract support costs associated
with Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act agreements with the
Indian Health Service for fiscal year 2026,
such sums as may be necessary: Provided,
That notwithstanding any other provision of
law, no amounts made available under this
heading shall be available for transfer to another budget account: Provided further, That
amounts obligated but not expended by a
tribe or tribal organization for contract support costs for such agreements for the current fiscal year shall be applied to contract

support costs due for such agreements for
subsequent fiscal years.
PAYMENTS FOR TRIBAL LEASES

For payments to tribes and tribal organizations for leases pursuant to section 105(l)
of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5324(l)) for
fiscal year 2026, such sums as may be necessary, which shall be available for obligation through September 30, 2027: Provided,
That notwithstanding any other provision of
law, no amounts made available under this
heading shall be available for transfer to another budget account.
INDIAN HEALTH FACILITIES

For construction, repair, maintenance,
demolition, improvement, and equipment of
health and related auxiliary facilities, including quarters for personnel; preparation
of plans, specifications, and drawings; acquisition of sites, purchase and erection of modular buildings, and purchases of trailers; and
for provision of domestic and community
sanitation facilities for Indians, as authorized by section 7 of the Act of August 5, 1954
(42 U.S.C. 2004a), the Indian Self-Determination Act, and the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, and for expenses necessary
to carry out such Acts and titles II and III of
the Public Health Service Act with respect
to environmental health and facilities support activities of the Indian Health Service,
$5,826,000, to remain available until expended, which shall be in addition to funds
previously appropriated under this heading
that became available on October 1, 2025; in
addition, $292,622,000, to remain available
until expended, for Sanitation Facilities
Construction and Health Care Facilities Construction; and, in addition, $516,600,000,
which shall become available on October 1,
2026, and remain available until expended:
Provided, That notwithstanding any other
provision of law, funds appropriated for the
planning, design, construction, renovation,
or expansion of health facilities for the benefit of an Indian tribe or tribes may be used
to purchase land on which such facilities will
be located: Provided further, That not to exceed $500,000 may be used for fiscal year 2027
by the Indian Health Service to purchase
TRANSAM equipment from the Department
of Defense for distribution to the Indian
Health Service and tribal facilities: Provided
further, That none of the funds provided that
become available on October 1, 2026, may be
used for Health Care Facilities Construction
or for Sanitation Facilities Construction:
Provided further, That of the amount appropriated under this heading for fiscal year
2026 for Sanitation Facilities Construction,
$17,039,000 shall be for projects specified for
Sanitation Facilities Construction (CDS) in
the table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment
Incorporation of Community Project Funding Items/Congressionally Directed Spending
Items’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act): Provided further, That
none of the funds appropriated to the Indian
Health Service may be used for sanitation facilities construction for new homes funded
with grants by the housing programs of the
United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—INDIAN HEALTH
SERVICE

Appropriations provided in this Act to the
Indian Health Service shall be available for
services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109 at
rates not to exceed the per diem rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for seniorlevel positions under 5 U.S.C. 5376; hire of
passenger motor vehicles and aircraft; purchase of medical equipment; purchase of re-

January 8, 2026

prints; purchase, renovation, and erection of
modular buildings and renovation of existing
facilities; payments for telephone service in
private residences in the field, when authorized under regulations approved by the Secretary of Health and Human Services; uniforms, or allowances therefor as authorized
by 5 U.S.C. 5901–5902; and for expenses of attendance at meetings that relate to the functions or activities of the Indian Health Service: Provided, That in accordance with the
provisions of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, non-Indian patients may be
extended health care at all tribally administered or Indian Health Service facilities, subject to charges, and the proceeds along with
funds recovered under the Federal Medical
Care Recovery Act (42 U.S.C. 2651–2653) shall
be credited to the account of the facility providing the service and shall be available
without fiscal year limitation: Provided further, That notwithstanding any other law or
regulation, funds transferred from the Department of Housing and Urban Development
to the Indian Health Service shall be administered under Public Law 86–121, the Indian
Sanitation Facilities Act and Public Law 93–
638: Provided further, That funds appropriated
to the Indian Health Service in this Act, except those used for administrative and program direction purposes, shall not be subject
to limitations directed at curtailing Federal
travel and transportation: Provided further,
That none of the funds made available to the
Indian Health Service in this Act shall be
used for any assessments or charges by the
Department of Health and Human Services
unless such assessments or charges are identified in the budget justification and provided in this Act, or approved by the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations
through the reprogramming process: Provided further, That notwithstanding any
other provision of law, funds previously or
herein made available to a tribe or tribal organization through a contract, grant, or
agreement authorized by title I or title V of
the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975 (25 U.S.C. 5301
et seq.), may be deobligated and reobligated
to a self-determination contract under title
I, or a self-governance agreement under title
V of such Act and thereafter shall remain
available to the tribe or tribal organization
without fiscal year limitation: Provided further, That none of the funds made available
to the Indian Health Service in this Act shall
be used to implement the final rule published in the Federal Register on September
16, 1987, by the Department of Health and
Human Services, relating to the eligibility
for the health care services of the Indian
Health Service until the Indian Health Service has submitted a budget request reflecting
the increased costs associated with the proposed final rule, and such request has been
included in an appropriations Act and enacted into law: Provided further, That with
respect to functions transferred by the Indian Health Service to tribes or tribal organizations, the Indian Health Service is authorized to provide goods and services to
those entities on a reimbursable basis, including payments in advance with subsequent adjustment, and the reimbursements
received therefrom, along with the funds received from those entities pursuant to the
Indian Self-Determination Act, may be credited to the same or subsequent appropriation
account from which the funds were originally derived, with such amounts to remain
available until expended: Provided further,
That reimbursements for training, technical
assistance, or services provided by the Indian
Health Service will contain total costs, including direct, administrative, and overhead
costs associated with the provision of goods,
services, or technical assistance: Provided

January 8, 2026

H193

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

further, That the Indian Health Service may
provide to civilian medical personnel serving
in hospitals operated by the Indian Health
Service housing allowances equivalent to
those that would be provided to members of
the Commissioned Corps of the United States
Public Health Service serving in similar positions at such hospitals: Provided further,
That the appropriation structure for the Indian Health Service may not be altered without advance notification to the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations.
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH SCIENCES

For necessary expenses for the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences in
carrying out activities set forth in section
311(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9660(a)) and section 126(g) of
the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, $77,100,000.
AGENCY FOR TOXIC SUBSTANCES AND DISEASE
REGISTRY
TOXIC SUBSTANCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PUBLIC HEALTH

For necessary expenses for the Agency for
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
(ATSDR) in carrying out activities set forth
in sections 104(i) and 111(c)(4) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980
(CERCLA) and section 3019 of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, $79,800,000: Provided,
That notwithstanding any other provision of
law, in lieu of performing a health assessment under section 104(i)(6) of CERCLA, the
Administrator of ATSDR may conduct other
appropriate health studies, evaluations, or
activities, including, without limitation,
biomedical testing, clinical evaluations,
medical monitoring, and referral to accredited healthcare providers: Provided further,
That in performing any such health assessment or health study, evaluation, or activity, the Administrator of ATSDR shall not
be bound by the deadlines in section
104(i)(6)(A) of CERCLA: Provided further,
That none of the funds appropriated under
this heading shall be available for ATSDR to
issue in excess of 40 toxicological profiles
pursuant to section 104(i) of CERCLA during
fiscal year 2026, and existing profiles may be
updated as necessary.
OTHER RELATED AGENCIES
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AND
OFFICE OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

For necessary expenses to continue functions assigned to the Council on Environmental Quality and Office of Environmental
Quality pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, the Environmental Quality Improvement Act of 1970, and
Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1977, and not to
exceed $750 for official reception and representation expenses, $4,629,000: Provided,
That notwithstanding section 202 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1970, the
Council shall consist of one member, appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, serving as
chairman and exercising all powers, functions, and duties of the Council.
CHEMICAL SAFETY AND HAZARD INVESTIGATION
BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses in carrying out activities pursuant to section 112(r)(6) of the
Clean Air Act, including hire of passenger
vehicles, uniforms or allowances therefor, as
authorized by 5 U.S.C. 5901–5902, the rental of
space, and for services authorized by 5 U.S.C.

3109 but at rates for individuals not to exceed
the per diem equivalent to the maximum
rate payable for senior level positions under
5 U.S.C. 5376, $14,000,000: Provided, That the
Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation
Board (Board) shall have not more than
three career Senior Executive Service positions: Provided further, That notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the individual appointed to the position of Inspector General
of the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) shall, by virtue of such appointment,
also hold the position of Inspector General of
the Board: Provided further, That notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Inspector General of the Board shall utilize
personnel of the Office of Inspector General
of EPA in performing the duties of the Inspector General of the Board, and shall not
appoint any individuals to positions within
the Board.
INSTITUTE OF AMERICAN INDIAN AND ALASKA
NATIVE CULTURE AND ARTS DEVELOPMENT
PAYMENT TO THE INSTITUTE

For payment to the Institute of American
Indian and Alaska Native Culture and Arts
Development, as authorized by part A of
title XV of Public Law 99–498 (20 U.S.C. 4411
et seq.), $13,482,000, which shall become available on July 1, 2026, and shall remain available until September 30, 2027.
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Smithsonian
Institution, as authorized by law, including
research in the fields of art, science, and history; development, preservation, and documentation of the National Collections; presentation of public exhibits and performances; collection, preparation, dissemination, and exchange of information and publications; conduct of education, training, and
museum assistance programs; maintenance,
alteration, operation, lease agreements of no
more than 30 years, and protection of buildings, facilities, and approaches; not to exceed
$100,000 for services as authorized by 5 U.S.C.
3109; and purchase, rental, repair, and cleaning of uniforms for employees, $928,500,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027,
except as otherwise provided herein; of which
not to exceed $27,000,000 for the instrumentation program, collections acquisition, exhibition reinstallation, Smithsonian American
Women’s History Museum, National Museum
of the American Latino, and the repatriation
of skeletal remains program shall remain
available until expended; and including such
funds as may be necessary to support American overseas research centers: Provided,
That funds appropriated herein are available
for advance payments to independent contractors performing research services or participating in official Smithsonian presentations: Provided further, That the Smithsonian Institution may expend Federal appropriations designated in this Act for lease or
rent payments, as rent payable to the Smithsonian Institution, and such rent payments
may be deposited into the general trust
funds of the Institution to be available as
trust funds for expenses associated with the
purchase of a portion of the building at 600
Maryland Avenue, SW, Washington, DC, to
the extent that federally supported activities
will be housed there: Provided further, That
the use of such amounts in the general trust
funds of the Institution for such purpose
shall not be construed as Federal debt service for, a Federal guarantee of, a transfer of
risk to, or an obligation of the Federal Government: Provided further, That no appropriated funds may be used directly to service
debt which is incurred to finance the costs of
acquiring a portion of the building at 600
Maryland Avenue, SW, Washington, DC, or of

planning, designing, and constructing improvements to such building: Provided further, That any agreement entered into by the
Smithsonian Institution for the sale of its
ownership interest, or any portion thereof,
in such building so acquired may not take effect until the expiration of a 30 day period
which begins on the date on which the Secretary of the Smithsonian submits to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and Senate, the Committees on House Administration and Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of
Representatives, and the Committee on
Rules and Administration of the Senate a report, as outlined in the explanatory statement described in section 4 of the Further
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020 (Public Law 116–94; 133 Stat. 2536) on the intended
sale.
FACILITIES CAPITAL

For necessary expenses of repair, revitalization, and alteration of facilities owned or
occupied by the Smithsonian Institution, by
contract or otherwise, as authorized by section 2 of the Act of August 22, 1949 (63 Stat.
623), and for construction, including necessary personnel, $152,000,000, to remain
available until expended, of which not to exceed $10,000 shall be for services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109.
NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For the upkeep and operations of the National Gallery of Art, the protection and
care of the works of art therein, and administrative expenses incident thereto, as authorized by the Act of March 24, 1937 (50 Stat.
51), as amended by the public resolution of
April 13, 1939 (Public Resolution 9, 76th Congress), including services as authorized by 5
U.S.C. 3109; payment in advance when authorized by the treasurer of the Gallery for
membership in library, museum, and art associations or societies whose publications or
services are available to members only, or to
members at a price lower than to the general
public; purchase, repair, and cleaning of uniforms for guards, and uniforms, or allowances therefor, for other employees as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 5901–5902); purchase
or rental of devices and services for protecting buildings and contents thereof, and
maintenance, alteration, improvement, and
repair of buildings, approaches, and grounds;
and purchase of services for restoration and
repair of works of art for the National Gallery of Art by contracts made, without advertising, with individuals, firms, or organizations at such rates or prices and under
such terms and conditions as the Gallery
may deem proper, $185,000,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, of which
not to exceed $3,893,000 for the special exhibition program shall remain available until
expended.
REPAIR, RESTORATION AND RENOVATION OF
BUILDINGS

For necessary expenses of repair, restoration, and renovation of buildings, grounds
and facilities owned or occupied by the National Gallery of Art, by contract or otherwise, for operating lease agreements of no
more than 10 years, that address space needs
created by the ongoing renovations in the
Master Facilities Plan, as authorized,
$19,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That funds made available
in prior Acts under this heading for the design and construction of an off-site art storage facility in partnership with the Smithsonian Institution may be used for the repair,
restoration, and renovation of other National Gallery of Art buildings, grounds, and
facilities: Provided further, That contracts
awarded for environmental systems, protection systems, and exterior repair or renovation of buildings of the National Gallery of

H194

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Art may be negotiated with selected contractors and awarded on the basis of contractor
qualifications as well as price.
JOHN F. KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE
PERFORMING ARTS
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE

For necessary expenses for the operation,
maintenance, and security of the John F.
Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, including rent of temporary office space in the
District of Columbia during renovations of
such Center, $32,340,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027.
CAPITAL REPAIR AND RESTORATION

For necessary expenses for capital repair
and restoration of the existing features of
the building and site of the John F. Kennedy
Center for the Performing Arts, $4,860,000, to
remain available until expended.
WOODROW WILSON INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR
SCHOLARS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary in carrying out the
provisions of the Woodrow Wilson Memorial
Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 1356) including hire of
passenger vehicles and services as authorized
by 5 U.S.C. 3109, $5,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
NATIONAL FOUNDATION ON THE ARTS AND THE
HUMANITIES
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE ARTS
GRANTS AND ADMINISTRATION

For necessary expenses to carry out the
National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities Act of 1965, $207,000,000 shall be
available to the National Endowment for the
Arts for the support of projects and productions in the arts, including arts education
and public outreach activities, through assistance to organizations and individuals
pursuant to section 5 of the Act, for program
support, and for administering the functions
of the Act, to remain available until expended.
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES
GRANTS AND ADMINISTRATION

For necessary expenses to carry out the
National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities Act of 1965, $207,000,000, to remain
available
until
expended,
of
which
$192,000,000 shall be available for support of
activities in the humanities, pursuant to section 7(c) of the Act and for administering the
functions of the Act; and $15,000,000 shall be
available to carry out the matching grants
program pursuant to section 10(a)(2) of the
Act, including $13,000,000 for the purposes of
section 7(h): Provided, That appropriations
for carrying out section 10(a)(2) shall be
available for obligation only in such
amounts as may be equal to the total
amounts of gifts, bequests, devises of money,
and other property accepted by the chairman
or by grantees of the National Endowment
for the Humanities under the provisions of
sections 11(a)(2)(B) and 11(a)(3)(B) during the
current and preceding fiscal years for which
equal amounts have not previously been appropriated.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
None of the funds appropriated to the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities may be used to process any grant
or contract documents which do not include
the text of 18 U.S.C. 1913: Provided, That none
of the funds appropriated to the National
Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities
may be used for official reception and representation expenses: Provided further, That
funds from nonappropriated sources may be
used as necessary for official reception and
representation expenses: Provided further,
That the Chairperson of the National Endow-

ment for the Arts may approve grants of up
to $10,000, if in the aggregate the amount of
such grants does not exceed 5 percent of the
sums appropriated for grantmaking purposes
per year: Provided further, That such small
grant actions are taken pursuant to the
terms of an expressed and direct delegation
of authority from the National Council on
the Arts to the Chairperson.
COMMISSION OF FINE ARTS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses of the Commission of Fine
Arts under chapter 91 of title 40, United
States Code, $3,641,000: Provided, That the
Commission is authorized to charge fees to
cover the full costs of its publications, and
such fees shall be credited to this account as
an offsetting collection, to remain available
until expended without further appropriation: Provided further, That the Commission
is authorized to accept gifts, including objects, papers, artwork, drawings and artifacts, that pertain to the history and design
of the Nation’s Capital or the history and activities of the Commission of Fine Arts, for
the purpose of artistic display, study, or education: Provided further, That one-tenth of 1
percent of the funds provided under this
heading may be used for official reception
and representation expenses.
NATIONAL CAPITAL ARTS AND CULTURAL
AFFAIRS

For necessary expenses as authorized by
Public Law 99–190 (20 U.S.C. 956a), $5,000,000.
ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC
PRESERVATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation (Public
Law 89–665), $8,285,000.
NATIONAL CAPITAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the National
Capital Planning Commission under chapter
87 of title 40, United States Code, including
services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 3109,
$8,750,000: Provided, That one-quarter of 1
percent of the funds provided under this
heading may be used for official reception
and representational expenses associated
with hosting international visitors engaged
in the planning and physical development of
world capitals.
UNITED STATES HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL
MUSEUM
HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL MUSEUM

For expenses of the Holocaust Memorial
Museum, as authorized by Public Law 106–292
(36 U.S.C. 2301–2310), $65,231,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, of which
$1,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2028, for the Museum’s equipment
replacement program; and of which $4,000,000
for the Museum’s repair and rehabilitation
program and $1,264,000 for the Museum’s outreach initiatives program shall remain available until expended.
UNITED STATES SEMIQUINCENTENNIAL
COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the United
States Semiquincentennial Commission to
plan and coordinate observances and activities associated with the 250th anniversary of
the founding of the United States, as authorized by Public Law 116–282, the technical
amendments
to
Public
Law
114–196,
$15,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
TITLE IV
GENERAL PROVISIONS

January 8, 2026

activity or the publication or distribution of
literature that in any way tends to promote
public support or opposition to any legislative proposal on which Congressional action
is not complete other than to communicate
to Members of Congress as described in 18
U.S.C. 1913.
OBLIGATION OF APPROPRIATIONS

SEC. 402. No part of any appropriation contained in this Act shall remain available for
obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless expressly so provided herein.
DISCLOSURE OF ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

SEC. 403. The amount and basis of estimated overhead charges, deductions, reserves, or holdbacks, including working capital fund charges, from programs, projects,
activities and subactivities to support government-wide, departmental, agency, or bureau administrative functions or headquarters, regional, or central operations
shall be presented in annual budget justifications and subject to approval by the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate. Changes to
such estimates shall be presented to the
Committees on Appropriations for approval.
MINING APPLICATIONS

SEC. 404. (a) LIMITATION OF FUNDS.—None of
the funds appropriated or otherwise made
available pursuant to this Act shall be obligated or expended to accept or process applications for a patent for any mining or mill
site claim located under the general mining
laws.
(b) EXCEPTIONS.—Subsection (a) shall not
apply if the Secretary of the Interior determines that, for the claim concerned: (1) a
patent application was filed with the Secretary on or before September 30, 1994; and
(2) all requirements established under sections 2325 and 2326 of the Revised Statutes (30
U.S.C. 29 and 30) for vein or lode claims, sections 2329, 2330, 2331, and 2333 of the Revised
Statutes (30 U.S.C. 35, 36, and 37) for placer
claims, and section 2337 of the Revised Statutes (30 U.S.C. 42) for mill site claims, as the
case may be, were fully complied with by the
applicant by that date.
(c) REPORT.—On September 30, 2027, the
Secretary of the Interior shall file with the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations and the Committee on Natural Resources of the House and the Committee on
Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate
a report on actions taken by the Department
under the plan submitted pursuant to section 314(c) of the Department of the Interior
and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,
1997 (Public Law 104–208).
(d) MINERAL EXAMINATIONS.—In order to
process patent applications in a timely and
responsible manner, upon the request of a
patent applicant, the Secretary of the Interior shall allow the applicant to fund a qualified third-party contractor to be selected by
the Director of the Bureau of Land Management to conduct a mineral examination of
the mining claims or mill sites contained in
a patent application as set forth in subsection (b). The Bureau of Land Management
shall have the sole responsibility to choose
and pay the third-party contractor in accordance with the standard procedures employed by the Bureau of Land Management
in the retention of third-party contractors.
CONTRACT SUPPORT COSTS, PRIOR YEAR
LIMITATION

SEC. 405. Sections 405 and 406 of division F
of the Consolidated and Further Continuing
Appropriations Act, 2015 (Public Law 113–235)
shall continue in effect in fiscal year 2026.
CONTRACT SUPPORT COSTS, FISCAL YEAR 2026

(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

LIMITATION

RESTRICTION ON USE OF FUNDS

SEC. 406. Amounts provided by this Act for
fiscal year 2026 under the headings ‘‘Department of Health and Human Services, Indian

SEC. 401. No part of any appropriation contained in this Act shall be available for any

January 8, 2026

H195

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Health Service, Contract Support Costs’’ and
‘‘Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs and Bureau of Indian Education,
Contract Support Costs’’ are the only
amounts available for contract support costs
arising out of self-determination or self-governance contracts, grants, compacts, or annual funding agreements for fiscal year 2026
with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of
Indian Education, and the Indian Health
Service: Provided, That such amounts provided by this Act are not available for payment of claims for contract support costs for
prior years, or for repayments of payments
for settlements or judgments awarding contract support costs for prior years.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLANS

SEC. 407. The Secretary of Agriculture
shall not be considered to be in violation of
section 6(f)(5)(A) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of
1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(f)(5)(A)) solely because
more than 15 years have passed without revision of the plan for a unit of the National
Forest System. Nothing in this section exempts the Secretary from any other requirement of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act (16 U.S.C. 1600
et seq.) or any other law: Provided, That if
the Secretary is not acting expeditiously and
in good faith, within the funding available,
to revise a plan for a unit of the National
Forest System, this section shall be void
with respect to such plan and a court of
proper jurisdiction may order completion of
the plan on an accelerated basis.
PROHIBITION WITHIN NATIONAL MONUMENTS

SEC. 408. No funds provided in this Act may
be expended to conduct preleasing, leasing
and related activities under either the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 181 et seq.) or the
Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C.
1331 et seq.) within the boundaries of a National Monument established pursuant to
the Act of June 8, 1906 (16 U.S.C. 431 et seq.)
as such boundary existed on January 20, 2001,
except where such activities are allowed
under the Presidential proclamation establishing such monument.
LIMITATION ON TAKINGS

SEC. 409. Unless otherwise provided herein,
no funds appropriated in this Act for the acquisition of lands or interests in lands may
be expended for the filing of declarations of
taking or complaints in condemnation without the advance notification and approval of
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations: Provided, That this provision shall
not apply to funds appropriated to implement the Everglades National Park Protection and Expansion Act of 1989, or to funds
appropriated for Federal assistance to the
State of Florida to acquire lands for Everglades restoration purposes.
PROHIBITION ON NO-BID CONTRACTS
SEC. 410. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this Act to executive branch agencies may be used to enter
into any Federal contract unless such contract is entered into in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 33 of title 41, United
States Code, or Chapter 137 of title 10, United
States Code, and the Federal Acquisition
Regulation, unless—
(1) Federal law specifically authorizes a
contract to be entered into without regard
for these requirements, including formula
grants for States, or federally recognized Indian tribes;
(2) such contract is authorized by the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (Public Law 93–638, 25 U.S.C.
5301 et seq.) or by any other Federal laws
that specifically authorize a contract within
an Indian tribe as defined in section 4(e) of
that Act (25 U.S.C. 5304(e)); or

(3) such contract was awarded prior to the
date of enactment of this Act.
POSTING OF REPORTS

SEC. 411. (a) Any agency receiving funds
made available in this Act, shall, subject to
subsections (b) and (c), post on the public
website of that agency any report required
to be submitted by the Congress in this or
any other Act, upon the determination by
the head of the agency that it shall serve the
national interest.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to a report if—
(1) the public posting of the report compromises national security; or
(2) the report contains proprietary information.
(c) The head of the agency posting such report shall do so only after such report has
been made available to the requesting Committee or Committees of Congress for no less
than 45 days.
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE ARTS GRANT
GUIDELINES

SEC. 412. Of the funds provided to the National Endowment for the Arts—
(1) The Chairperson shall only award a
grant to an individual if such grant is awarded to such individual for a literature fellowship, National Heritage Fellowship, or American Jazz Masters Fellowship.
(2) The Chairperson shall establish procedures to ensure that no funding provided
through a grant, except a grant made to a
State or local arts agency, or regional group,
may be used to make a grant to any other
organization or individual to conduct activity independent of the direct grant recipient.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit
payments made in exchange for goods and
services.
(3) No grant shall be used for seasonal support to a group, unless the application is specific to the contents of the season, including
identified programs or projects.
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE ARTS PROGRAM
PRIORITIES

SEC. 413. (a) In providing services or awarding financial assistance under the National
Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities
Act of 1965 from funds appropriated under
this Act, the Chairperson of the National Endowment for the Arts shall ensure that priority is given to providing services or awarding financial assistance for projects, productions, workshops, or programs that serve underserved populations.
(b) In this section:
(1) The term ‘‘underserved population’’
means a population of individuals, including
urban minorities, who have historically been
outside the purview of arts and humanities
programs due to factors such as a high incidence of income below the poverty line or to
geographic isolation.
(2) The term ‘‘poverty line’’ means the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C.
9902(2))) applicable to a family of the size involved.
(c) In providing services and awarding financial assistance under the National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities Act of
1965 with funds appropriated by this Act, the
Chairperson of the National Endowment for
the Arts shall ensure that priority is given
to providing services or awarding financial
assistance for projects, productions, workshops, or programs that will encourage public knowledge, education, understanding, and
appreciation of the arts.
(d) With funds appropriated by this Act to
carry out section 5 of the National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities Act of
1965—

(1) the Chairperson shall establish a grant
category for projects, productions, workshops, or programs that are of national impact or availability or are able to tour several States;
(2) the Chairperson shall not make grants
exceeding 15 percent, in the aggregate, of
such funds to any single State, excluding
grants made under the authority of paragraph (1);
(3) the Chairperson shall report to the Congress annually and by State, on grants
awarded by the Chairperson in each grant
category under section 5 of such Act; and
(4) the Chairperson shall encourage the use
of grants to improve and support community-based music performance and education.
STATUS OF BALANCES OF APPROPRIATIONS

SEC. 414. The Department of the Interior,
the Environmental Protection Agency, the
Forest Service, and the Indian Health Service shall provide the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and Senate quarterly reports on the status of
balances of appropriations including all uncommitted, committed, and unobligated
funds in each program and activity within 60
days of enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION OF GRAZING PERMITS

SEC. 415. The terms and conditions of section 325 of Public Law 108–108 (117 Stat. 1307),
regarding grazing permits issued by the Forest Service on any lands not subject to administration under section 402 of the Federal
Lands Policy and Management Act (43 U.S.C.
1752), shall remain in effect for fiscal year
2026.
FUNDING PROHIBITION

SEC. 416. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to maintain or
establish a computer network unless such
network is designed to block access to pornography websites.
(b) Nothing in subsection (a) shall limit
the use of funds necessary for any Federal,
State, tribal, or local law enforcement agency or any other entity carrying out criminal
investigations, prosecution, or adjudication
activities.
HUMANE TRANSFER AND TREATMENT OF
ANIMALS

SEC. 417. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, the Secretary of the Interior, with respect to land administered by
the Bureau of Land Management, or the Secretary of Agriculture, with respect to land
administered by the Forest Service (referred
to in this section as the ‘‘Secretary concerned’’), may transfer excess wild horses
and burros that have been removed from
land administered by the Secretary concerned to other Federal, State, and local
government agencies for use as work animals.
(b) The Secretary concerned may make a
transfer under subsection (a) immediately on
the request of a Federal, State, or local government agency.
(c) An excess wild horse or burro transferred under subsection (a) shall lose status
as a wild free-roaming horse or burro (as defined in section 2 of Public Law 92–195 (commonly known as the ‘‘Wild Free-Roaming
Horses and Burros Act’’) (16 U.S.C. 1332)).
(d) A Federal, State, or local government
agency receiving an excess wild horse or
burro pursuant to subsection (a) shall not—
(1) destroy the horse or burro in a manner
that results in the destruction of the horse
or burro into a commercial product;
(2) sell or otherwise transfer the horse or
burro in a manner that results in the destruction of the horse or burro for processing
into a commercial product; or

H196

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(3) euthanize the horse or burro, except on
the recommendation of a licensed veterinarian in a case of severe injury, illness, or
advanced age.
(e) Amounts appropriated by this Act shall
not be available for—
(1) the destruction of any healthy,
unadopted, and wild horse or burro under the
jurisdiction of the Secretary concerned (including a contractor); or
(2) the sale of a wild horse or burro that results in the destruction of the wild horse or
burro for processing into a commercial product.
FOREST SERVICE FACILITY REALIGNMENT AND
ENHANCEMENT AUTHORIZATION EXTENSION

SEC. 418. Section 503(f) of Public Law 109–54
(16 U.S.C. 580d note) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’ for ‘‘September 30, 2019’’.
USE OF AMERICAN IRON AND STEEL

SEC. 419. (a)(1) None of the funds made
available by a State water pollution control
revolving fund as authorized by section 1452
of the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C.
300j–12) shall be used for a project for the
construction, alteration, maintenance, or repair of a public water system or treatment
works unless all of the iron and steel products used in the project are produced in the
United States.
(2) In this section, the term ‘‘iron and
steel’’ products means the following products
made primarily of iron or steel: lined or unlined pipes and fittings, manhole covers and
other municipal castings, hydrants, tanks,
flanges, pipe clamps and restraints, valves,
structural steel, reinforced precast concrete,
and construction materials.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply in any
case or category of cases in which the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency (in this section referred to as the
‘‘Administrator’’) finds that—
(1) applying subsection (a) would be inconsistent with the public interest;
(2) iron and steel products are not produced
in the United States in sufficient and reasonably available quantities and of a satisfactory quality; or
(3) inclusion of iron and steel products produced in the United States will increase the
cost of the overall project by more than 25
percent.
(c) If the Administrator receives a request
for a waiver under this section, the Administrator shall make available to the public on
an informal basis a copy of the request and
information available to the Administrator
concerning the request, and shall allow for
informal public input on the request for at
least 15 days prior to making a finding based
on the request. The Administrator shall
make the request and accompanying information available by electronic means, including on the official public Internet Web
site of the Environmental Protection Agency.
(d) This section shall be applied in a manner consistent with United States obligations under international agreements.
(e) The Administrator may retain up to
0.25 percent of the funds appropriated in this
Act for the Clean and Drinking Water State
Revolving Funds for carrying out the provisions described in subsection (a)(1) for management and oversight of the requirements
of this section.
LOCAL COOPERATOR TRAINING AGREEMENTS AND
TRANSFERS OF EXCESS EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES FOR WILDFIRES

SEC. 420. The Secretary of the Interior is
authorized to enter into grants and cooperative agreements with volunteer fire departments, rural fire departments, rangeland fire
protection associations, and similar organi-

zations to provide for wildland fire training
and equipment, including supplies and communication devices. Notwithstanding section
121(c) of title 40, United States Code, or section 521 of title 40, United States Code, the
Secretary is further authorized to transfer
title to excess Department of the Interior
firefighting equipment no longer needed to
carry out the functions of the Department’s
wildland fire management program to such
organizations.
REPROGRAMMING GUIDELINES

SEC. 421. None of the funds made available
in this Act, in this and prior fiscal years,
may be reprogrammed without the advance
notification and approval of the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations in accordance with the reprogramming procedures contained in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
LOCAL CONTRACTORS

SEC. 422. Section 412 of division E of Public
Law 112–74 shall be applied by substituting
‘‘fiscal year 2026’’ for ‘‘fiscal year 2019’’.
INTERPRETIVE ASSOCIATION AUTHORIZATION
EXTENSION

SEC. 423. Section 426 of division G of Public
Law 113–76 (16 U.S.C. 565a–1 note) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’
for ‘‘September 30, 2019’’.
FOREST BOTANICAL PRODUCTS FEE COLLECTION
AUTHORIZATION EXTENSION

SEC. 424. Section 339 of the Department of
the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2000 (as enacted into law by Public
Law 106–113; 16 U.S.C. 528 note), as amended
by section 335(6) of Public Law 108–108 and
section 432 of Public Law 113–76, shall be applied by substituting ‘‘fiscal year 2026’’ for
‘‘fiscal year 2019’’.
CHACO CANYON

SEC. 425. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to accept a nomination for oil and gas leasing under 43 CFR
3120.3 et seq., or to offer for oil and gas leasing, any Federal lands within the withdrawal
area identified on the map of the Chaco Culture National Historical Park prepared by
the Bureau of Land Management and dated
April 2, 2019, prior to the completion of the
cultural resources investigation identified in
the explanatory statement described in section 4 in the matter preceding division A of
the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021
(Public Law 116–260).
TRIBAL LEASES

SEC. 426. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, in the case of any lease
under section 105(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25
U.S.C. 5324(l)), the initial lease term shall
commence no earlier than the date of receipt
of the lease proposal.
(b) The Secretaries of the Interior and
Health and Human Services shall, jointly or
separately, during fiscal year 2026 consult
with tribes and tribal organizations through
public solicitation and other means regarding the requirements for leases under section
105(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5324(l))
on how to implement a consistent and transparent process for the payment of such
leases.
FOREST ECOSYSTEM HEALTH AND RECOVERY
FUND

SEC. 427. The authority provided under the
heading ‘‘Forest Ecosystem Health and Recovery Fund’’ in title I of Public Law 111–88,
as amended by section 117 of division F of
Public Law 113–235, shall be applied by substituting ‘‘fiscal year 2026’’ for ‘‘fiscal year
2020’’ each place it appears.

January 8, 2026

ALLOCATION OF PROJECTS, LAND AND WATER
CONSERVATION FUND

SEC. 428. (a)(1) Within 45 days of enactment
of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior and
the Secretary of Agriculture, as appropriate,
shall allocate amounts made available for
expenditure from the Land and Water Conservation Fund for fiscal year 2026 pursuant
to subsection (a) of section 200303 of title 54,
United States Code, to the agencies and accounts specified, for the projects specified
under the accounts titled ‘‘Land Acquisition
Projects’’ and ‘‘Forest Legacy Projects’’ in
the Forest Service, and in the amounts specified in the table titled ‘‘Allocation of Funds:
Land and Water Conservation Fund Fiscal
Year 2026’’ in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act): Provided, That the matter preceding this proviso
shall not apply to amounts in any account
titled ‘‘Land Acquisition Projects’’ in the
Bureau of Land Management, United States
Fish and Wildlife Service, or National Park
Service in such table.
(2)(A) Within 30 days of enactment of this
Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall provide to the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations project lists with project
data sheets as described in subsection (c)(4),
which shall include a sufficient number of
projects to total the amounts for the account titled ‘‘Land Acquisition Projects’’ for
each of the Bureau of Land Management,
United States Fish and Wildlife Service, and
National Park Service, as specified in the
table titled ‘‘Allocation of Funds: Land and
Water Conservation Fund Fiscal Year 2026’’
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act): Provided, That on
the date on which the Secretary of the Interior provides to the Committees on Appropriations such project lists with such project
data sheets, the Secretary of the Interior
shall provide to the Committees on Appropriations lists of supplementary allocations
for Federal land acquisition projects for each
of the Bureau of Land Management, United
States Fish and Wildlife Service, and National Park Service that are prioritized and
detailed by account, program, and project,
and that total no less than half the full
amount allocated to each such account for
that land management Agency in the table
titled ‘‘Allocation of Funds: Land and Water
Conservation Fund Fiscal Year 2026’’ in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act): Provided further, That expenditure of funds under this paragraph is a
reprogramming and shall be subject to section 421 of this Act.
(B) Within 45 days of the date on which a
reprogramming is approved pursuant to the
last proviso in subparagraph (A), the Secretary of the Interior shall allocate amounts
made available for expenditure from the
Land and Water Conservation Fund for fiscal
year 2026 pursuant to subsection (a) of section 200303 of title 54, United States Code, to
the account titled ‘‘Land Acquisition
Projects’’ for each of the Bureau of Land
Management, United States Fish and Wildlife Service, and National Park Service, as
applicable, in the amounts specified in the
table titled ‘‘Allocation of Funds: Land and
Water Conservation Fund Fiscal Year 2026’’
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act) and for the projects
included in the project lists approved by the
Committees on Appropriations in accordance
with subparagraph (A).
(3) If any portion of a project specified
under the accounts titled ‘‘Land Acquisition
Projects’’ and ‘‘Forest Legacy Projects’’ in

January 8, 2026

H197

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

the Forest Service in the table titled ‘‘Allocation of Funds: Land and Water Conservation Fund Fiscal Year 2026’’ in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the
matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act) or for the projects included in the
project lists approved by the Committees on
Appropriations in accordance with subsection (a)(2)(A) is intended to be carried out
within the Federal land unit or project
boundary as specified in such table (or any
prior allocation table incorporated by reference into a prior Act, as applicable) or
project list but outside the specific tracts for
the project described in the corresponding
project data sheet submitted to the Committees on Appropriations required by section
200303(c)(1) of title 54, United States Code, or
paragraph (2), not later than 30 days before
the date on which the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture expends
amounts on the project, the Secretary of the
Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture, as
appropriate, shall provide written notice to
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations of such expenditure.
(b) Neither the President nor his designee
may allocate any amounts that are made
available for any fiscal year under subsection (a) of section 200303 of title 54, United
States Code, other than in amounts and for
projects and activities that are allocated by
subsection (a)(1) or in accordance with subsection (a)(2) of this section: Provided, That
in any fiscal year, the matter preceding this
proviso shall not apply to the allocation of
amounts for continuing administration of
programs allocated funds from the Land and
Water Conservation Fund, which may be allocated only in amounts that are no more
than the allocation for such purposes in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section.
(c)(1) Concurrent with the annual budget
submission of the President for fiscal year
2027, the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations a
list of supplementary allocations for Federal
land acquisition and Forest Legacy Projects
at the Forest Service that are in addition to
the ‘‘Submission of Cost Estimates’’ required
by section 200303(c)(1) of title 54, United
States Code, that are prioritized and detailed
by account, program, and project, and that
total no less than half the full amount allocated to each such account for the Forest
Service under the allocations submitted
under section 200303(c)(1) of title 54, United
States Code: Provided, That in the event
amounts allocated by this Act or any prior
Act pursuant to subsection (a) of section
200303 of title 54, United States Code, are no
longer needed because a project has been
completed or can no longer be executed, such
amounts must be clearly identified if proposed for reallocation in the annual budget
submission.
(2) Concurrent with the annual budget submission of the President for fiscal year 2027,
the Secretary of the Interior shall submit to
the Committees on Appropriations a list of
supplementary allocations for Federal land
acquisition projects at the National Park
Service, the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service, and the Bureau of Land Management that are in addition to the ‘‘Submission of Cost Estimates’’ required by section
200303(c)(1) of title 54, United States Code,
that are prioritized and detailed by account,
program, and project, and that total the full
amount allocated to each such account for
that land management Agency in the table
titled ‘‘Allocation of Funds: Land and Water
Conservation Fund Fiscal Year 2026’’ in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act): Provided, That in the
event amounts allocated by this Act or any
prior Act pursuant to subsection (a) of sec-

tion 200303 of title 54, United States Code,
are no longer needed because a project has
been completed or can no longer be executed,
such amounts must be clearly identified if
proposed for reallocation in the annual budget submission.
(3) The Federal land acquisition and Forest
Legacy projects in the ‘‘Submission of Cost
Estimates’’ required by section 200303(c)(1) of
title 54, United States Code, in the project
lists provided under subsection (a)(2), in the
list of supplementary allocations provided
under subsection (a)(2), and on the lists of
supplementary allocations required by paragraphs (1) and (2) shall be comprised only of
projects for which a willing seller has been
identified and for which an appraisal or market research has been initiated.
(4) Concurrent with the annual budget submission of the President for fiscal year 2027,
the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall each submit to
the Committees on Appropriations project
data sheets in the same format and containing the same level of detailed information that is found on such sheets in the
Budget Justifications annually submitted by
the Secretary of the Interior with the President’s Budget for the projects in the ‘‘Submission of Cost Estimates’’ required by section 200303(c)(1) of title 54, United States
Code, and in the same format and containing
the same level of detailed information that
is found on such sheets submitted to the
Committees on Appropriations pursuant to
section 427 of division D of the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020 (Public
Law 116–94) for the list of supplementary allocations required by paragraphs (1) and (2).
(5) The Secretary of the Interior and the
Secretary of Agriculture shall provide to the
Committees on Appropriations quarterly reports on the status of balances of projects
and activities funded by the National Parks
and Public Land Legacy Restoration Fund
and the Land and Water Conservation Fund,
and the status of balances of projects and activities funded by the Land and Water Conservation Fund for amounts allocated pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, including all uncommitted, committed, and
unobligated funds.
(d) Within 45 days of enactment of this
Act, the Secretary of the Interior and the
Secretary of Agriculture, as appropriate,
shall allocate amounts made available for
expenditure from the Land and Water Conservation Fund for fiscal year 2025 pursuant
to subsection (a) of section 200303 of title 54,
United States Code, to the agencies and accounts specified, for the projects specified,
under the accounts specified, and in the
amounts specified in the table titled ‘‘Allocation of Funds: Land and Water Conservation Fund Fiscal Year 2025 Revisions’’ in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act).
(e)(1) Within 30 days of enactment of this
Act, the Secretary of the Interior and the
Secretary of Agriculture shall provide to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations project lists with project data sheets,
which shall include a sufficient number of
projects to total the amounts for the account titled ‘‘National Parks and Public
Land Legacy Restoration Fund’’ for each of
the Bureau of Land Management, United
States Fish and Wildlife Service, National
Park Service, Bureau of Indian Education,
and U.S. Forest Service: Provided, That expenditure of funds under this paragraph is a
reprogramming and shall be subject to section 421 of this Act.
(2) Within 45 days of the date on which a
reprogramming is approved pursuant to the
last proviso in subparagraph (1), the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of

Agriculture shall allocate amounts made
available for expenditure from the National
Parks and Public Land Legacy Restoration
Fund for fiscal year 2026 pursuant to subsection (c) of 200402 of title 54, United States
Code, to the account titled ‘‘National Parks
and Public Land Legacy Restoration Fund’’
for each of the Bureau of Land Management,
United States Fish and Wildlife Service, National Park Service, Bureau of Indian Education, and U.S. Forest Service as applicable,
in the amounts specified and for the projects
included in the project lists approved by the
Committees on Appropriations in accordance
with subparagraph (1).
POLICIES RELATING TO BIOMASS ENERGY

SEC. 429. To support the key role that forests in the United States can play in addressing the energy needs of the United States,
the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of
Agriculture, and the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency shall,
consistent with their missions, jointly—
(1) ensure that Federal policy relating to
forest bioenergy—
(A) is consistent across all Federal departments and agencies; and
(B) recognizes the full benefits of the use of
forest biomass for energy, conservation, and
responsible forest management; and
(2) establish clear and simple policies for
the use of forest biomass as an energy solution, including policies that—
(A) reflect the carbon neutrality of forest
bioenergy and recognize biomass as a renewable energy source, provided the use of forest
biomass for energy production does not
cause conversion of forests to non-forest use;
(B) encourage private investment throughout the forest biomass supply chain, including in—
(i) working forests;
(ii) harvesting operations;
(iii) forest improvement operations;
(iv) forest bioenergy production;
(v) wood products manufacturing; or
(vi) paper manufacturing;
(C) encourage forest management to improve forest health; and
(D) recognize State initiatives to produce
and use forest biomass.
SMALL REMOTE INCINERATORS

SEC. 430. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to implement or enforce the regulation issued on March 21, 2011
at 40 CFR part 60 subparts CCCC and DDDD
with respect to units in the State of Alaska
that are defined as ‘‘small, remote incinerator’’ units in those regulations and, until a
subsequent regulation is issued, the Administrator shall implement the law and regulations in effect prior to such date.
TIMBER SALE REQUIREMENTS

SEC. 431. No timber sale in Alaska’s Region
10 shall be advertised if the indicated rate is
deficit (defined as the value of the timber is
not sufficient to cover all logging and stumpage costs and provide a normal profit and
risk allowance under the Forest Service’s appraisal process) when appraised using a residual value appraisal. The western red cedar
timber from those sales which is surplus to
the needs of the domestic processors in Alaska, shall be made available to domestic processors in the contiguous 48 United States at
prevailing domestic prices. All additional
western red cedar volume not sold to Alaska
or contiguous 48 United States domestic
processors may be exported to foreign markets at the election of the timber sale holder. All Alaska yellow cedar may be sold at
prevailing export prices at the election of
the timber sale holder.

H198

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

TRANSFER AUTHORITY TO FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION FOR THE NATIONAL PARKS AND
PUBLIC LAND LEGACY RESTORATION FUND

SEC. 432. Funds made available or allocated
in this Act to the Department of the Interior
or the Department of Agriculture that are
subject to the allocations and limitations in
54 U.S.C. 200402(e) and prohibitions in 54
U.S.C. 200402(f) may be further allocated or
reallocated to the Federal Highway Administration for transportation projects of the
covered agencies defined in 54 U.S.C.
200401(2).
PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS

SEC. 433. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, none of the funds made available
in this Act or any other Act may be used to
promulgate or implement any regulation requiring the issuance of permits under title V
of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7661 et seq.)
for carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, water
vapor, or methane emissions resulting from
biological processes associated with livestock production.
GREENHOUSE GAS REPORTING RESTRICTIONS

SEC. 434. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, none of the funds made available
in this or any other Act may be used to implement any provision in a rule, if that provision requires mandatory reporting of
greenhouse gas emissions from manure management systems.
FUNDING PROHIBITION

SEC. 435. None of the funds made available
by this or any other Act may be used to regulate the lead content of ammunition, ammunition components, or fishing tackle
under the Toxic Substances Control Act (15
U.S.C. 2601 et seq.) or any other law.

issuing, or renewing a right-of-way under
section 501 of the Federal Land Policy and
Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1761) for
the Lava Ridge Wind Project while such consultations and efforts are ongoing.
(b) Prior to granting, issuing, or renewing
a right-of-way under section 501 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of
1976 (43 U.S.C. 1761) for the Lava Ridge Wind
Project, the Secretary shall periodically report to the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations on the status of consultations required under subsection (a) and, once
such consultations are complete, provide a
briefing to the Committees on the action alternatives and the feedback of local elected
officials and stakeholders.

(6) Program Funding for Surveys, Investigations, and Research;
(7) Program Funding for Operation of Indian Programs;
(8) Program Funding for Science and Technology Programs;
(9) Program Funding for Environmental
Programs and Management;
(10) Program Funding for National Estuary
Program;
(11) Program Funding for Forest and
Rangeland Research;
(12) Program Funding for State, Private,
and Tribal Forestry; and
(13) Program Funding for National Forest
System.

WILDFIRE SUPPRESSION FUNDING AND FOREST
MANAGEMENT ACT

SEC. 444. (a) Of the amounts made available
under the heading ‘‘Department of the Interior—Departmental
Offices—DepartmentWide Programs—Wildland Fire Management’’, $763,514,000 shall be derived by transfer from the unobligated balances of
amounts previously appropriated in division
J of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act (Public Law 117–58) as follows: (1)
$125,000,000 from the unobligated balances
under the heading ‘‘Environmental Protection Agency—State and Tribal Assistance
Grants’’ from amounts that will become
available for fiscal year 2026 in paragraph (3);
(2) $353,514,000 from the unobligated balances
under the heading ‘‘Department of the Interior—Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement—Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund’’; (3) $285,000,000 from the unobligated balances under the heading ‘‘Department of the Interior—Methane Reduction Infrastructure’’: Provided, That amounts
derived by transfer pursuant to this subsection shall continue to be treated as
amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5: Provided further,
That amounts derived by transfer pursuant
to this subsection shall not be available for
wildfire suppression operations.
(b) Of the amounts made available under
the heading ‘‘Department of the Interior—
Departmental Offices—Office of Inspector
General’’, $65,000,000 shall be derived by
transfer from the unobligated balances of
amounts previously appropriated in division
J of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act (Public Law 117–58), including amounts
that will become available for fiscal year
2026, that have been or will be transferred to
the Office of Inspector General of the Department of the Interior for oversight of funding
provided to the Department of the Interior
in title VI of division J of that Act: Provided,
That amounts derived by transfer pursuant
to this subsection shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in section 103(b) of
division A of Public Law 118–5.
(c) Of the amounts made available under
the heading ‘‘Department of Agriculture—
Forest Service—Forest Service Operations’’,
$146,486,000 shall be derived by transfer from
the unobligated balances of amounts previously appropriated under the heading ‘‘Department of the Interior—Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement—
Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund’’ in division J of the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58): Provided, That
amounts derived by transfer pursuant to this
subsection shall continue to be treated as
amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5.

SEC. 439. Section 104 of the Wildfire Suppression Funding and Forest Management
Activities Act (division O of Public Law 115–
141) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a), by striking ‘‘90’’ and
inserting ‘‘180’’; and
(2) in paragraph (4) of subsection (b), by inserting the following before the semi-colon:
‘‘, and shall include an accounting of any
spending in the first two quarters of the succeeding fiscal year that is attributable to
suppression operations in the fiscal year for
which the report was prepared’’.
FIVE YEAR CONSTRUCTION PLAN

SEC. 440. The Department of the Interior
and the Forest Service are directed to maintain updated 5-year deferred maintenance
plans that, to the extent practicable, include
a list of all outstanding deferred maintenance needs, and to provide them to the
Committee on a quarterly basis.

FIREFIGHTER PAY CAP

QUARTERLY DISASTER ESTIMATES

SEC. 436. (a) Section 1701 of division B of
the Extending Government Funding and Delivering Emergency Assistance Act (5 U.S.C.
5547 note), as amended by Public Law 117–103,
is further amended in subsection (a)(1), by
striking the last sentence and inserting
‘‘Any Services during a given calendar year
that generate payments payable in the subsequent calendar year shall be disregarded in
applying this subsection’’.
(b) The waivers of premium and overtime
pay authorized in subsections (a) through (c)
of section 1701 of division B of the Extending
Government Funding and Delivering Emergency Assistance Act (5 U.S.C. 5547 note), as
amended by Public Law 117–103, shall be applied in fiscal year 2026.

SEC. 441. The Department of the Interior,
the United States Forest Service, and the
Environmental Protection agency shall provide quarterly estimates to the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate within 30 days of a
quarter closing detailing the costs to repair,
restore, or otherwise remediate damages to
Federal lands and infrastructure caused by
disasters and, for the Environmental Protection Agency, the costs to repair and improve
the resiliency of drinking water and wastewater infrastructure damaged in states, territories, and on tribal lands.
AMERICAN WOMEN’S HISTORY MUSEUM AND

ALASKA NATIVE REGIONAL HEALTH ENTITIES
AUTHORIZATION EXTENSION

SEC. 437. Section 424(a) of title IV of division G of the Consolidated Appropriations
Act, 2014 (Public Law 113–76) shall be applied
by substituting ‘‘October 1, 2026’’ for ‘‘December 24, 2022’’.
LAVA RIDGE WIND PROJECT

SEC. 438. (a) None of the funds made available by this Act may be obligated or expended for the purpose of granting, issuing,
or renewing a right-of-way under section 501
of the Federal Land Policy and Management
Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1761) for the Lava Ridge
Wind Project, unless or until the Secretary
of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of
Land Management, has analyzed, in consultation with local elected officials and
stakeholders, action alternatives designed to
reduce impacts to wildlife, cultural resources, transportation, hunting, wetlands
and the connected surface and ground
waters. The Secretary shall complete such
consultations, and seek feedback regarding
action alternatives, not later than September 30, 2026, and no funds made available
in this Act shall be used for granting,

January 8, 2026

NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN LATINO

SEC. 442. None of the funds made available
by this or any other Act may be used to
close, halt development of, merge with or
transfer to another function or program, reduce funding, or otherwise diminish the operations of the Smithsonian American Women’s History Museum or the National Museum of the American Latino established by
Public Law 116–260 on December 27, 2020.
PROGRAM FUNDING INCORPORATED BY
REFERENCE

SEC. 443. Amounts provided in this Act
shall be allocated in the amounts specified
for the programs, projects and activities
specified in the tables in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act) titled:
(1) Program Funding for Management of
Lands and Resources;
(2) Program Funding for Resource Management;
(3) Program Funding for Operation of the
National Park System;
(4) Program Funding for National Recreation and Preservation;
(5) Program Funding for National Heritage
Areas;

REPURPOSING

BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT ACTIONS
REGARDING GRAZING ON PUBLIC LANDS

SEC. 445. Paragraph (1) of section 122(a) of
division E of Public Law 112–74 (125 Stat.
1013) is amended by striking ‘‘through 2024.’’
in the first sentence and inserting ‘‘through
2027,’’.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS

SEC. 446. The contents in the ‘‘Senate’’ sub
column of the ‘‘Requestor(s)’’ column in the
table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressional Directed Spending’’ under the
heading ‘‘Disclosure of Earmarks and Congressionally Directed Spending Items’’ in the
explanatory statement for the Agriculture,
Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agency Appropriations
Act, 2026 (division B of Public Law 119–37) described in section 4 in the matter preceding
division A of such Act are deemed to be
amended—
(1) by inserting ‘‘Schiff’’ for the project
identified as the ‘‘Forest and Watershed
Management
Plan’’
for
the
recipient
‘‘McKinleyville Community Services District’’;
(2) by inserting ‘‘Schatz’’ for the project
identified as ‘‘Facility Improvements and
Purchase of Equipment’’ for the recipient
‘‘The Queens Health System’’; and
(3) by inserting ‘‘Cantwell’’ for the project
identified as the ‘‘Chewelah Expansion and
Regional Workforce Development Center’’
for the recipient ‘‘NEW Health Programs Association’’.
This division may be cited as the ‘‘Department of the Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill
shall be debatable for 1 hour equally divided and controlled by the chair and
ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Oklahoma (Mr.
COLE) and the gentlewoman from Connecticut (Ms. DELAURO) each will control 30 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Oklahoma.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. COLE. Madam Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on the measure under
consideration.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Oklahoma?
There was no objection.
Mr. COLE. Madam Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I rise today in support of H.R. 6938, a three-bill package
covering
the
Commerce,
Justice,
Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment
appropriations measures for fiscal year
2026.
These bills are the product of bipartisan, bicameral consensus and are
grounded in a Member-driven process.
As I stand here today, I think of the
genius of our Founding Fathers. They
designed Congress to be an engine of
thoughtful and deliberative policymaking. It wasn’t meant to be easy. In
fact, difficulty is what separates serious legislating from political performance.
In her 250 years, America has never
shied away from hard work, nor does
the Appropriations Committee in carrying out our constitutional responsibilities for fiscal year 2026. Even after
the longest government shutdown in
history, political obstruction, and

tough deadlines, we remained resolute
and took responsible steps forward to
restore regular order.
I am proud to say we have ended the
cycle of pork-filled omnibuses decided
at the last minute. Just as importantly, we have been turning America
First priorities into action. President
Trump set a critical foundation by
signing three appropriations bills into
law in November, and we are carrying
that momentum forward today. The
measure before us keeps us on track to
complete all 12 appropriations bills for
fiscal year 2026.
With passage of these three bills, we
will provide full-year funding for many
of our most critical programs.
We prioritize public safety by supporting law enforcement and stopping
the flow of fentanyl into our communities. We advance American strength
by unleashing energy dominance, securing critical minerals, and investing
in nuclear power. We uphold stewardship by protecting public lands, supporting wildland firefighters, ensuring
responsible resource management, and
fulfilling our obligations to our Tribal
nations.
All of this is achieved while cutting
waste and keeping total fiscal year ‘26
spending below the current continuing
resolution.
These results are not accidental.
They are by design, and they are the
result of the hard work of our subcommittee chairmen, HAL ROGERS,
MIKE
SIMPSON,
and
CHUCK
FLEISCHMANN. Thanks to their leadership, good will, attention to detail, and
strong relationships with their negotiating partners, the power of the purse
is, once again, being exercised by lawmakers through the committee process, as Article I intended.
To their accompanying ranking
members, GRACE MENG, CHELLIE PINGREE, and MARCY KAPTUR, I thank
them for their partnership and collaboration, which was instrumental to this
effort.
As I look ahead to today’s action, Republicans are strongest when they are
focused; Democrats are more effective
when they negotiate in good faith; and
the country is better off when Republicans and Democrats work together.
In its Statement of Administrative
Policy on this package, the White
House said, in part: ‘‘The administration urges every Member of Congress to
support this fiscally responsible bill,
which is a win for the American taxpayer.’’ Not surprisingly, I completely
agree. I look forward to enacting these
full-year appropriations and taking
every action to complete our work.
With that, Mr. Speaker, I reserve the
balance of my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself 5 minutes.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support
of this bill. It is the product of a genuine bipartisan compromise, something
that was once common in this body but
has since fallen out of fashion.
I am eager to share all the great
things that are in this bill, but before

H199

I do, I must take a moment to express
my profound gratitude to the devoted
public servants who worked tirelessly
to make this happen.
They are Ranking Members GRACE
MENG, MARCY KAPTUR, and CHELLIE
PINGREE on the Appropriations Committee, who led these negotiations and
secured crucial funding for key programs. Subcommittee staff, especially
Bob Bonner, Rita Culp, Scott McKee,
Adam Wilson, Nora Faye, Jamie Wise,
Faye Cobb, Jocelyn Hunn, Michael
Schmeltz, and Ippo Dellatolas worked
through the holidays to craft this legislation. I send a shout-out to Chris
Bigelow, the appropriations staff director.
Of course, I thank our Republican
counterparts on the committee under
the leadership of my dear friend, Chairman COLE.
When we began this process, we set
out three goals: protect Democratic
priorities, eliminate any poison pills,
and reassert Congress’ power of the
purse. I am pleased to report that this
package accomplishes all three.
It protects funding for key Democratic priorities, and it rejects draconian cuts proposed by the Trump administration. It invests in programs at
the Department of Energy that will
bring down energy costs and utility
bills, which are core drivers of the ongoing affordability crisis, programs
that President Trump proposed to cut
or eliminate, despite the cost-of-living
crisis he has led us into.
This package promotes community
safety, increasing funding for Violence
Against Women Act grants by $7 million, supporting victims of abuse who
otherwise would have nowhere to turn.
It rejects efforts by the Trump administration to eviscerate scientific research funding, providing $4.8 billion
more for the National Science Foundation than the White House proposed.
The agreement also rejects the Office
of Management and Budget’s illegal efforts to undermine America’s dominance in scientific innovation across
the entire government by protecting
the indirect costs that research institutions
depend
on
to
do
groundbreaking work with the Department of Energy, NASA, and the National Science Foundation. This is
something Chairman COLE and I have
worked on in the past with regard to
the NIH, and it is critical for us to expand it to other agencies in this package.
The bill provides funding to protect
our national parks, natural resources,
endangered species, and public lands,
rejecting $9.5 billion in proposed cuts
in the Interior bill. It protects our environment while restraining polluters,
providing $8.8 billion in funding for the
EPA, nearly double the budget proposed by the White House.
Additionally, there is not a single
poison pill policy rider in this bill. I
know my friend, the chairman, and I
may disagree on what constitutes a
poison pill, but it is a testament to the

H200

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

good faith of these negotiations that
both sides agreed to drop provisions
the other found truly objectionable.
I know some of my Democratic colleagues may be reticent to support a
funding package for an administration
that has been rife with abuse since the
day they took office. I understand their
concerns, and I share them. However,
abandoning the appropriations process
only empowers the President and the
Office of Management and Budget to
continue manipulating Federal spending as a partisan weapon. If we give up
on appropriations, there are only two
alternatives: a permanent shutdown or
endless stopgaps with funding on autopilot. Neither is a viable option.
Stopgap measures afford the administration broader discretion over the
budget and cede our authority over
Federal spending. The more ambiguity
we afford them, the more they will exploit it. One of the best ways to rein in
this reckless administration is by providing precise spending levels for specific projects that they are bound by
law to carry out.
That is exactly what this bill does.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Kentucky (Mr. ROGERS), who is the distinguished chairman of the Commerce,
Justice, Science, and Related Agencies
Subcommittee of the Appropriations
Committee, the chairman emeritus of
the full committee, and the dean of the
House.
Mr. ROGERS of Kentucky. Mr.
Speaker, I thank my chairman for the
introduction. Mr. Speaker, as chairman
of the CJS Subcommittee, I rise in support of H.R. 6938.
From national security and law enforcement to American innovation and
space exploration, the CJS bill before
us puts the Nation on a path to greatness
while
reinforcing
President
Trump’s bold agenda on trade and combating illicit drug trafficking.
b 1240
To continue the fight against the
drug cartels that are ravaging American communities, the Drug Enforcement Administration receives an increase of $63 million in this bill.
The bill also streamlines and enhances support for the National Weather Service to ensure Americans receive
lifesaving information in times of need.
This bill is pro-law enforcement. It
includes increased funding for State
and local police through the Byrne
Formula Grant Program and COPS hiring grants, while also making cuts to
wasteful grant programs.
I thank Chairman COLE for his steady
leadership. This has been a courageous
effort on his part and our committee to
restore regular order to the way we apportion taxpayer moneys that are entrusted to us. This legislation is a
product of good faith, bipartisan negotiations.
I thank and recognize Ranking Member MENG and Ranking Member

DELAURO for their partnership as well
as staff for their hard work on the bill.
Mr. Speaker, I urge a ‘‘yes’’ vote.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 4
minutes to the gentlewoman from Ohio
(Ms. KAPTUR), the distinguished ranking member of the Energy and Water
Development Subcommittee.
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I very
much
thank
Ranking
Member
DELAURO for yielding time. I also
thank Chairman COLE and the chair of
our committee, CHARLES FLEISCHMANN,
for their cooperation. Please let me
thank our diligent staff for all their
hard work on this bill, both majority
and minority, including from the minority staff Scott McKee, Adam Wilson, Ippo Dellatolas, and on my personal staff Jed Bullock, Kaitlin Ulin,
and Margaret McInnis.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support
of the fiscal year 2026 Energy and
Water Development bill, a measure
that chooses progress over retreat,
American energy independence in perpetuity inside our borders, not dependence on foreign energy supplies.
At $63.3 billion, this legislation provides a critical $2.4 billion increase
over last year. Our bill aims to help address significantly rising energy and
water bills coast to coast for families,
as well as climate-caused water shortages in the West and across our Nation,
with crop losses from coast to coast
and increasing flooding across our beloved country.
Our Nation must help communities
reimagine affordable power grids and
water conveyance systems. We must
also assure technologies like artificial
intelligence and data centers don’t
bankrupt the ability of families to afford to live, nor take our society down
dangerous roads without a roadmap.
For those of us from the industrial
and agricultural heartland, energy and
water drive the lifeblood of our economies. This bill invests $10.4 billion in
the indefatigable Army Corps of Engineers. That is $3.8 billion more than
the Trump administration’s shortsighted request.
It includes more dollars for harbor
maintenance. It ensures that our Great
Lakes stay vibrant, our ports on all
coasts stay open, and our water infrastructure is built to last for Mother
Nature’s complexities in this century
and beyond. Our bill maintains our
commitment for critical regional commissions and authorities to build
America forward in the underinvested
corners of America right here at home.
While the White House astoundingly
proposed eliminating the Weatherization Assistance Program entirely, this
bill restores and increases that funding
to $329 million, a commonsense investment that puts an average of $372 back
into the pockets of thousands of struggling households in every single congressional district. Every dollar counts
to make ends meet nowadays in an era
marred by ill-considered Trump-inflicted tariffs that make living in
America more expensive as prices rise.

January 8, 2026

To tackle the cost-of-living crisis and
affordability head-on, this bill provides
an additional $375 million for electric
grid modernization to help reduce
prices to target the primary driver of
skyrocketing utility bills and ensure
every American has access to reliable,
affordable power.
This bill provides $3.1 billion for energy efficiency and renewable energy
programs, an increase of $1.3 billion
over the Republican bill. Our goal
seeks to secure U.S. energy independence in perpetuity to drive down prices
for the long haul.
Further, with $8.4 billion allocated
for the Department of Energy’s Office
of Science, we invest in the next generation
of
technological
breakthroughs. In the past, we have had
some—like fracking, for example, that
unleashed the gas deposits of this country, but we want those investments inside our borders. American innovators,
universities, and labs—not foreign adversaries overseas—must command the
new energy frontiers and not lose the
edge on inventing our common future.
Finally, our bill provides an increase
to $25.4 billion for the National Nuclear
Security Administration.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
ROGERS of Alabama). The time of the
gentlewoman has expired.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from Ohio.
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman for allowing me to
focus on our National Nuclear Security
Administration, where we must maintain safe, secure, and credible nuclear
deterrents that power our unparalleled,
remarkable nuclear Navy—thank God
for them—and counter the threat of
nuclear proliferation and terrorism.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this bill. America can and
must meet the new-age frontiers of energy and water. Let us invest in our
workers, protect our water, and power
our future. Future generations are depending on all of us to pass this bill.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Idaho
(Mr. SIMPSON), chairman of the Interior-Environment Subcommittee of the
Appropriations Committee and my
very good friend.
Mr. SIMPSON. Mr. Speaker, I am
pleased to begin consideration of H.R.
6938 today, which includes the fiscal
year 2026 Department of the Interior,
Environment, and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act.
First, I commend Chairman COLE for
his leadership over the Appropriations
Committee and his continued support
of the Interior bill. A lot of people
don’t realize how hard it is to get all
these bills done. We had them all
marked up through the committee by
the end of September, on time. That is
an amazing task by the chairman of
this committee, and I thank him for
his continued work on this.
I also thank Ranking Member PINGREE for her partnership, as well as

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Ranking Member DELAURO and the
subcommittee members for their work
on this bill.
The fiscal year 2026 Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies bill
provides $38.6 billion in total nondefense discretionary funding, reducing
spending from fiscal year 2025 by $1.9
billion.
This legislation prioritizes critical
needs and addresses specific concerns
brought to my attention through more
than 8,000 Member requests.
The bill invests $1.74 billion in 1,277
Community Project Funding and Congressionally
Directed
Spending
projects. These projects will improve
clean and drinking water infrastructure throughout this country.
This bill also fully funds all of our,
what I call, must-pays, such as PILT
payments—payments in lieu of taxes—
to States and territories and payments
to Tribes through Contract Support
Costs and section 105(l) leases.
This bill eliminates waste and restores fiscal responsibility, prioritizes
unleashing American energy, and protects public lands and access to those
lands. It bolsters national security and
public safety by reducing our reliance
on foreign countries for energy and
mineral resources and by increasing
law enforcement funding for our land
management agencies and for our
Tribes.
It protects our communities, fully
funding firefighter pay to support
wildland firefighters and prevent catastrophic wildfires.
The bill prioritizes upholding our
trust and treaty responsibilities with
Tribal nations. I continue to say that I
refuse to balance this budget on the
backs of our Tribes, and I am proud
that this bill does not do that. The bill
increases support for public safety and
justice through Indian Country and
provides over $8 billion to the Indian
Health Service for key healthcare programs, prioritizing Federal investment
where it is needed.
We need to pass this bill that efficiently invests in our priorities, supports the programs our communities
care about, and reduces the bureaucratic overreach of the prior administration. This bill does just that, and it
makes sensible cuts across 28 bureaus
and agencies and closing one agency
that has completed its mission.
Thoughtful cuts were made to the
Department of the Interior, resulting
in a nearly 2 percent reduction in the
top line. EPA is cut by nearly 4 percent.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Idaho.
b 1250
Mr. SIMPSON. Mr. Speaker, renewable energy is cut by $34 million, while
providing targeted increases that preserve our Nation’s natural heritage and
ensure a sustainable and fiscally responsible future.

Passage of these bills will send a
strong message that Congress is determined to return to regular order and
deliver results for our districts.
Mr. Speaker, this bill works to ensure our priority programs receive
funding without any poison pills. We
had to make some tough decisions, but
I am proud that this is a bipartisan, bicameral bill that both parties and
Chambers see as a benefit to the American people. I urge its adoption.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 4
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Maine (Ms. PINGREE), the distinguished
ranking member of the Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Subcommittee.
Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
support the consolidated appropriations act.
First, I thank Ranking Member
DELAURO for yielding me the time, but
also for her leadership and perseverance in this challenging time.
I thank Mr. SIMPSON for his collaboration and partnership in this committee, and I also thank Chairman
COLE for the work he has done on this
committee.
Mr. Speaker, I will give the most applause and great thanks to our committee staff, Rita Culp, Jocelyn Hunn,
and Michael Schmeltz, who put in
many long hours, as we know, and
worked over the holidays. We wouldn’t
be standing here today if they and so
many others on both sides of the aisle
hadn’t put in this work.
I am pleased we were able to reach a
bipartisan agreement to produce a bill
that protects Tribal lands and the environment, invests in our Tribal communities, supports the arts, and rejects
billions in extreme cuts proposed by
the administration.
Rather than handing the Trump administration a blank check through
another stopgap measure, this bill imposes precise, legally binding spending
requirements that constrain executive
overreach.
This will provide much-needed funding and certainty to public land management agencies, like the National
Park Service, that have suffered tremendous disruption over the past year.
The bill also protects funding for programs important to combating and
adapting to climate change. It rejects
House Republicans’ effort to gut funding for renewable energy and funds
USGS climate science.
Funding for the Environmental Protection Agency’s environmental justice, a top target for this administration, is included at $30 million. The
continuation of these grants is a sharp
rebuke of this administration’s attack
on communities of color and low-income communities facing high pollution burdens.
The bill also protects the arts and
humanities, maintaining the enacted
funding level for the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities, which
the administration tried to eliminate

H201

entirely. This funding will support the
arts in communities across the country.
Finally, this bill supports Native
American families by investing in a
strong and resilient Indian Country, including through education, public safety and justice, and healthcare programs.
Importantly, this bill strips out
every single partisan poison pill rider
that the Republicans tried to jam into
the process, including the pesticide liability shield that would have let
chemical giants evade accountability.
This bill is significantly better than
a continuing resolution. It is not all
that we would want or all that we
should be delivering, but its investments will improve the lives of Americans.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support the bill.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Tennessee (Mr. FLEISCHMANN), my very
good friend and distinguished chairman
of the Energy and Water Development
and Related Agencies Subcommittee of
Appropriations.
Mr. FLEISCHMANN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Chairman COLE for yielding
time.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in strong support
of H.R. 6938. As chairman of the Energy
and Water Development and Related
Agencies Subcommittee, I worked hard
to ensure this bill includes many House
Republican priorities.
The bill provides a total of $58 billion
to advance our national security,
strengthen our economy, and unleash
American energy dominance.
The bill delivers strong support for
our national defense and provides $25.4
billion for the National Nuclear Security Administration, prioritizing the
continued modernization of the nuclear
weapons stockpile and the United
States Navy nuclear fleet.
The bill strengthens our Nation’s energy security by advancing American
leadership in deploying new nuclear
technologies and supporting the administration’s efforts to make full use of
our Nation’s vast fossil fuel resources.
The bill will reduce reliance on foreign
materials and secure the full supply
chain of critical minerals.
The bill furthers our Nation’s scientific and technological leadership,
including a strong focus on laying the
groundwork for AI and quantum efforts, by providing $8.4 billion for the
Department of Energy’s Office of
Science.
At the same time, the bill reduces
funding by over 29 percent across numerous other Department programs,
including the applied energy technology offices, to ensure taxpayer resources are focused on the highest priority
research
and
development
projects.
The bill also strengthens our economy and promotes public safety, providing $10.3 billion for the great Army
Corps of Engineers, including full funding of harbor maintenance and over $2

H202

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

billion for flood and storm damage reduction, and continued support for the
highest priority, ongoing construction
projects on the inland waterways system.
Additionally, the bill prioritizes
funding for the Bureau of Reclamation
for projects that increase water supply
and support drought resilience.
Mr. Speaker, there are many other
important provisions in the Energy and
Water bill, but before I conclude, I will
specifically congratulate and thank
Chairman COLE for being an outstanding chairman of the full committee. He has let the cardinals do
their work. He has worked with Members in the minority and the majority.
He has worked with Members of the
Senate and the House. Mr. Speaker, I
also thank Ranking Member MARCY
KAPTUR and our colleagues across the
Capitol.
This is a strong bipartisan bill. It addresses America’s needs and is a great
bill, and it should get bipartisan support. This is a strong bill for America.
Mr. Speaker, I also thank the staff,
and I do not say this lightly: My staff,
Republican and Democratic staff,
worked up and through Christmas and
after Christmas to get this done. These
men and women are outstanding. They
do a great job. Let’s pass this great bill
for America.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 4
minutes to the gentlewoman from New
York (Ms. MENG), the distinguished
ranking member of the Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies
Subcommittee.
Ms. MENG. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
support of this appropriations package.
As the ranking member of CJS, this
may not be the bill I would have drafted if my Democratic colleagues and I
were in the majority, but it is a strong,
responsible compromise that meets the
needs of the American people. I will be
voting in favor, and I urge my colleagues to do the same.
I am proud that this bill increases
funding for grants to State and local
law enforcement, including for Community Oriented Policing Services programs and the Violence Against
Women Act. These funds are vital for
the public safety of all of our local
communities and for victim services.
Earlier proposals, including the
President’s budget requests in the previous House bill, eliminated funding
for the community violence intervention and prevention program. Thanks
to Democrats’ advocacy, we secured
level funding to continue this important program in this bill.
Earlier proposals also zeroed out
funding for grant programs to prevent
hate crimes. I am proud that we ensured these programs will continue
without cuts.
We secured strong funding levels for
the Economic Development Administration and the Manufacturing Extension Partnership program, which both
work to create and preserve good jobs
in the United States.

We continued and funded three agencies that the Trump administration
wanted to eliminate entirely: the Minority Business Development Agency,
the Legal Services Corporation, and
the DOJ’s Community Relations Service.
This bill also resoundingly rejects efforts to cut funding for basic scientific
research, technology development, and
STEM education at NSF and NASA.
Importantly, this bill strengthens
congressional oversight and control
over funding for Federal agencies, to
ensure that they spend this money as
Congress intended rather than for their
own political purposes.
Last but not least, every single one
of the extreme, partisan policy riders
contained in the previous House CJS
bill has been removed from the bill before us today.
I am proud of the work we have done
in this bipartisan package. I thank
Chairman TOM COLE and his team, and
our subcommittee Chairman HAL ROGERS and his team, for their cooperation. I thank our ranking member of
the Appropriations Committee, ROSA
DELAURO, and her team, for her leadership. I especially thank our Appropriations subcommittee staff, Bob Bonner,
Jamie Wise, Nora Faye, and Faye Cobb,
for their tireless work on this, and also
Tom Dinegar and Rebecca Lee from my
individual office, as well.
Mr. Speaker, I urge all of my colleagues to support this bill.
b 1300
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Texas
(Mr. CLOUD), my very good friend and
the distinguished vice chairman of the
Energy and Water and Related Agencies Subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. CLOUD. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in support of the fiscal year 2026
Energy and Water Appropriations Act.
As vice chair of the Energy and
Water Development and Related Agencies Subcommittee, I am encouraged
by this bill’s historic commitment to
unleashing American energy dominance,
while
also
responsibly
stewarding taxpayer dollars.
We are at a time when our Nation is
at an energy crossroads. Certainly, as
we work to win the AI race against
China, energy dominance is mandatory. This bill appropriately allocates
resources to invest in our nuclear capabilities, mining production, water resources, and more.
Specifically, this bill repurposes
wasteful Biden administration spending on things like unproductive carbon
capture toward real infrastructure and
energy production capabilities. This includes $1.785 billion in total resources
for nuclear energy technology, $720
million in investments for fossil energy
production, and $190 million to improve
cybersecurity and grid resilience.
Unleashing American energy dominance means truly building our production and infrastructure to meet the

January 8, 2026

modern demands, not just coming up
with more and more regulation.
A prime example of real building is
found in the $10.435 billion secured for
the Army Corps of Engineers and their
projects such as improvements to the
Matagorda and Corpus Christi Ship
Channels in south Texas. The Port of
Corpus Christi, for example, is the
leading energy exporter in the country,
and its strength is essential to our Nation’s energy security.
In addition to these critical energy
investments, this bill points investments toward desalination projects,
drought response, and rural water supplies so that our communities can receive much-needed relief and long-term
stability.
This bill gets us on the right path in
accomplishing the Trump administration’s goal of energy dominance and
leaves behind wasteful and destructive,
often counterproductive, Biden administration spending and regulation that
created things like the Office of Energy
Justice and Equity and crippled our efficient and cost-saving energy production capabilities.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Texas.
Mr. CLOUD. Mr. Speaker, I applaud
the Chair for his diligent work on this
piece, and I thank him for his guidance
on this committee. I look forward to
our continued work, and I encourage
support of this legislation.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from Minnesota (Ms. MCCOLLUM), the distinguished ranking member of the Defense
Subcommittee.
Ms. MCCOLLUM. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Ranking Member DELAURO and
Chairman COLE for their work in bringing this bipartisan package to the
floor. I especially thank Ranking Member PINGREE and Chair SIMPSON. I serve
on the subcommittee with them.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in strong support
of this legislation that secures funding
for public safety, public infrastructure,
public lands and, yes, public health.
This bill will help reassert Congress’
Article I power of the purse and provide clear funding direction to this administration.
I want to highlight how this bill
maintains funding to our trust and
treaty responsibilities to Indian Country. It continues to support education,
healthcare, public safety, and human
services for our Native American
brothers and sisters.
This bill maintains Indian Health
Service
advanced
appropriations,
which is targeted for elimination by
President Trump’s budget. I thank the
leaders for their work on making this
part of the bill. The Tribal leaders
fought hard to establish this advanced
appropriations security, and I am glad
it is included. I am so proud of our bipartisan ranking members working
hard to get this provision and this bill
across the line.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

I am pleased this bill includes nearly
$9 billion for the Environmental Protection Agency, a significant increase
over the House position and twice that
of what the White House had proposed
for the EPA.
This bill also fully funds the National
Endowment for the Arts and the Humanities at $207 million each. This bill,
as has been pointed out, rejects all the
poison pill riders.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this appropriations bill.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Florida
(Mr. FRANKLIN).
Mr. SCOTT FRANKLIN of Florida.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in strong support of H.R. 6938, which includes the
FY26 Energy and Water Appropriations
bill.
This bill makes critical investments
in our national defense by increasing
Department of Energy defense program
funding by $912 million. This includes
$25.4 billion for the National Nuclear
Security Administration, an increase
of $1.3 billion. These funds ensure we
can maintain today’s nuclear stockpile, prepare for future needs, and modernize aging infrastructure that underpins our nuclear deterrent.
Our bill also delivers a nearly 10 percent increase for naval reactors, advancing Columbia-class submarine reactor development, and supporting the
safe handling of naval spent fuel.
This package is not just about national defense. It reins in the Biden administration’s climate agenda that dismantled our energy independence and
hurt American consumers. Instead, it
refocuses the Federal Government on
affordable and reliable energy that will
drive down costs.
For Florida, this bill continues funding for critical infrastructure projects
that protect our waterways, help our
rural communities, and grow our economy.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman.
Mr. SCOTT FRANKLIN of Florida.
Mr. Speaker, this is a huge win for our
national security and for all Americans, and I urge my colleagues to support it.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Pennsylvania (Ms. DEAN), a member of
the Appropriations Committee.
Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today in support of the
negotiated FY26 Commerce, Justice,
Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment
Appropriations Act.
As a new member of the CJS Committee, I am pleased to have been part
of crafting this legislation. I thank my
fellow
Appropriations
Committee
members and staff for their extraordinary hard work making this bill happen.
Despite being in the minority, Democrats on the Appropriations Committee

have fought for months to reject the
Trump administration’s proposed cuts
to crucial programs, programs that
make our communities safer and support our law enforcement. Our fight
was fruitful.
For example, we secured $50 million
for community violence intervention
and prevention initiative grants, despite the President and the House Republicans’ attempts to eliminate this
funding that so many of our local law
enforcement rely upon. These programs
have immeasurably reduced crime and
gun violence.
We successfully removed 76 partisan
policy riders that would have eliminated firearms trafficking regulations,
climate change, and so much more.
Further, this bill provides $938 million for STEM education so that we
can invest in the next generation of
innovators, despite the House Republicans’ attempt to eliminate this funding.
Overall, this is a strong repudiation
of
the
Trump
administration’s
antiscience agenda. The Interior and
Environment bill appropriates $8.8 billion for the EPA and includes provisions to protect staffing levels at EPA
so that the agency can perform its mission to protect human health and the
environment.
The Energy and Water bill includes
strong funding for energy research and
innovation programs including energy
efficiency and renewable energy programs.
This isn’t just good for the environment. It is good for business. Amid rising energy demands and higher prices,
an increase of $3 million to the Weatherization Assistance Program will help
low-income households reduce their
home energy use.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman.
Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Speaker, these bills, while not perfect,
reflect months of hard work by the
Democrats to fight against the administration’s cuts to vital programs and
services so many Americans rely upon.
They reassert Congress’ power of the
purse, impose checks on the administration, and provide stability to our
country and economy by avoiding another stopgap measure.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Chairman COLE.
I thank the ranking member. It has
been a privilege to serve on this committee, and I urge my colleagues to
join me in supporting the package.
b 1310
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Missouri (Mr. ALFORD), my very good
friend.
Mr. ALFORD. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the chair and my good friend, Ranking
Member ROSA DELAURO, for their leadership.
Mr. Speaker, for too long, Washington has governed by crisis: shut-

H203

down threats, continuing resolutions,
these omnibus bills, and backroom
deals that the American people never
asked for.
Mr. Speaker, this bill proves that
those days are coming to an end. The
Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy
and Water Development; and Interior
and Environment Appropriations Act,
2026 is bipartisan, bicameral, and built
the right way—from the ground up,
from subcommittees up.
It strengthens our national security,
restores American energy dominance,
backs law enforcement, combats illicit
drugs, and supports responsible land
management, all while spending less
than the current continuing resolution.
Mr. Speaker, that is not chaos. That
is responsible governing. There are no
poison pills, no partisan games, and
full-year funding that takes shutdown
leverage off the table and allows America to plan, build, and lead.
As an appropriator, I am proud of
what this bill delivers for Missouri’s
Fourth Congressional District. There
are several investments that I won’t go
into here, but I am proud of this process. I am proud to be under the leadership of TOM COLE. I have never seen a
committee—and I know I have been on
your committee, as well. I have never
worked this hard in my life, but I have
never been more proud of what I am
able to do in this body and on this committee.
Mr. Speaker, I urge passage of this
bill.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Indiana
(Mr. MRVAN), a member of the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. MRVAN. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the ranking member for this time.
Mr. Speaker, since my first day as an
elected Federal official, I sought to
serve on the House Appropriations
Committee because the work of this
committee is so critical to the economic success of our Nation and the
safety of our communities.
This focus and interest are also what
led me to choose to be a member of the
Energy and Water Development and
Related Agencies Subcommittee and
the Commerce, Justice, Science, and
Related Agencies Subcommittee. I am
so pleased today that a reasonable and
bipartisan version of these two measures is included in this legislation.
I thank the ranking member and the
chairman of both the full committee
and these subcommittees, as well as all
the dedicated staff, for their similar
commitment to put in the hours, find
common ground, and move these essential bills forward.
Notably, I express my profound appreciation for the inclusion of the community project funding requests in
these measures, including the funds
specific to the members of northwest
Indiana law enforcement agencies. I
am grateful every day for the selfless
service and sacrifice that first responders, including our local police, fire departments, and emergency personnel,
provide to our communities every day.

H204

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

These requested funds will ensure
that our officers and public safety personnel have the resources that they
need to carry out their responsibilities
safely and effectively, while ensuring
that families in northwest Indiana can
live, work, play, and raise their children without fear.
I thank the leaders of this committee
for advocating for a transparent process that allows Members to advocate
safely for the well-being of the communities that we represent and for
prioritizing the protection of northwest Indiana and our neighborhoods.
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to supporting this measure and continuing to
work with the Appropriations Committee to deliver real, meaningful public safety investments for the people
whom I serve.
Mr. Speaker, I also thank ROSA
DELAURO, our ranking member, and
Chairman COLE for the countless hours
truly working in a bipartisan way and
being an example to me of how people
should work together for the interests
of our Nation. I thank them both very
much for their work on this bill, and it
is a pleasure to serve on their committee.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Alabama (Mr. STRONG), my very good
friend and distinguished vice chairman
of the Commerce, Justice, Science, and
Related Agencies Subcommittee of the
Appropriations Committee.
Mr. STRONG. Mr. Speaker, as vice
chair of the Commerce, Justice,
Science, and Related Agencies Subcommittee, I rise in strong support of
this legislation.
Mr. Speaker, our Republic is alive
and well. This bill refocuses Washington’s spending. It cuts waste, restores
accountability, and delivers on President Trump’s agenda. It cracks down
on fentanyl and foreign adversaries, defends American values and principles,
and ensures that taxpayer dollars are
spent on public safety and national security, not bloated bureaucracy.
It provides strong support for State
and local law enforcement partnerships, and it defends the Second
Amendment and America’s right to
bear arms.
Republicans are working to advance
regular order and deliver results for
the American people—reliable and affordable energy, strong national security, safe communities, and long-term
fiscal responsibility. The appropriations process works for America.
I also highlight the provisions important to my community and, as a result,
the security of our Nation. This bill ensures continued American dominance
in space, making crucial investments
that secure the future of the space
launch system, human landing system,
and nuclear thermal propulsion, for all
of which Marshall Space Flight Center
in north Alabama plays a central role.
These investments reinforce America’s leadership in space through competition
and
innovation,
while

strengthening our national security,
protecting taxpayers’ dollars, and ensuring NASA remains focused on results.
This legislation returns the FBI to
its core mission and ensures that our
dedicated FBI agents are back in the
field and out of the beltway. There is
no better place to achieve this than the
FBI Redstone in Huntsville, Alabama.
We are making America safe and secure again.
This is a responsible bill that supports law enforcement, strengthens national security, and puts America first.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Chairman COLE,
Ranking Member DELAURO, and Chairman ROGERS for their steady leadership
throughout this process, and I thank
the subcommittee staff for their hard
work on this legislation.
Mr. Speaker, I urge all Members to
support this bill. Our time is now.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Puerto
Rico (Mr. HERNÁNDEZ).
Mr. HERNÁNDEZ. Mr. Speaker, I
rise in support of this bill because investing in energy infrastructure, education, and public safety is not optional. It is essential.
Mr. Speaker, I will focus on what this
bill does for the people of Puerto Rico.
I have the honor to represent them in
the United States Congress.
This bill incorporates one of my
amendments and assigns $235 million
for the Department of Energy to support grid modernization in the 50
States and Puerto Rico, which so direly needs it.
This bill also incorporates another of
my amendments to provide $14 million
to the Corps of Engineers that could
support water infrastructure projects
in Puerto Rico, which so direly needs
it.
In this bill, we also secured $1.7 million in community project funding that
updates crime prevention technology
in Juana Diaz, provides new patrol vehicles in Cabo Rojo, and supports
STEM education in San Juan.
This bill is an important step in delivering Federal funding for Puerto
Rico and communities across the
United States. I praise the bipartisan
work led by the chairman and ranking
member. Let’s continue marching forward and finish the six remaining bills.
The American people deserve a Congress that works for them.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to close, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, I extend my thanks to
Chairman COLE, an incredible partner
in working on all 12 appropriations
bills.
The Appropriations Committee is the
lifeblood of the government. It is a
place where you can only achieve work
on behalf of the American people
through bipartisan, bicameral legislation. Without it, we know what happens: the catastrophe with the con-

January 8, 2026

tinuing resolutions that go on forever,
or the government shuts down. That is
not a path to success on behalf of the
people of this country.
Mr. Speaker, I continue to say that it
is the lifeblood of our government.
Those of us who serve on the Appropriations Committee know that. I will
be bold in saying that, quite frankly, if
they left these things to us, we would
get them done. In this regard, we have.
We are through six bills. We have six
more to go. We are going to get this
done, and we are going to meet the
January 30 deadline.
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of this bill.
I am proud of the process that produced it.
b 1320
We have shown good faith, bipartisan
negotiation is still possible in an era of
increasing polarization, and the kind of
constructive conversations that produced this package continue with regard to the remaining six funding bills.
The negotiations are ongoing. We
haven’t stopped the conversations in
order for us to meet that January 30
deadline, and I remain confident that
we can meet the deadline and avoid another continuing resolution.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, I will begin by recognizing the hard work of my distinguished ranking member and my very
good friend, Ms. DELAURO from Connecticut. We have had the opportunity
to work together for a long time in a
variety of capacities, and I particularly
appreciate the cooperation, the bipartisanship, and the professionalism that
she and her whole staff always show
when we sit down. To paraphrase my
friend, if they would just leave us
alone, we will get this job done. I could
not have a better working partner than
my good friend from Connecticut.
I am very proud that this bill is, as
my friend said, bipartisan. This has
been in negotiation at every level, and
the ranking member and I have worked
hard to push the decisionmaking down
to the subcommittee levels as much as
we possibly can. I know we have both
told our respective chairmen and ranking members: ‘‘Hey, if you don’t send
us anything up, you are making us
happy. We want you to make the decisions.’’ The members of the subcommittees know the subject matter
better than anybody else. They have
done the hearings. They have done the
work. They work well. The higher up
the food chain it goes, frankly, the
more political the decisions become
and the less informed. Let the people
who have actually done the work write
the bills. In this case, in these three
and the three preceding bills, that is
exactly what happened, and I couldn’t
be more pleased with that result.
I would be remiss not to build on a
remark my friend, Ms. MCCOLLUM,
made in her speech. I am very proud of

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

this bill on Native-American issues,
which have been a bipartisan priority
over the years. I am proud of all of my
cardinals and all of my ranking members, but particularly the relationship
between Mr. SIMPSON and Ms. PINGREE,
which we have seen on this committee
before, and my friend, Ms. MCCOLLUM,
who also has chaired this subcommittee earlier in her career. As a
matter of fact, we worked together on
the matter that she mentioned in
terms of forward-funding for Indian
healthcare. It has just been a pleasure
in these areas where we have so much
in common and a common commitment to fulfill our trust obligations.
I, for one, am very proud of the community projects in this bill. It allows
the Members, not just on our committee, but across the entire Congress,
to do things that they think are important for their constituents. They are
the best people to make that judgment
because they represent them in the
House.
My friend, again, Ms. DELAURO, has
worked over the years to build a system that will make sure that these
things are used appropriately, honestly, and openly. We continue to work
together on that matter. Again, I am
very proud of her.
Mr. Speaker, I want to join every
other speaker today, which is unusual
in a very partisan-polarized era, to
urge the passage of this bill. We have
worked together. We have worked in
good faith. We have worked effectively.
We have actually cut spending in these
bills collectively. I think we have a
common commitment to get the most
out of our tax dollars.
I think this is a three-bill package,
as the previous three-bill package was,
that Members of this body can be proud
of, should point to, and should celebrate. When we have bipartisan, bicameral cooperation and work together, we can get the job done and do
a great job for the American people. I
share my good friend Ms. DELAURO’s
opinion in this case, that is exactly
what we did.
Mr. Speaker, I urge support for the
bill and urge its passage. I urge my colleagues to support this, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
GOLDMAN of Texas). All time for debate
has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 977,
the previous question is ordered.
Pursuant to section 4(a) of House
Resolution 977, the Chair will put the
question on retaining Division A of the
bill, and then retaining Divisions B and
C.
The question is: Shall Division A of
the bill be retained?
Pursuant to section 4(b) of House
Resolution 977, the yeas and nays are
ordered.
Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX and
the order of the House of today, further
proceedings on this question will be
postponed.

FINISH THE ARKANSAS VALLEY
CONDUIT ACT—VETO MESSAGE
FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of January 2, 2026, the unfinished business is
the further consideration of the veto
message of the President on the bill
(H.R. 131) to make certain modifications to the repayment for the Arkansas Valley Conduit in the State of Colorado.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is, Will the House, on reconsideration, pass the bill, the objections
of the President to the contrary notwithstanding?
(For veto message, see proceedings of
the House of January 2, 2026, at page
H6135.)
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman
from
Arkansas
(Mr.
WESTERMAN) is recognized for 1 hour.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, for
the purpose of debate only, I yield the
customary 30 minutes to the gentleman from California (Mr. HUFFMAN),
the ranking member of the House Committee on Natural Resources, pending
which I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on the veto
message of the President of the United
States to H.R. 131.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Arkansas?
There was no objection.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, H.R.
131, the Finish the Arkansas Valley
Conduit Act, facilitates the construction of the Arkansas Valley Conduit, or
AVC, by easing the repayment requirements for project beneficiaries.
The AVC is designed to provide potable water from Pueblo Reservoir to 39
communities in southeastern Colorado,
many of which are dependent on
groundwater supplies that contain unacceptable levels of naturally-occurring heavy metals and radionuclides.
According to the Southeastern Colorado Water Conservancy District, 18 of
those communities are currently failing to meet Federal drinking water
standards due to these contaminants.
H.R. 131 passed the House Committee
on Natural Resources and then the
House of Representatives in July 2025.
However, President Trump has returned H.R. 131 to the House without
his approval. I respect the administration’s views on this legislation and its
commitment to fiscal responsibility.
President Trump’s record demonstrates
a
commitment
to
prioritizing
unleashing abundant water supplies
across the West.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.

H205

Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, in 1962, Congress authorized a 130-mile pipeline, known as
the Arkansas Valley Conduit, to deliver clean, reliable water to communities in southeastern Colorado. More
than 60 years later, the project remains
uncompleted, while communities in the
region continue to face unreliable
water supplies and serious water quality challenges.
The drinking water sources they rely
on are often contaminated with unsafe
levels of radium, uranium, and other
pollutants. Treating these contaminants places a significant burden on
rural communities and forces many
families to rely on bottled water or expensive filtration systems to meet
basic needs that we all take for granted.
b 1330
The Arkansas Valley Conduit was designed to address these challenges, but
the project is still not completed largely because the communities that it will
serve do not have the financial capacity to meet the traditional repayment
obligations. They need our help.
For over a decade, the Colorado delegation has worked to advance this
project so that families in southeastern
Colorado can finally have access to
clean, safe drinking water. Senators
BENNET and HICKENLOOPER helped secure $500 million through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act for
this project that was a major step toward completion.
Last year, this body worked in a bipartisan manner to pass H.R. 131. Now,
as
introduced,
Representative
BOEBERT’s bill did raise some concerns
about removing interest payments and
extending the repayment period, but
our colleagues in the Senate worked to
address these shared concerns, and we
in the Natural Resources Committee
came together to build on that work to
ensure that this legislation addresses
the real water reliability challenges
facing the people of southeastern Colorado while remaining consistent with
core reclamation law principles.
Together, Congress sent the President a carefully negotiated and narrowly tailored bipartisan bill to support the completion of this project.
The administration has no problem
subsidizing water for certain stakeholders, including large-scale agricultural projects, yet when it comes to a
tailored bill to ensure access to safe
drinking water for rural communities,
unfortunately, the President has taken
a different path.
Now, we are going to talk about the
merits of this bill today, I am sure, but
we all know that this veto has nothing
to do with fiscal policy, nothing to do
with the merits. There has been extensive reporting that raises broader concerns about the administration’s posture toward the State of Colorado and
even toward the sponsor of this bill.
We know what this veto was about,
and the message that that sends to Colorado and communities awaiting the

H206

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

completion of the Arkansas Valley
Conduit is deeply troubling.
Meanwhile, and the good news, is
that this Congress has kept working to
find a solution, and the legislation before us today is reasonably negotiated
and bipartisan. It is going to help communities who have waited too long to
finally have clean water.
I thank my colleagues for their commitment to working with us to reach
the language before us today. I am
deeply disappointed that the President
chose to veto a bill that would help
communities gain access to clean
drinking water. The communities of
southeastern Colorado deserve better,
and today we have a bipartisan opportunity to do that for them.
I express my support and urge my
colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’ on overriding
the President’s veto, and I reserve the
balance of my time.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield 6 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Colorado (Ms. BOEBERT), the lead
sponsor of this legislation.
Ms. BOEBERT. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the chairman of our House Natural Resources Committee and the ranking
member of our committee for all the
work that has been put in on this legislation. I also thank my colleagues in
the Senate for their work on this important bill.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote in favor of today’s veto override
to ensure my bill, H.R. 131, becomes
law.
In December of last year, this commonsense, bipartisan, and bicameral
bill passed both the House and Senate
unanimously. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office has estimated
that my bill will not result in a measurable increase to Federal spending.
H.R. 131, the Finish the Arkansas
Valley Conduit Act, will help small
rural communities in southeast Colorado finally complete a Federal water
project that was authorized in 1962
under the Kennedy administration.
Radium, uranium, and other naturally occurring elements are found in
the surface and groundwater of southeastern Colorado, and the water quality is problematic year-round because
of its salinity, selenium, sulfate, hardness, and manganese levels.
The Bureau of Reclamation has found
that these contamination levels are so
severe that local communities could
see the costs of their drinking water
triple without this legislation.
Contrary to what the veto message
states, my bill does not authorize any
additional Federal funding. It simply
modifies the repayment terms for
small rural communities in my district
so they are able to afford their 35 percent cost share of the project that they
are statutorily obligated to repay.
After the project broke ground, inflation took place. Costs doubled under
the previous administration. The price
tag of this project doubled due to construction and labor costs.
Once completed, the Arkansas Valley
Conduit will provide 7,500 acre-feet of

water per year to as many as 50,000
Coloradans across 40 different communities in Pueblo, Otero, Bent, Kiowa,
Prowers, Crowley, and Baca Counties.
I boldly remind my colleagues here
today that this project broke ground
during the first Trump administration
in 2020 due to major investments from
the Trump-led Bureau of Reclamation
and the State of Colorado.
From 1962 until 2020, only $24 million
had been invested in this project. In
2020, President Trump and his team,
his administration, did the right thing,
continuing with their commitment to
improve Western water infrastructure.
He more than doubled the Federal investments in this project with $28 million going toward it. The State of Colorado then invested over $100 million in
this project.
Former Secretary of the Interior
David Bernhardt personally attended
the groundbreaking of the AVC and
retweeted: ‘‘For nearly 60 years, Colorado’s leaders have worked to move the
Arkansas Valley Conduit forward.’’
The Trump administration got it
done.
A press release from the Department
of
the
Interior
announcing
the
groundbreaking reads: ‘‘Western water
supply reliability and infrastructure
investments has been a priority for
President Trump and his administration.’’
This bill makes good on not only a
60-year plus commitment without
wasting hundreds of millions of dollars
in State and local and Federal investments, but it also makes good on President Trump’s commitment to rural
communities, to Western water issues.
President Trump’s commitment to
Western water supply and reliability
will be upheld, and the Arkansas Valley Conduit will finally be completed.
We were able to get this bill passed
and sent to the White House the right
way, the way that I have fought for
since I have been in Congress. This is a
piece of legislation that has gone
through committee, has been negotiated, has been debated, has gone back
and forth between both Chambers, and
we were able to pass this single-subject
legislation all the way through with
unanimous support in this body and in
the Senate. It is something I am very,
very proud of, and it is past time that
we finally fulfill the promise that the
Federal Government made to the communities I represent in Colorado. I urge
my colleagues to support this override
to finish the Arkansas Valley Conduit.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
5 minutes to the gentleman from Colorado (Mr. NEGUSE).
Mr. NEGUSE. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the ranking member for the time. I
support this bill for many reasons. I
support it for the reasons that were articulated by the sponsor, my colleague
from Colorado, Ms. BOEBERT; by the
ranking member; and by the chairman.
I think they have ably explained why
this water infrastructure project for
southeastern Colorado is so critical, a
project 60 years in the making.

January 8, 2026

I support it because, as was noted,
there are no cogent issues with this bill
as were purportedly articulated in the
veto message from President Trump.
Far from it, this bill will cost taxpayers virtually nothing as was referenced. It makes good on a promise to
the people of rural Colorado.
I support the bill because I believe
that the people of Otero County and
Bent County and Crowley County deserve access to clean water just as
every citizen of the great State that I
serve and that Ms. BOEBERT serves,
that Mr. HURD serves, and my other
colleagues in the Colorado congressional delegation deserve.
b 1340
I think what is perhaps missing from
this debate, and it is important for us
to level with the American people, is:
Why are we here? Why, despite all the
reasons that this bill makes a whole
lot of sense? Why, despite the fact that
this bill passed unanimously in the
House and in the Senate, Mr. Speaker?
Why did the President veto this bill?
We are here, unfortunately and profoundly, because the President has declared war on our State. In the last 40
days, he has taken step after step to
harm the people whom I serve and
whom I represent. He is denying disaster assistance for folks in Rio Blanco
County and down south in La Plata
County. He is freezing childcare assistance and food assistance for hungry
families across our State and trying to
dismantle a scientific institution in
my district. Now, he is denying access
to clean water to 50,000 people in southeastern Colorado.
It is unconscionable.
Now, I am speaking to my Democratic colleagues. To be clear, it is important in this moment for Members to
support this override and ensure that
this promise that was made to the people of southeastern Colorado is not impaired and is not abrogated by the
President’s retaliation against the
State of Colorado. We cannot let that
become the new normal.
I will say to all of my colleagues: As
you consider where you land on this
particular vote, let me be abundantly
clear. It does not matter if your community supported Donald Trump politically. If we don’t take this step,
then, trust me, no town is safe, no
county is safe, and no State is safe
from political retaliation by the administration. We will be back here on
the floor debating a veto for a project
in Arkansas or in Texas or in Ohio.
The House has an opportunity, in my
view, to do the right thing on the merits and to support this important legislation that Ms. BOEBERT has introduced and that she has fought for with
our colleagues in the Senate, Senator
BENNET and Senator HICKENLOOPER.
I am urging every Member of this
body: Put aside political differences.
Recognize that this is a bill you already supported as recently as last
month. Recognize that it is going to

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

have a dramatic and consequential impact on a lot of hardworking Americans in the rural parts of our country.
Vote in the affirmative on the override.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield 8 minutes to the gentleman from
Colorado (Mr. HURD).
Mr. HURD of Colorado. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today to urge my colleagues to
vote to override the President’s veto of
H.R. 131, the Finish the Arkansas Valley Conduit Act.
This is not a symbolic vote. It is not
messaging. It is not partisan. This is a
test of whether Congress keeps its word
not just to southeastern Colorado but
to every community in every State and
district that depends on Federal commitments being honored.
For those of us who represent the
American West, this vote is personal.
In the West, water means survival. It
means whether communities grow or
disappear, whether agriculture survives, and whether moms can trust the
water they give their kids out of the
tap. Westerners understand something
instinctively: When the government
makes a water promise, it should keep
it.
In 1962, Congress authorized the Arkansas Valley Conduit to deliver safe
drinking water to rural communities in
southeastern Colorado. These communities grow amazing watermelons, cantaloupes, and chilies, and support families who ranch and raise livestock.
When we talk about honoring Federal
commitments, we are talking about
whether the people who grow our food
can have clean water.
Decades later, that promise remains
unfinished. More than 50,000 Coloradans, across a distance spanning
more than some Eastern States, still
rely on contaminated and radioactive
groundwater. Eighteen systems are
under enforcement orders for violating
EPA standards. These are real families,
real towns, and real public health consequences.
Rural Colorado and rural America
more broadly voted overwhelmingly for
this President and for an agenda that
promised they would not be forgotten.
They expected Washington to keep its
word, not abandon them midway.
H.R. 131 doesn’t expand this drinking
water project, authorize new construction, increase the Federal share, or create any new entitlement. It doesn’t
bail out any mismanagement. It simply
gives rural communities more time and
flexibility to repay the Federal Government. It extends the repayment period and lowers the interest rate in
cases of economic hardship. It prevents
hundreds of millions of dollars from
being stranded mid-construction. It
lets communities doing their part and
repaying the government finally access
clean water.
This bill passed both Houses unanimously. Republicans and Democrats
from across the entire country all
agreed: This is a project worth completing, not abandoning.
Mr. Speaker, veto overrides are rare,
and they should be. However, the Con-

stitution gave Congress this authority
for moments exactly like this: when
the legislative branch speaks with
unity and clarity, and the executive
branch says no anyway.
In modern congressional history, it is
extraordinarily rare, and perhaps unprecedented, for a President to veto a
bill that passed both Chambers unanimously while his party holds unified
control of the government. That should
give every Member pause.
If Congress cannot keep a clear, longstanding, bipartisan commitment like
this, then what message does that send
to communities in every State and
every district relying on similar commitments? What certainty do they
have that our word means anything?
Yesterday, the administration issued
a statement opposing this override,
claiming it continues failed policies of
the past and burdens taxpayers with a
local water project. This is not a new
water project. It is a federally authorized water system underway for decades with consistent bipartisan congressional support. This exact project
was previously celebrated by this
President himself. On October 3, 2020,
President Trump’s Department of the
Interior issued a press release titled:
‘‘Trump administration breaks ground
on long-awaited Arkansas Valley Conduit to bring safe, clean water to rural
Colorado communities.’’
Earlier that year, the President visited Colorado and praised the Arkansas
Valley Conduit. He said that we got the
money to begin construction. His own
Secretary of the Interior broke ground
on this project.
If the project was worth supporting
in a campaign rally and celebrating at
a groundbreaking, then surely it is
worth finishing. It was the right position then, and it is the right position
now.
Mr. Speaker, if a bill that passed
unanimously that costs almost nothing
and fulfills a 60-year Federal promise
and protects public health can be vetoed under these circumstances, then
bipartisan work in this institution is
at risk.
I ask my colleagues: How would you
feel if a project like this in your district that was passed unanimously and
fulfilled a decades-long promise was vetoed anyway? That is what these rural
communities are facing.
Mr. Speaker, my constituents are
watching, and your constituents are
watching, to see whether Congress
means what it says. This vote is not
about defying a President. It is about
defending
Congress.
It
is
about
strengthening this institution and
standing for the people who trust us to
fight for them.
For those of us who represent the
West, this is also about standing together. Western water projects are
long-term, complex, and federally driven by necessity. If Congress walks
away from a 60-year commitment midproject, then no Western project is
truly secure, and no district anywhere

H207

in the country can trust that a Federal
infrastructure promise will be kept.
I ran for Congress to fight for my district, even when it is difficult, even
when it is uncomfortable, and even
when the outcome is uncertain. This is
one of those moments.
b 1350
Mr. Speaker, some of my colleagues
may be feeling pressure today to accept
the veto. I get it. However, I would ask
every Member to consider the pressure
felt by the communities they represent, especially those in rural America who need infrastructure built, who
need clean water, and who need Washington to mean what it says.
What does it say to them, to all of
our constituents, if this institution
makes this kind of commitment and
walks away when it matters most?
This override is about finishing what
we started, honoring commitments,
protecting taxpayer dollars, and standing by rural communities. Yes, it is
also about protecting this institution.
For these reasons, I respectfully urge
my colleagues to vote to override the
veto of H.R. 131.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
I really, in this moment, could care
less about Ms. BOEBERT’s politics or
Mr. HURD’s politics. What I see before
us is a piece of legislation that does an
awful lot of good for people, a bill that
was carefully negotiated, is bipartisan,
and is common sense.
It is a water infrastructure bill, and
every Member of this House looked
past their political differences and did
the right thing when we passed this
unanimously out of the House of Representatives. That was Congress just
doing its job.
If a noncontroversial, bipartisan,
good bill like this can be taken hostage
and become a weapon for settling political scores, well, it may not be in your
State, it may not be in your district,
but that could happen and will happen
to any of us.
Mr. Speaker, this may seem like a
little water infrastructure bill, but this
is a bigger moment than that. This is a
bit of a Spartacus moment for the
Members of this body because any of us
could face this, and we are about to
find out.
I hope the people of this country are
watching. I know history is actually
going to be watching what happens
here because if Congress is able to
override this veto, it is a statement
that even in a moment of extreme polarization, dysfunction, and conflict,
we were able to get some work done.
That would be Congress doing its job. If
we fail to override this veto, that
would say something much, much more
troubling.
I urge my colleagues to do the right
thing, and I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I respect the administration’s views on
this legislation, and I respect my colleagues from Colorado’s passion for
their districts and for their State.

H208

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

I yield back the balance of my time,
and I move the previous question.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Without
objection, the previous question is ordered.
There was no objection.
The question is, Will the House, on
reconsideration, pass the bill, the objections of the President to the contrary notwithstanding?
Under the Constitution, the vote
must be by the yeas and nays.
Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings will be postponed.
f

MICCOSUKEE
RESERVED
AREA
AMENDMENTS ACT—VETO MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of January 2, 2026, the unfinished business is
the further consideration of the veto
message of the President on the bill
(H.R. 504) to amend the Miccosukee Reserved Area Act to authorize the expansion of the Miccosukee Reserved
Area and to carry out activities to protect structures within the Osceola
Camp from flooding, and for other purposes.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is, Will the House, on reconsideration, pass the bill, the objections
of the President to the contrary notwithstanding?
(For veto message, see proceedings of
the House of January 2, 2026, at page
H6136.)
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman
from
Arkansas
(Mr.
WESTERMAN) is recognized for 1 hour.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, for
the purpose of debate only, I yield the
customary 30 minutes to the gentleman from California (Mr. HUFFMAN),
the ranking member of the House Committee on Natural Resources, pending
which I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days in
which to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material
on the veto message of the President of
the United States to the bill H.R. 504.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Arkansas?
There was no objection.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, we are here today as
President Trump has returned H.R. 504,
the Miccosukee Reserved Area Amendments Act, to the House of Representatives without his approval.
H.R. 504, sponsored by Representative
GIMENEZ, would amend the Miccosukee
Reserved Area Act, or MRAA, to include the Osceola Camp, a Tribal village within the Everglades, as part of
the Miccosukee Reserved Area. It also

directs the Secretary of the Interior, in
consultation with the Tribe, to safeguard structures within the Osceola
Camp from flooding events.
The Miccosukee Tribe is currently
located in the Greater Everglades in
southern Florida. Following Federal
recognition of the Tribe in 1962, the
Miccosukee’s northernmost villages
within what became Everglades National Park were managed under a special use permit until 1998, when Congress placed that permit framework
with the MRAA, authorizing the
Tribe’s use of the area and noting it as
Indian Country.
The original law did not include
Osceola Camp. H.R. 504 would include
the Osceola Camp in the Miccosukee
Reserved Area and formalize a partnership between the Tribe and the Federal
Government to address flooding risk in
the area.
H.R. 504 passed the House Committee
on Natural Resources in June 2025 and
the House of Representatives in July
2025.
However, I respect the President’s
views on this legislation and his commitment to fiscal responsibility, and I
reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
The Natural Resources Committee is
entrusted with working on behalf of Indian Country. While we don’t always
agree on everything, we have a long
history of bipartisan work and a shared
commitment to advancing legislation
that benefits Tribal communities. H.R.
504 is one clear example of this. It addresses longstanding challenges caused
by past Federal policies, and it is an
opportunity—I would argue, an obligation—to support the Miccosukee Tribe
in their efforts to protect their homelands.
President Trump has undermined
that work, vetoing this bill based on
unrelated policy disputes and a fundamental misunderstanding of Tribal sovereignty.
H.R.
504
would
expand
the
Miccosukee Reserved Area to include
Osceola Camp, which would strengthen
the Tribe’s ability to self-govern and,
importantly, to address serious flooding concerns facing the village. This bipartisan bill is narrow, targeted, and
respects Tribal sovereignty.
After reviewing the President’s statement regarding his veto, it is very
clear that this decision was not limited
to the merits of the bill or to any particular policy. Instead, his statement
criticizes the Tribe for actions taken to
protect the Everglades, their homelands, from environmental risks. It
even takes issue with the Tribe’s opposition to his administration’s unpopular immigration policies.
Moreover, the statement reflects a
fundamental misunderstanding of Tribal Nations and the obligations that the
United States has to those sovereign
governments. Let me be clear: Tribes
are not special interests. They are not
seeking special treatment. They are

January 8, 2026

sovereign nations with legal and moral
responsibilities to protect the wellbeing of their citizens, their homelands, and the United States has a government-to-government responsibility
to work with them. Unrelated policy
disagreements should never be used to
undermine that relationship.
The Miccosukee Tribe has worked for
generations to protect their homelands
within the Everglades. H.R. 504 would
ensure that a historic Tribal village is
protected, while allowing for critical
restoration efforts to move forward
without displacing the community.
It is pretty straightforward. It is
noncontroversial. It was broadly universally bipartisan. It never should
have been vetoed.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support H.R. 504. Vote ‘‘yes’’ on overriding this veto. I reserve the balance
of my time.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I
have no requests for time. I am prepared to close, and I continue to reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
5 minutes to the gentlewoman from
Florida (Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ).
Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentleman for
yielding.
Mr. Speaker, it is disappointing that
I must rise to support this veto override of the Miccosukee Reserved Area
Amendments Act.
It is a very commonsense bill, as our
unanimous vote in both houses of Congress clearly demonstrated. It is simple. This act would absorb the Osceola
Camp into the Miccosukee Reservation
and directs the Tribe and Department
of the Interior to jointly protect the
camp from flooding.
b 1400
This work is already underway, as we
speak, but let’s address the erroneous
reasons that it was vetoed.
First, it does not appropriate or authorize any new spending. The Congressional Budget Office verified that.
This bill in no way bestows special
treatment, as it was alleged in the veto
message, because the site wasn’t authorized when it was inhabited.
On these points, it appears the President’s staff gave him bad advice, bad
facts, or both.
The reality is, the Tribe came to the
Everglades after being driven from
their homes in the early 1800s. As the
Miccosukee moved to what is now Everglades National Park, they formed
temporary camps on tree islands. The
water that flows through our River of
Grass was a source of food, water, and
a means of transit.
Depot Tiger settled on a tree island
at the turn of the 20th century. Her
son, John Tiger Poole, was born there
and later helped found the Osceola
Camp. However, the construction of a
new major roadway split their camp,
and it dried up the water that they relied upon, forcing the family to move
to a different part of their camp.

January 8, 2026

H209

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Family members still live, visit, and
protect the land where Depot Tiger’s
home once stood.
None of these facts are in dispute, as
my Republican colleagues, who sponsored and voted for this, well know.
Protecting
this
land
and
the
Miccosukees’ ability to live there must
never be sacrificed by party politics or
revenge.
This bill was introduced by House
and Senate Republicans, backed by the
Florida
delegation,
and
approved
unanimously. This is hardly a candidate for a veto.
Our Nation made a commitment to
the Miccosukee, and hundreds of other
Tribes, to protect their lands, resources, and sovereignty. Congress
must stand by that commitment and
override the President’s veto.
The sanctity of Native-American
lands is something that is of the utmost importance to Native-American
Tribes, and all of us in this country
that represent Native-American lands
and Native Americans make a commitment regularly that we are going to
help protect those rights.
Allowing this veto to stand flies in
the face of that, especially because
each of us, in both Houses of Congress,
lent our votes to this legislation. There
are times for vetoes, and I have seen
Presidents in both parties issue a veto
and then robust and healthy debate
plays out on this floor for good reason
and Members decide where they want
to land, but that is always when we
have seen a result that was mixed,
where there were people who voted
against the bill. No one voted against
this bill.
This bill is entirely noncontroversial,
and it is so narrowly focused that it
makes absolutely no sense other than
the interest in vengeance that seems to
have emanated in this result.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote to override this inappropriate and
unfortunate veto.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, to state the obvious,
this bill has nothing to do with immigration. It is a very important bill,
though, about Tribal sovereignty. It is
a well-crafted bill. It is bipartisan. It is
noncontroversial. Someone in the
White House has decided to use it as a
hostage to play politics, very petty and
personal politics because of score settling.
They have chosen to do that, but
that doesn’t mean that all of us have
to be used as pawns to advance that
nastiness. This veto signal sends a terrible message, and it comes after a
year of uncertainty in Indian Country,
which included significant funding
cuts, workforce reductions, and a withdraw of key executive orders that were
designed to support Tribes.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
do the right thing by the Miccosukee
Tribe and pass this veto override. Let’s
ensure that this Tribe continues to
have access to the historic Osceola

Camp and their homelands remain protected for future generations.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I respect the administration’s views on
this legislation. I yield back the balance of my time, and I move the previous question.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MORAN). Without objection, the previous question is ordered.
There was no objection.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is, Will the House, on reconsideration, pass the bill, the objections
of the President to the contrary notwithstanding?
Under the Constitution, the vote
must be by the yeas and nays.
Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will
be postponed.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess subject to
the call of the Chair.
Accordingly (at 2 o’clock and 5 minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1430
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. FINE) at 2 o’clock and 30
minutes p.m.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Proceedings will resume on questions previously postponed.
Votes will be taken in the following
order:
Retaining Division A of H.R. 6938;
Retaining Divisions B and C of H.R.
6938;
Passage of H.R. 6938;
Passage of H.R. 504, the objections of
the President to the contrary notwithstanding;
Passage of H.R. 131, the objections of
the President to the contrary not withstanding; and
Adoption of House Resolution 780.
The first electronic vote will be conducted as a 15-minute vote. Pursuant
to clause 9 of rule XX, remaining electronic votes will be conducted as 5minute votes.
f

COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE;
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX and the order
of the House today, the unfinished
business is the vote on retaining Division A of H.R. 6938, making consoli-

dated appropriations for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes, on which the yeas and
nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on retaining Division A of
the bill.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 375, nays 47,
not voting 9, as follows:
[Roll No. 5]
YEAS—375
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Arrington
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Balint
Barr
Barragán
Barrett
Baumgartner
Beatty
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Bice
Bilirakis
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Collins
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Crockett
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter

Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Fletcher
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Fry
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grijalva
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huffman
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack

Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Lynch
Mace
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)

H210
Rouzer
Ruiz
Rulli
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simon
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Taylor

Allen
Bean (FL)
Begich
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Brecheen
Burchett
Burlison
Cammack
Cloud
Clyde
Crane
Crow
Davidson
DeGette
Donalds

Fine
Gill (TX)
Gosar
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Higgins (LA)
Jackson (TX)
Johnson (GA)
Kennedy (UT)
Knott
Massie
McClintock
McCormick
McGuire
Miller (IL)

Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Timmons
Titus
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Epps
Van Orden
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Wagner
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)
Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—47
Mills
Moore (AL)
Neguse
Ogles
Perry
Pettersen
Roy
Schweikert
Self
Spartz
Steube
Tiffany
Tlaib
Van Duyne
Vargas

NOT VOTING—9
Baird
Beyer
Escobar

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Moore (WV)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Nehls
Newhouse
Norcross
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Onder
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pfluger
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross

Hunt
McCaul
Murphy

Norman
Rutherford
Salazar

b 1457
Messrs.
CROW,
SCHWEIKERT,
MILLS,
OGLES,
and
DAVIDSON
changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to
‘‘nay.’’
Mr. COHEN changed his vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the question was decided in the affirmative, and Divison A of the bill was
retained.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair will now put the question on retaining Divisions B and C of the bill.
The question is: Shall Divisions B
and C be retained.
Pursuant to section 4(b) of House
Resolution 977, the yeas and nays were
ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.

The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 419, nays 6,
not voting 6, as follows:
[Roll No. 6]
YEAS—419
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Allen
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Arrington
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Balint
Barr
Barragán
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Burchett
Burlison
Bynum
Calvert
Cammack
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Cloud
Clyburn
Clyde
Cohen
Cole
Collins
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davidson
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro

DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Escobar
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Fletcher
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Fry
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gill (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gosar
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grijalva
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huffman
Huizenga

Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jackson (IL)
Jackson (TX)
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Kennedy (UT)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Lynch
Mace
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGarvey
McGovern
McGuire
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)

Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Nehls
Newhouse
Norcross
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Ogles
Olszewski
Omar
Onder
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Pelosi
Perez
Perry
Peters
Pettersen
Pfluger
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)

Rose
Ross
Rouzer
Roy
Ruiz
Rulli
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Self
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simon
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Spartz
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes

Johnson (GA)
Massie

McClintock
Steube

Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Titus
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Wagner
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)
Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—6
Tlaib
Vargas

NOT VOTING—6
Baird
Beyer

Hunt
McCaul

Murphy
Rutherford

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1503
So the question was decided in the affirmative, and the Divisions B and C of
the bill were retained.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the engrossment and
third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on passage of the bill.
Pursuant to clause 10 of rule XX, the
yeas and nays are ordered.
This is a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 397, nays 28,
not voting 6, as follows:
[Roll No. 7]
YEAS—397
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford

Allen
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari

Arrington
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon

January 8, 2026
Balderson
Balint
Barr
Barragán
Barrett
Baumgartner
Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Beyer
Bice
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Cloud
Clyburn
Clyde
Cohen
Cole
Collins
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Crockett
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Escobar
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Finstad

Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Fletcher
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Fry
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grijalva
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huffman
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jackson (IL)
Jackson (TX)
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer

H211

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Lynch
Mace
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGarvey
McGovern
McGuire
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Nehls
Newhouse
Norcross
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Ogles
Olszewski
Omar
Onder
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pfluger
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross

Rouzer
Ruiz
Rulli
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simon
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Smucker
Sorensen

Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Timmons
Titus
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)

Bean (FL)
Biggs (AZ)
Burchett
Burlison
Cammack
Crane
Crow
Davidson
Donalds
Fine

Gill (TX)
Gosar
Grothman
Johnson (GA)
Kennedy (UT)
Massie
McClintock
Neguse
Norman
Perry

Underwood
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Wagner
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)
Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—28
Pettersen
Roy
Self
Spartz
Steube
Tiffany
Tlaib
Vargas

NOT VOTING—6
Baird
Hunt

McCaul
Mfume

Murphy
Rutherford

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1510
Ms. PETTERSEN, Messrs. MASSIE
and GROTHMAN changed their vote
from ‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
Mrs. LUNA changed her vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

MICCOSUKEE
RESERVED
AREA
AMENDMENTS ACT—VETO MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the question of whether the House, on reconsideration, will
pass the bill (H.R. 504) to amend the
Miccosukee Reserved Area Act to authorize
the
expansion
of
the
Miccosukee Reserved Area and to carry
out activities to protect structures
within the Osceola Camp from flooding, and for other purposes, the objections of the President to the contrary
notwithstanding.
In accord with the Constitution, the
yeas and nays are ordered.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 236, nays
188, not voting 7, as follows:

[Roll No. 8]
YEAS—236
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Bacon
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Edwards
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fitzpatrick
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)

Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Hurd (CO)
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Joyce (OH)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Massie
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Miller-Meeks
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Norcross
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman

Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)

Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Simpson
Smith (NE)
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)
Womack

NAYS—188
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais

H212
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)

Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Scalise
Schmidt
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Smith (MO)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Tiffany
Timmons
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—7
Baird
Hill (AR)
Hunt

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mast
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Ogles

McCaul
Mfume
Murphy

Rutherford

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1517
Mr. LAHOOD changed his vote from
‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
So (two-thirds not being in the affirmative) the veto of the President
was sustained and the bill was not
passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The veto
message and the bill are referred to the
Committee on Natural Resources.
The clerk will notify the Senate of
the action of the House.
f

FINISH THE ARKANSAS VALLEY
CONDUIT ACT—VETO MESSAGE
FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the question of whether the House, on reconsideration, will
pass the bill (H.R. 131) to make certain
modifications to the repayment for the
Arkansas Valley Conduit in the State
of Colorado, the objections of the
President to the contrary notwithstanding.

In accord with the Constitution, the
yeas and nays are ordered.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 248, nays
177, answered ‘‘present’’ 1, not voting 5,
as follows:
[Roll No. 9]
YEAS—248
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Bacon
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Burlison
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crane
Crank
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Edwards
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fitzpatrick
Fletcher
Flood
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen

Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gosar
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Harris (MD)
Hayes
Hill (AR)
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Hurd (CO)
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Maloy
Mannion
Massie
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Miller-Meeks
Min
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Norcross
Obernolte

Aderholt
Alford

Allen
Amodei (NV)

Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Owens
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Simpson
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)
Womack
Zinke

NAYS—177
Arrington
Babin

Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Collins
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fleischmann
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony

Gooden
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Mann
Mast
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)

Miller (WV)
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Ogles
Onder
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Scalise
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Tiffany
Timmons
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym

ANSWERED ‘‘PRESENT’’—1
Mace

NOT VOTING—5
Baird
Hunt

McCaul
Murphy

Rutherford

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1523
Mr. GUTHRIE changed his vote from
‘‘yea’’ to nay.’’
So (two-thirds being in the affirmative) the veto of the President was sustained and the bill was not passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The veto
message and the bill are referred to the
Committee on Natural Resources.
The Clerk will notify the Senate of
the action of the House.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 1834, BREAKING THE
GRIDLOCK ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on adoption
of the resolution (H. Res. 780) providing

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

for consideration of the bill (H.R. 1834)
to advance policy priorities that will
break the gridlock, on which the yeas
and nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the resolution.
This is a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 224, nays
202, not voting 5, as follows:
[Roll No. 10]

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

YEAS—224
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fitzpatrick
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi

Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Krishnamoorthi
LaLota
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Miller (OH)
Min
Moore (WI)

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:18 Jan 14, 2026

Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Valadao

Jkt 059060

Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman

Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bost
Brecheen
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino

Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
Langworthy
Latta
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills

Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NAYS—202
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—5
Baird
Hunt

McCaul
Murphy

Rutherford

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
BOST) (during the vote). There are 2
minutes remaining.
b 1530
Mr. ONDER changed his vote from
‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’

PO 00000

Frm 00077

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

CORRECTION

H213-216

So the resolution was agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
Stated against:
Ms. BOEBERT. Mr. Speaker, on Roll Call
No. 10, I mistakenly voted YEA when I intended to vote NAY.
SUBMISSION OF MATERIAL EXPLANATORY REGARDING H.R. 6938, COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE; ENERGY
AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026

Pursuant to section 6 of House Resolution 977, the chair of the Committee
on Appropriations submitted explanatory material relating to H.R. 6938. The
contents of this submission will be published in Book II of the RECORD.
f

BREAKING THE GRIDLOCK ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 780, the House
will proceed to the immediate consideration of H.R. 1834, which the Clerk
will report by title.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 780, the
amendment in the nature of a substitute, submitted by Mr. MCGOVERN of
Massachusetts, and printed in the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD of November 12,
2025, is adopted and the bill, as amended, is considered read.
The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:
H.R. 1834
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. EXTENSION OF ENHANCED PREMIUM
TAX CREDIT.

(a) EXTENSION OF RULES TO INCREASE PREASSISTANCE AMOUNTS.—Clause (iii) of
section 36B(b)(3)(A) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 is amended—
(1) in the heading, by striking ‘‘THROUGH
2025’’ and inserting ‘‘THROUGH 2028’’, and
(2) in the matter preceding subclause (I),
by striking ‘‘before January 1, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘before January 1, 2029’’.
(b) EXTENSION OF RULE TO ALLOW CREDIT
TO TAXPAYERS WHOSE HOUSEHOLD INCOME EXCEEDS 400 PERCENT OF POVERTY LINE.—Subparagraph (E) of section 36B(c)(1) of such
Code is amended—
(1) in the heading, by striking ‘‘THROUGH
2025’’ and inserting ‘‘THROUGH 2028’’, and
(2) by striking ‘‘before January 1, 2026’’ and
inserting ‘‘before January 1, 2029’’.
(c) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments
made by this section shall apply to taxable
years beginning after December 31, 2025.
MIUM

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\H08JA6.REC

H08JA6

January 8, 2026
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill,
as amended, shall be debatable for 1
hour, equally divided and controlled by
the majority leader and the minority
leader, or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Missouri (Mr.
SMITH) and the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. NEAL) each will control
30 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Missouri (Mr. SMITH).
GENERALLEAVE

Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on the bill
under consideration.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Missouri?
There was no objection.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
$100 billion worth of bailouts for a broken system that is fueled by Democratic mandates.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
subsidizing insurance plans for wealthy
people. Any support for the bill ensures
that subsidies go to wealthy families
making as much as $600,000 a year.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
using hard-earned taxpayer dollars to
bail Democrats out of their own decision—their own decision—to make this
COVID-era spending temporary so that
they could give Green New Deal tax
breaks to the wealthy for electric vehicles and solar panels.
They had the option. They had the
option to make it permanent twice,
whether it was in the American Rescue
Plan or the Inflation Reduction Act.
Instead, they wanted to put their resources into their wealthy environmentalists.
Check the math. Nearly half of all
Americans get their insurance from
their employer, nearly a quarter from
Medicaid, and a bit less than that from
Medicare.

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Mr. Speaker, only 7 percent of the
population relies on ObamaCare marketplace plans. This Chamber should be
about helping 100 percent of Americans,
and
lowering
the
cost
of
healthcare and premiums, not just 7
percent.
Mr. Speaker, it is shameful that
Democrats are only focusing on 7 percent of the population while ignoring
the millions of working families who
are struggling to afford healthcare.
Since ObamaCare was enacted, premiums have increased by 80 percent.
Since ObamaCare was enacted—let me
say that again—the premiums have increased by 80 percent. Deductibles and
out-of-pocket costs have skyrocketed.
Families worry about medical debt—
that is, those who still have access to
doctors. In fact, 150 rural hospitals
have
closed
since
passage
of
ObamaCare, and small businesses were
crushed under the weight of the new
mandates.
Not only did Democrats refuse to fix
any of this, but they want to make it
permanent at a cost of $400 billion. No
thanks, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, reverting these tax
credits back to the original structure
that the Democrats designed means
that 93 percent of enrollees will still retain very generous subsidies next year.
Mr. Speaker, 60 percent of the enrollees
will still have access to a plan at or
below $50 a month.
I represent one of the poorest congressional districts in the country, and
still, 99.7 percent of my constituents in
my district, one of the poorest congressional districts, will be unaffected by
this expiration.
This is all about subsidizing the
wealthy, so why are we even having
this debate? It is because Democrats
chose to make these giveaways temporary—not
once,
but
twice,
Mr.
Speaker—as part of their partisan
spending bills. The reason they did so
was to shower the rich with Green New
Deal subsidies, which they made permanent. We reversed those in the big,
beautiful bill.

CORRECTION

H217

Mr. Speaker, here is a word you
won’t hear from Democrats: ‘‘fraud.’’
They forced taxpayers to pay up to $27
billion for as many as 6.4 million individuals fraudulently enrolled in the
ObamaCare plans. Nearly half of all enrollees—that is, 12 million people—
didn’t even file one single medical
claim, not even a prescription, all year,
last year. It sounds like they didn’t
even know that they had insurance
through ObamaCare, but those insurance companies were subsidized, almost half of them, on the exchanges.
b 1540
If Democrats think that is not a
problem, that is pretty scary.
I called on the Government Accountability Office to investigate. They created fictitious ObamaCare applicants
with fake documentation, and 100 percent—not some, but 100 percent; not
half, but 100 percent—were approved in
the first year, and 90 percent are still
being subsidized, resulting in checks
worth more than $12,000 per month
going to insurance companies.
One Social Security number was associated with more than 125 different
ObamaCare policies. One Social Secu-rity
number was tied to more than 125
policies—waste,
fraud,
abuse.
Apparently, the other side doesn’t see that.
They don’t see the truth. In fact, more than
58,000 dead people were being sub-sidized,
according
to
the
Government
Accountability Office.
In response, Democrats only brag
about higher health insurance enrollment. They are really celebrating.

H218

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

What they are celebrating is subsidizing insurers for people without a
pulse. For Democrats, fraud comes
first.
Mr. Speaker, Republicans are putting
real, living Americans first. Republicans blocked illegal immigrants’ access to taxpayer-funded healthcare
benefits, then eliminated over $185 billion worth of fraud and waste in the
ObamaCare marketplace. For Americans who are eligible, Republicans actually lowered ObamaCare premiums
and expanded access to health savings
accounts, direct primary care, and telehealth
for
millions,
including
ObamaCare enrollees, as part of the
Working Families Tax Cuts.
There was $50 billion invested in the
healthcare needs of rural communities.
The Lower Health Care Premiums for
All Americans Act was passed, which
also lowered premiums even further, as
well as provided more freedom and
flexibility for healthcare access and increased competition by negotiating
better drug prices for workers.
Mr. Speaker, I will take greater access to affordable healthcare any day
over shoveling more tax dollars into
Democrats’ healthcare fraud schemes. I
oppose this legislation, and I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, this argument is about
universal access. For years, the Republican leadership in this institution has
attempted to avert this very moment.
For us this is not to be about spiking
the football. This is not to be about an
end-zone dance. This is about to declare a major victory for the American
people.
Despite what I have heard, they have
used every maneuver and procedure to
prevent the very debate that we are
going to have for the next hour. All
these years later, they never even had
a plan or an alternative.
We can finally choose families, and
they can join us today in extending the
ACA tax credits and save healthcare
for millions of members of the American family. How easily and quickly
they did a massive tax cut for the
wealthiest amongst us while subsequently arguing that they could deny
average men and women an opportunity for health insurance.
So here we are all these years later,
as one who helped to write the Affordable Care Act, the ACA is still standing. We will continue to improve it
every single year. When I consider now
the uninsured enrollment in America is
down to 6 percent, it is thanks to the
ACA.
If Congress did not do what we are
about to do in the next hour, a family
of four making $130,000 would see their
marketplace premium go from $921 to
$1,992. That would be an 18.4 percent increase. Our enhanced credits make sure
that nobody would pay more than 8.5
percent of their income for coverage.
Now, Republicans think that people
can afford increased premiums by 37

percent, and that is what they are proposing today. They said 2 weeks ago
that they had a healthcare plan that
they wrote on Friday night. As I noted
at the time, it was held together by
bubble gum and Elmer’s Glue. By the
way, Democrats never even got to see
it. If they had a healthcare plan alternative, they should have shown it to
us.
Let me say this, Mr. Speaker. This is
a good day for the American family.
This is an important consideration for
this institution. Despite repeated denials and efforts to thwart this very moment, in the next hour, my colleagues
are going to do for the American family what they said they would do, and
that is to extend these tax credits for
the ACA.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from Texas (Mr. ARRINGTON).
Mr. ARRINGTON. Mr. Speaker, my
friend from Massachusetts talked
about not seeing the Republican bill.
There was a bipartisan provision in
there that would lower premiums by 11
percent per the Congressional Budget
Office, the nonpartisan budget office.
This is a provision that the Democrats
all supported. They know we have to
make the ObamaCare market work. It
doesn’t work today. The facts belie
that:
double
premiums,
double
deductibles, one out of five claims rejected, limited choice. It has failed.
That experiment has failed.
The only game in town that has actually lowered costs of healthcare, reduced premiums is what Republicans
passed out of the House. There was not
a single Democrat vote to join us.
Here is what I can’t understand for
the life of me, and I have some good
friends over there, and I am not mad. I
am miffed that Democrats would all
talk about affordability in healthcare
and bring to this Chamber the idea, the
notion that Congress take a COVID-era
program that Democrats all designed
to expire when COVID was over, that
every watchdog group has said is loaded with fraud and waste—as the chairman said, Social Security numbers
from tens of thousands of dead people—
it is siphoning money out of the taxpayers’ pockets, away from the vulnerable, and enriching insurance companies.
There are millions of ineligible people, billions of dollars of fraud, and
people are watching what is going on in
the country, especially in Minnesota.
How could my colleagues across the
aisle, in good faith, call this affordable
healthcare and stewardship of the sacred treasure of our fellow Americans?
Republicans have a plan. It works. It
is not perfect. There are some things
Congress could work together on. But
for the love of God and country, please,
it is intellectually dishonest to tell the
American people that this COVID-era,
fraud-ridden program is somehow going
to make healthcare affordable any

January 8, 2026

more than the underlying bill itself,
ObamaCare, which everyone knows
hasn’t.
I said it the last time, I will say it
again: Ronald Reagan was spot on.
Government isn’t the solution. Government is the problem. This is a case
study for that. America needs less
mandates, less taxes, less regulations,
and people need more freedom, more
choices, more competition.
Republicans are willing to work with
Democrats, but this is beyond the pale,
and it is audacious to call it affordable
healthcare. I am amazed. I am surprised. I encourage my colleagues to
roundly, soundly stand firm and reject
it, and no Republican should ever support
this.
They
didn’t
support
ObamaCare when it was designed. They
shouldn’t support doubling down on a
failed policy, and I encourage them to
not begin now.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from Massachusetts (Ms. CLARK), the Democratic minority whip, who can stand at
that microphone and say the following:
Every child in Massachusetts has
health insurance and 97 percent of the
adults in Massachusetts are covered because of the ObamaCare plan.
Ms. CLARK of Massachusetts. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentleman from
the Commonwealth for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, today, thanks to the
persistence of the American people, because millions of constituents have
called their Members of Congress,
shown up at townhalls, shown up and
marched in the streets, because of parents who spoke out for their kids, for
doctors who spoke out for their patients, neighbors who mobilized together, today, Congress has a chance to
vote for Americans’ healthcare.
Today, thanks to the strength and
unity of our Democratic Caucus, the
House will vote to restore the ACA tax
credits, and I will vote to restore the
affordable marketplace plans that
working people depend on to stay
healthy, to live, to survive.
Today, I will vote to prioritize the
lives of regular people over the greed of
billionaires and start bringing the Republican healthcare crisis to an end.
b 1550
This vote won’t solve every problem
the GOP has created. We still have to
reverse their cuts to Medicaid and
Medicare. We still have to stop the closure of rural hospitals and deal with
the maternity health crisis and work
together—yes, work together—to create a healthcare system that is affordable and accessible to everyone.
Today, we can begin. Today, the people’s House has a chance to stand with
and for the people. I hope we have a
strong bipartisan majority for this
vote and that the Senate will immediately do the same.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from Florida (Mr. BEAN).
Mr. BEAN of Florida. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the chairman for yielding time.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Mr. Speaker, when your old roof
keeps leaking, you can keep adding
shingles to it, but eventually you must
admit the structure underneath isn’t
built to weather the storm. Rather
than double down on a problem that
keeps getting more expensive, it is
time sometimes to rethink the foundation. Such is the case with ObamaCare.
Mr. Speaker, we all remember those
promises made when Obama signed the
Affordable Care Act into law. If you
like your doctor, you can keep your
doctor. It turns out that wasn’t true. It
is also not true the promise made that
this ObamaCare will bend the cost
curve for healthcare downward. That is
not true at all. Premiums for the average ObamaCare plan have skyrocketed
much higher than traditional inflation
leaving patients with higher costs and
fewer choices.
If Americans are just tuning in to C–
SPAN, you might assume that Republicans are eliminating the Affordable
Care Act or ObamaCare altogether.
That is simply not the case.
The premium tax credits were developed during COVID to subsidize Americans making more than 400 percent of
the Federal poverty level, including
those making up to $600,000. People
making up to $600,000 are getting subsidized by the American taxpayers. In
northeast Florida, we call people making $600,000 rich, and that is who we are
subsidizing with these premium tax
credits.
I have also got a news flash for you,
Mr. Speaker: COVID is over. We made
these premium tax credits during
COVID. COVID is over, and these subsidies should be over with it.
ObamaCare will continue for those
who need it. Americans making up to
400 percent of the poverty level are still
eligible for the tax credits. At this very
moment that is still happening. That
means a family of four can make up to
$128,000 and still qualify for help.
To call this, and I have heard it said
a couple of times already, a Republican
healthcare crisis is fake news. There is
new hope, Mr. Speaker. Instead of
throwing more money away, we can
have a new day for America to look at
health savings accounts, to look at the
Lower Healthcare Premiums for All
Act that according to the CBO is going
to lower premiums for everybody, all
Americans across the Nation.
It is time to give more choice and
more competition. Those are the only
ingredients that are going to make
costs lower. We can’t keep patching the
same roof. Everybody has sticker
shock.
Mr. Speaker, I urge everybody, the
right answer is to vote ‘‘no’’ on extending these horrible tax credits.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the distinguished gentleman
from New York (Mr. JEFFRIES), the
Democratic leader, whose tactful leadership has brought us to this moment.
Mr. JEFFRIES. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the distinguished gentleman from the
great Commonwealth of Massachusetts

for yielding and for his tremendous
leadership on behalf of protecting the
healthcare of the American people.
I rise today, Mr. Speaker, in strong
support of this bipartisan effort to protect the healthcare of the American
people and ensure that we extend the
Affordable Care Act tax credits, to
make sure that tens of millions of
Americans do not experience dramatically increased premiums, copays, and
deductibles.
From the very beginning of this Congress, House Democrats have made it
clear that we will find bipartisan common ground with any of our Republican colleagues in order to address the
affordability issues that are making
life more expensive for everyday Americans, working-class Americans, and
middle-class Americans. That has been
our commitment from the very beginning.
Today, we are able to take a substantial step forward to address the
healthcare crisis that does exist in the
United States of America and was
made worse by the one big, ugly bill.
Medicaid was cut by the largest
amount in American history. As a result of the policies that were part of
that legislation, hospitals, nursing
homes, and community-based health
clinics are closing all across America.
We have also seen an extraordinary
assault on the Centers for Disease Control and the National Institutes of
Health and the Food and Drug Administration, on vaccine availability, on
public health, and on healthcare of everyday Americans here in the United
States of America.
Today, we have an opportunity to
push back against that assault and do
it in a bipartisan way. That is what the
American people have been calling for:
Democrats and Republicans working
together to address the affordability
crisis in this country. It is not a hoax.
It is very real.
Housing costs are out of control. Grocery costs are out of control. Electricity bills are out of control.
Childcare costs are out of control.
Healthcare costs are out of control.
What we do here today will not be
the end of the effort that is necessary,
but we can begin the effort that is necessary and extend the Affordable Care
Act tax credits.
Several things that were mentioned
earlier by some of my colleagues are
completely and totally inaccurate. The
Affordable Care Act tax credits benefit
working-class Americans, middle-class
Americans, and everyday Americans.
That is why we are waging this fight.
We know that over 90 percent of the
people who benefit from the tax credits
that we are working to protect today
make on average $63,000 a year. That is
working-class America. That is middleclass America. That is the heartland of
America. That is rural America. That
is urban America. That is small-town
America. That is what we are protecting when we extend the Affordable
Care Act tax credits.

H219

This is not a partisan issue for us.
This is an American issue.
In fact, we know that the 10 States
that will be most adversely impacted
by the lapse in the Affordable Care Act
tax credits are all, Mr. Speaker, run by
Republicans. We are standing up for
the American people. We are talking
about States like West Virginia, Wyoming, Alaska, Tennessee, Mississippi,
South Carolina, Texas, Alabama, South
Dakota, and North Dakota will be the
States most impacted by the lapse in
the Affordable Care Act tax credits.
This is not a partisan issue for us. It
is a patriotic one, and we will always
defend the healthcare of the American
people. That is exactly why.
This is an important moment for everyday Americans. It is what they
want to see out of this Congress, the
people’s House, the Article I branch of
government, the House of Representatives, the first amongst equals coming
together today, every single House
Democrat and at least 10 House Republicans to extend the Affordable Care
Act tax credits.
Now, we believe as House Democrats
that in this great country of ours you
work hard, you play by the rules, you
should be able to live a comfortable
life, an affordable life, live the good
life. You should have a good-paying
job, good housing, good education for
your children, good healthcare, and a
good retirement. That is not too much
to ask for in the wealthiest country in
the history of the world.
b 1600
There is a lot of work that needs to
be done to make that aspiration, the
American Dream, the good life, a reality. Today, we take an important
step forward in that regard by extending the Affordable Care Act tax credits.
When we get this done, we can send it
over to the Senate, and, hopefully, get
it out of that Chamber and to the
President’s desk. It will be part of our
continuing commitment to lower the
high cost-of-living, fix our broken
healthcare system here in the United
States of America, and ensure that in
every single part of this country, for
working-class America, urban America,
rural America, suburban America,
exurban America, the heartland of
America, and small-town America, we
can bring the American Dream to life.
We will protect the healthcare of the
American people today, but our commitment doesn’t end today. We will
protect it tomorrow, this week, next
week, this month, this year, and next
year. We will protect the healthcare of
the American people always and forever, and we will always fight to bring
the great American Dream to life.
Vote ‘‘yes’’ on extending the Affordable Care Act tax credits.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from Texas (Mr. MORAN).
Mr. MORAN. Mr. Speaker, I want to
point out before I get to my prepared
remarks that Leader JEFFRIES just said

H220

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

that we need to fix our broken
healthcare system. It is a healthcare
system put into place by the Democrats. It is a healthcare system extended by the Democrats. The proposal
today will do nothing to extend anything but the failures of the past. It
will not fix the broken system they put
in place.
Mr. Speaker, that is why I rise today
in opposition to this Democratic discharge petition. It is fiscally irresponsible and fails to address the waste,
fraud, and abuse of ObamaCare while
ignoring the real problems in our
healthcare system and ignoring the
fact that these temporary COVID-era
enhanced subsidies have done nothing
but pad the profits of big insurance
companies and drive up the very premiums that they purport to reduce.
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the facts
more closely. First, ObamaCare has yet
to deliver on the promises made to
Americans over a decade ago. Since the
ACA was enacted, premiums have increased by roughly 80 percent. Guess
what. Ninety percent of that increase
has been paid for by the taxpayers.
It is important to note that these
premium tax credits are sent directly
to insurance companies, not the taxpayers, and it is no secret why. The
ACA was written by insurance companies to benefit insurance companies,
and it has served to drive up the stock
price for those insurance companies by
more than 1,000 percent since the ACA
came into existence.
Meanwhile, families face out-of-pocket costs exceeding $20,000 a year and a
95-percent increase in their premiums
over that same time period. This is
hardly a coincidence in a system designed to reward the insurers, not the
patient.
Let’s not forget that today’s proposed extension of these pandemic-era
tax credits only relates to the 7 percent
of Americans who are actually enrolled
in the ACA, not the other 93 percent of
Americans who are not participants in
the failed ACA exchange. Of those 7
percent, roughly one-half did not even
use their coverage once last year. Yet,
the Democrats want to pour more
money into a failing ACA program at a
cost of $400 billion.
Far too often, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers have been left paying the bill
for a broken system that lacks proper
guardrails and has been grossly mismanaged. The ACA is just another example of this, and we should not spend
more money to prop up a failing program, certainly not a COVID-era, temporary program that they put in place
and they, the Democrats, set to expire
this year.
Waste, fraud, and abuse in this program cannot be ignored. My fellow colleagues have gone over that today in
large measure, but today, Congress is
being asked to pass a clean 3-year extension and to continue to prop up this
madness and to prop up the waste,
fraud, and abuse. This cannot stand.
The Democratic-backed Big Insurance

business model is clear: charge excessive premiums to get excessive profits,
deny coverage to patients, and shift
costs onto both patients and providers.
This has to end, and I urge my colleagues to oppose this measure.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from California (Ms. PELOSI). There is no finer
leader or person who was more determined to help bring us to this moment
and whose fortitude helped to give us
the ACA than Speaker Emerita PELOSI.
Ms. PELOSI. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman for yielding, and I want
to quote him when he said that this is
a happy day. I thank Mr. Leader for
making it so, and I thank the chairman
for making it so and bringing it to the
floor. My mouth will breathe an exclamation point to the gentleman’s beautiful comments earlier and those of our
distinguished leader, Mr. JEFFRIES.
Mr. Speaker, Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., famously said: ‘‘Of all
the forms of inequality, injustice in
health is the most shocking and the
most inhuman,’’ he said, because people can die.
The Affordable Care Act, proudly
also known as ObamaCare, is a pillar of
health and financial security for America’s working families. Today, we vote
on Leader JEFFRIES’ clear, commonsense, and urgent bill to extend the
ACA tax credits signed into law by
President Biden so healthcare remains
affordable and accessible for the American people.
Every Democrat supports this bill because we believe healthcare is a right
for all and not a privilege for the few.
No family should be pushed out of coverage, and we welcome our Republican
colleagues who will be voting with us
today. This makes it a happy day.
As we vote today, let us remember
the stories of Americans we have heard
across the country. Parents saying: My
baby was born with a heart condition
costing millions of dollars before the
Affordable Care Act. Husbands saying:
My wife was diagnosed with breast cancer, and we couldn’t afford it. Families
saying: Dad had a stroke, and we
couldn’t handle the cost.
That will not happen anymore because we are protecting these families
in this bill.
Mr. Speaker, I urge all of my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’ and support this
bill to protect healthcare and the dignity of America’s working families.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from New Jersey (Mr. SMITH).
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I thank my good friend for
yielding.
Mr. Speaker, Hyde amendment protections need to be added to this bill.
Taxpayer funds should not be forced to
subsidize the killing of an unborn child
by dismemberment or by baby poison
pills.
The Hyde amendment was not—I will
say it again, was not—included when
the ACA was enacted in 2010, nor was it

January 8, 2026

included when President Biden significantly
expanded
subsidies
during
COVID.
It has gotten so bad, Mr. Speaker,
that, according to a 2025 article by the
Kaiser Family Foundation, 12 States,
including my own State of New Jersey,
absolutely require all plans on the ACA
marketplace to cover abortion on demand. We permit abortion until birth
in my State, as do many others. That
is all covered by ObamaCare.
The House has passed my bill, the No
Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act, on
four separate occasions beginning in
2011. It is pending again in this Congress, but every time it has gone over
to the Senate, it got nowhere, sadly.
I remember the day, Mr. Speaker,
when my friend and colleague, the author of the amendment, Henry Hyde,
first learned that about 1 million children were alive because of his amendment. He was overcome with joy. He
had a tear in his eye. I was there when
it happened, when he found out that 1
million mothers were spared the agony
of post-abortion pain, and 1 million
children were alive and well, growing
up, going to school, playing sports, dating, marrying, and having kids of their
own.
Today, that number is estimated at
over 2.6 million children not aborted,
all because abortion subsidies have
been prohibited by the Hyde amendment in Federal Medicaid programs
and other HHS programs.
It is time to add the Hyde amendment to the ACA.
I believe it is time, as well, for all of
us to face the harsh reality of what
abortion does to children and look beyond the slogans and the surface appeal arguments.
The
so-called
abortion
pill,
mifepristone, is baby poison. It kills
the unborn child by how? Starving the
innocent child to death. That is its operation. They can’t get food, so they
die. Then, the body of that baby is
often flushed down the toilet.
We know, however, now, that
mifepristone is extremely dangerous to
women. A big study, the biggest study
ever done, found that 1 in 10 women experienced serious adverse events.
Mr. Speaker, that is not what you
hear from the abortion lobby. You hear
about how safe it is. It ain’t safe. They
suffer things like sepsis, infection, and
hemorrhaging, all within about 45
days.
b 1610
Let me also say to my colleagues, another method of aborting a baby is dismemberment. It tears the child’s fragile body to pieces and includes decapitation. Until rendered unconscious or
dead by this hideous procedure, the
baby feels pain with every cut of the
knife.
It is no wonder that the polling
shows that the majority of Americans
do not want public funding for abortion. Abortion is the polar opposite of
healthcare.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield an additional 30 seconds to the
gentleman from New Jersey.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, abortion is not healthcare unless one construes the life of an unborn
child to be analogous to a tumor to be
excised or a disease to be vanquished.
I appeal to my colleagues: Don’t ignore or trivialize the battered victim
in the womb. Unborn babies need Members of Congress to be their friends and
advocates, not powerful adversaries.
Abortion violence must be replaced
with compassion and empathy for
women and respect for the weakest and
most vulnerable.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Texas
(Mr. DOGGETT).
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Speaker, our
vote today represents hope, the hope of
millions to access their family physician, the hope for so many Americans
who have wondered how they will be
able to afford healthcare, hope that by
using an extraordinary measure today
in the House, we can address an extraordinary need.
After 70 Republican repeal efforts,
after rejecting the amendment I offered last May to retain these credits,
and after delaying for months to give
us the opportunity to provide this care,
we are here today with hope.
Now, the responsibility shifts to the
Senate. They need to promptly approve
this measure and not attach any weakening provisions such as junk insurance and health savings account tax
shelters. Keep it focused on affordability, on providing enrollment periods for those who have already lost
their coverage because of enormous
premium hikes.
We have heard so much about fraud.
The only fraud that has been identified
relates to broker fraud that Trump has
made worse and Republicans have ignored. The biggest fraud of all would be
replacing ObamaCare with Republican
nothing care.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from Utah (Mr. KENNEDY).
Mr. KENNEDY of Utah. Mr. Speaker,
I thank my friend from Missouri for
this time.
As a family practice doctor for more
than 25 years, I hear directly from my
patients about the skyrocketing cost of
insurance and prescription drugs.
Americans were promised lower costs,
more choices, and better care. More
than a decade later, too many families
are asking what happened.
Since its passage, the unaffordable
care act has created a subsidy-fueled illusion with spiraling costs hidden by
taxpayer dollars and deficit spending.
Today, many Americans have insurance on paper but still cannot afford to
use it. Plans often come with
deductibles of several thousand dollars,
meaning families pay out of pocket for
most routine care. Insurance that can-

not be used when people are sick is not
real security. It is an illusion.
Let’s look at the facts. Healthcare
costs
have
skyrocketed
since
ObamaCare went into effect. The ACA
promised to lower healthcare premiums by up to $2,500 per family per
year, but since ObamaCare went into
effect, premiums have nearly tripled
and deductibles have nearly doubled.
The cost of coverage for a family of 4
has increased by more than $10,000.
The benchmark ACA silver plan cost
$346 a month in 2014. In 2026, the same
exact plan costs $625 a month. The
benchmark ACA silver plan deductible
was $2,425 in 2014. In 2026, the average
deductible will be $5,304, a 119 percent
increase. That means that before your
health insurance even kicks in, you
have to incur $5,304 in out-of-pocket
costs.
Such deductibles leave families effectively self-funding their care despite
being insured. A policy that you can’t
afford when you are sick is not a real
solution, only an illusion of coverage,
leaving individuals functionally uninsured.
Compounding these design failures
are serious fraud and enforcement
breakdowns within the system itself. A
2024 GAO investigation found that fake
identities
were
approved
for
ObamaCare subsidies at a 100 percent
rate. Often remaining enrolled despite
missing or falsified documentation,
these ObamaCare subsidies continued
for these fraudulent applications. Taxpayers are left footing the bill as reused Social Security numbers, subsidies paid on behalf of deceased individuals, and billions in unreconciled
payments expose a system unable to
protect public funds.
To be clear, expanding access to
health insurance and protecting people
with preexisting conditions are worthy
goals, but good intentions do not excuse bad results.
Mr. Speaker, faced with these affordability problems, what have my Democratic colleagues proposed? Their answer has been more taxpayer subsidies
to paper over ObamaCare’s problems.
Rather than address the root causes of
high premiums, they want to pour
ever-larger subsidies to insurance companies to mask the broken system.
Extending subsidies without reform
is just paying more for a broken system. I am not going to vote to promote
a broken ObamaCare system. If health
insurance only looks affordable when
Washington pumps in billions of temporary subsidies, the law itself is not
affordable. That structure is the real
problem that we need to fix. I urge my
colleagues to vote ‘‘no.’’
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from California (Mr. THOMPSON).
Mr. THOMPSON of California. Mr.
Speaker, House Democrats have fought
for
months
to
save
Americans’
healthcare. That led to four Republicans working with us to bring this
bill to the floor today. Yesterday, nine

H221

Republicans voted with us to bring this
tax credit extension up. Today, it is 11.
They know that letting these tax credits expire will hurt the people that
they represent as well.
Congressional Republicans set the
stage to price 4 million Americans out
of healthcare plans that they need.
Democrats are fighting to bring your
costs down. If you take away the credits that millions of Americans depend
on to afford coverage, families will be
forced into junk plans that don’t cover
their needs or will have no coverage at
all. When they get sick or hurt, it will
cost even more.
This is a good day for Americans. It
is a great day for Americans. Vote
‘‘yes’’ on this bill to protect healthcare
for the people that we represent.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from
California (Mr. KILEY).
Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, I agree with points that are being
made on both sides. The fundamental
point of our side is undeniably true,
which is that our healthcare system is
broken and costs continue to spiral out
of control.
However, it is also true that suddenly
withdrawing premium support from 22
million Americans is going to force
those folks into a terrible dilemma: either paying hundreds or thousands of
dollars more, so they face hard tradeoffs for their families, losing their insurance altogether in a way that will
impact the employer-based market of
150 million Americans, or working less
in order to remain eligible in a way
that will reduce their discretionary income as well as be bad for our economy
as a whole.
We need a solution to this, but this
bill is obviously not a solution. Everyone knows that. It is a political exercise that has been engineered by the
minority leader at the expense of pursuing an actual solution.
Now, once again, it is falling on the
Senate to do the real policymaking,
but I am heartened that they seem to
be close to a deal that roughly mirrors
the compromise bipartisan bill that I
have offered with the gentleman from
California (Mr. LICCARDO) that does a
temporary extension with reforms and
cost controls to provide runway, so
then we can begin the real hard work
of fixing our healthcare system in this
country.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. LARSON).
Mr. LARSON of Connecticut. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the leader of the
Ways and Means Committee and rise in
strong support of this legislation.
We have heard an awful lot of talk
about subsidies over there. Let’s cut
right to the chase. It is about subsidies. You care about subsidies for billionaires, and you are willing to do it
on the backs of the American people.
You would rather see them—thank
God for the people who are standing up
on your side. They deserve the Profile

H222

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

in Courage award because they are able
to stand up to a President who would
rather see 15 million people lose insurance and another 20 million see their
prices double. Thank the Republicans
on that side for profiles in courage.
Vote your conscience. Vote your constituents. This is not about politics. It
is about people.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to direct their remarks to the Chair.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the distinguished gentleman
from Illinois (Mr. DAVIS).
b 1620
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois. Mr. Speaker,
in Illinois, there are 465,000 people who
depend on the Affordable Care Act to
acquire health insurance. For the past
several years, the majority of them
have used enhanced Federal tax credits
to lower the cost.
In my district alone, 19,000, or 57 percent, will see the cost of their policy go
up $696, without the Federal tax credits.
In Austin, Mary will pay an additional $300 per month. On the North
Side, Emily will pay an additional $150
a month, raising her cost to $600. Beginning January 1, Rebecca will pay
$796 a month.
This is totally unacceptable. All of
these are too high. Let’s make
healthcare available to the American
people. Let’s pass today, not tomorrow,
not the next day, the Federal tax credits.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from California (Ms. SÁNCHEZ).
Ms. SÁNCHEZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in support of the many working
families who rely on the ACA tax credits.
Speaker JOHNSON should have let us
vote on this bill at the end of last year,
but instead of bringing down the cost
of healthcare, groceries, or housing,
Republicans are focused on protecting
President Trump while he invades foreign countries, builds golden ballrooms, and renames monuments to
himself, all while families in my district watch their healthcare premiums
double.
I will remind everyone: Republicans
already kicked 15 million people off
their healthcare to pay for tax cuts for
billionaires.
I urge my Republican colleagues now
to do the right thing and to vote on behalf of their constituents’ interests.
Vote to extend the ACA tax credits and
lower costs for America’s families.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I remind this body that the reason why
these COVID-era tax credits expired is
because the Democrats focused all
their resources on helping their
wealthy environmentalists with permanent tax credits for electric vehicles
and solar panels.

Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from Alabama (Ms. SEWELL).
Ms. SEWELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in strong support of restoring
the Affordable Care Act tax credits and
lowering healthcare costs for millions
of Americans.
As of January 1, more than 400,000
Alabamians faced higher premiums because Republicans in this body let the
ACA tax credits expire. That is on top
of the nearly $1 trillion in cuts that
Republicans made to healthcare earlier
this year.
Today’s vote represents one more
chance for Republicans to do the right
thing, reverse their disastrous policies,
and
join
Democrats
in
making
healthcare more affordable.
Let’s make no mistake: This vote
would not have taken place had it not
been for the relentless efforts of House
Democrats and our leader, HAKEEM
JEFFRIES. I urge my Republican colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’ to restore the
ACA credits and lower healthcare
costs. In the words of Dr. King: ‘‘The
time is always right to do what is
right.’’
Mr. Speaker, let us restore the ACA
tax credits.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I include in the RECORD a bombshell
GAO report documenting evidence of
widespread fraud, with billions of dollars going to fraudulent enrollees, including as many as 58,000 dead people.
U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE,
Washington, DC, December 3, 2025.
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act:
Preliminary Results from Ongoing Review Suggest Fraud Risks in the Advance
Premium Tax Credit Persist
Hon. BRETT GUTHRIE,
Chairman, Committee on Energy and Commerce,
House of Representatives.
Hon. JIM JORDAN,
Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary,
House of Representatives.
Hon. JASON SMITH,
Chairman, Committee on Ways and Means,
House of Representatives.
The Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (PPACA) provides premium tax
credits to those who purchase private health
insurance plans and meet certain income and
other requirements. Individuals may have
the federal government pay this credit to
their health insurance issuers in advance on
their behalf, known as the advance premium
tax credit (APTC), which lowers their
monthly premium payments.
Millions of consumers have purchased
health insurance plans through the marketplaces established under PPACA. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS),
within the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS), is responsible for maintaining the federal Marketplace and overseeing
state-based marketplaces. Under PPACA,
states may elect to operate their own statebased marketplace or to use the federal Marketplace. These marketplaces determine eligibility for APTC, based in part on income,
and allow individuals to compare and choose
among insurance plans offered by participating private health care coverage issuers.
CMS estimated it paid nearly $124 billion in
APTC for about 19.5 million enrollees for
plan year 2024.

January 8, 2026

Consumers can enroll in health insurance
coverage through a marketplace independently or with assistance, such as from an insurance agent or broker. As discussed later
in this report, agents and brokers can help a
consumer apply for coverage, including for
related financial assistance, and enroll in a
plan. Assistance from an agent or broker is
of no cost to a consumer. Rather, agents and
brokers are allowed to receive compensation
directly from health insurance issuers in accordance with agreements with those issuers
and any applicable state requirements.
Indictments from December 2024 and February 2025 highlight concerns about agent
and broker practices in the federal Marketplace. Specifically, the indictments allege
that bad actors enrolled consumers in insurance through the federal Marketplace by falsifying information on their applications.
Additionally, according to CMS, the agency
received approximately 275,000 complaints
between January and August 2024 that consumers were enrolled in a plan or had their
plan changed without their consent. Such
practices can result in wasteful federal
spending on APTC for enrollees who are not
eligible. Further, such practices can result in
harm and unexpected costs for consumers.
These can include loss of access to medical
providers and medications, higher copayments and deductibles, or repayment of
APTC if income or other eligibility was misrepresented.
We previously reported that APTC is at
risk of fraud. For example, in September
2016, we found that federal and state marketplaces approved coverage for our fictitious
applicants. Nearly all of these fictitious applicants remained covered after we sent fictitious documents or no documents to resolve issues with our applications. Further,
in July 2017, we found that CMS did not design processes to verify eligibility for APTC,
including preventing duplicate coverage.
You asked us to review issues related to
fraud risk management in APTC. This report
is based on preliminary results and analyses
from that ongoing work. Specifically, this
report addresses preliminary results from
our
1. covert testing of federal Marketplace enrollment controls for plan years 2024 and
2025,
2. analyses of federal Marketplace enrollment data for plan years 2023 and 2024, and
3. evaluation of CMS’s fraud risk assessment and antifraud strategy for APTC.
To perform covert testing of federal Marketplace enrollment controls, we created 20
fictitious identities and submitted applications for individual health care coverage in
the federal Marketplace. We submitted applications for four of these fictitious identities
in October 2024 for coverage through December 2024, which was the remainder of that
plan year. We pursued coverage for plan year
2025 for all 20 fictitious identities, including
the four identities for which we already submitted applications. Our covert testing for
plan year 2025 is ongoing, since the plan year
is not yet complete. As a result, we will describe additional details of the 2025 applications in a future report.
Our covert testing included applications
submitted
independently
through
HealthCare.gov, which is the federal Marketplace’s website, and applications submitted
with assistance from an insurance agent or
broker. For all our applicant scenarios, we
sought to act as an ordinary consumer would
in attempting to make a successful application. For example, if, during online applications, we were directed to make phone calls
to complete the process, we acted as instructed.
For applications for plan year 2024, our
covert tests included fictitious applicants

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

who provided invalid (i.e., never issued) Social Security numbers (SSN). Additionally,
we stated income at a level eligible to obtain
APTC. As appropriate, we used publicly
available information to construct our applications for coverage and subsidies. We also
used publicly available hardware, software,
and materials to produce counterfeit documents that we submitted, if appropriate for
our testing, when instructed to do so. We
then observed the outcomes of the document
submissions, such as any approvals received
or requests to provide additional supporting
documentation. The results of our covert
testing, while illustrative of potential enrollment control weaknesses, cannot be generalized to the overall enrollment population.
To examine federal Marketplace enrollment for plan years 2023 and 2024, we obtained and analyzed federal Marketplace enrollment and payment data, including APTC
information, from CMS. We also matched enrollee SSNs in the data to two additional
data sources: (1) Social Security Administration’s (SSA) full death file, a database containing records of death that have been reported to SSA, as of November 2024 and (2)
April 2025 data from the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) on APTC reconciliation from
tax forms filed for tax year 2023. We assessed
the reliability of all data sets by performing
electronic tests to determine the completeness and accuracy of key fields. We also reviewed agency documentation and interviewed knowledgeable agency officials about
the reliability of the data. Overall, we found
that the data were reliable for our purposes.
To examine CMS’s fraud risk assessment
and antifraud strategy for APTC, we reviewed documentation of CMS’s policies and
fraud risk management activities related to
APTC. This included CMS’s 2018 fraud risk
assessment for APTC. Additionally, we interviewed agency officials about CMS’s fraud
risk management activities in this program.
We reviewed relevant reports from GAO and
HHS’s Office of the Inspector General. We
evaluated information from relevant documentation and interviews of agency officials
against relevant leading practices in GAO’s
A Framework for Managing Fraud Risks in
Federal Programs (Fraud Risk Framework).
To support all three objectives, we interviewed CMS officials and representatives
from seven stakeholder organizations that
represent agents and brokers, state insurance regulators, researchers, and one of the
entities that CMS approved to host a nonmarketplace website where consumers can
apply for and enroll in a plan offered through
the federal Marketplace.
The ongoing work upon which this report
is based is being conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a
reasonable basis for our preliminary findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Additionally, our related investigative
work is being conducted in accordance with
standards prescribed by the Council of the
Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency.
Background
APTC ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT PROCESSES

APTC Eligibility
To qualify for a premium tax credit, individuals must be enrolled in a qualified
health plan offered through a marketplace
and meet certain criteria. These tax credits
can be paid in advance through APTC.
The amount of the premium tax credit varies based on household income and the cost

of a benchmark plan. The credit limits what
the consumer would pay for that plan to be
no more than a certain percentage of their
household income. The American Rescue
Plan Act of 2021 made temporary changes to
premium tax credits by expanding eligibility
to higher-income individuals and increasing
premium tax credits for lower-income individuals for tax years 2021 and 2022. For example, the law increased the premium tax credit amounts for eligible individuals and families, resulting in access to plans with no premium contributions for those earning 100 to
150 percent of the federal poverty level. It
also expanded eligibility for premium tax
credits to include certain individuals and
families with incomes at or above 400 percent
of the federal poverty level. Public Law 117–
169—commonly known as the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022—extended these provisions through the end of tax year 2025.
In 2013, CMS developed the Data Services
Hub (Hub) to help verify applicant eligibility
in an automated manner. To do so, the Hub
matches applicant information, such as SSN
and estimated income, against trusted data
sources. These sources include records from
SSA and IRS. In the federal Marketplace,
the system generates an inconsistency when
data matching processes are not able to
verify applicant information against the
Hub’s trusted sources. When an inconsistency is generated, applicants are instructed
to provide documentation to support information on their applications that cannot be
verified by the Hub’s data matching.
Marketplaces and Enrollment Pathways
States, along with the District of Columbia, may elect to rely on the federal Marketplace or operate their own health insurance
marketplace.
The federal Marketplace offers multiple
pathways to enroll in health insurance coverage and receive APTC. Consumers in states
that use the federal Marketplace may enroll
in coverage through the pathway known as
HealthCare.gov or an enhanced direct enrollment (EDE) pathway, among others.
Role of Agents and Brokers
Consumers seeking to obtain health insurance through the federal Marketplace may
receive assistance from agents and brokers
who help them apply for coverage, including
related financial assistance, and enroll in a
health plan. In return, agents and brokers
receive payment (commissions or salaries)
from the issuers of the health plans. Agents
and brokers must be licensed in the state in
which they sell plans and registered with
CMS to sell plans through the federal Marketplace. According to CMS, most enrollments in the federal Marketplace are assisted by an agent or broker through the
EDE and direct enrollment pathways.
CMS is responsible for oversight of agents
and brokers in the federal Marketplace and
ensuring that they comply with federal
rules. Agents and brokers are required to,
among other things, obtain and document
consumers’ consent before assisting them
with applying for and enrolling in coverage
through the federal Marketplace. For example, consumer consent is required before the
agent or broker can
collect or use any personally identifiable
information, such as name, date of birth, and
SSN;
help a consumer apply for coverage or financial assistance by completing an eligibility application on their behalf; and
actively enroll a consumer in a plan offered through the federal Marketplace.
After a consumer has applied or is enrolled, the agent or broker can also update a
consumer’s eligibility application or plan selection on their behalf, if the initial consent
authorized the agent or broker to do so, or if

H223

they obtained subsequent consent for any
new actions. Agents and brokers are required
to make documentation of consumer consent
available to CMS upon request in response to
monitoring, audit, and enforcement actions.
Fraud Risk Management
The objective of fraud risk management is
to ensure program integrity by continuously
and strategically mitigating both the likelihood and effects of fraud, while also facilitating a program’s mission. The Fraud Risk
Framework provides a comprehensive set of
leading practices that serve as a guide for
agency managers to use when developing efforts to combat fraud in a strategic, riskbased manner. As depicted in figure 2, the
framework organizes the leading practices
within four components: (1) Commit, (2) Assess, (3) Design and Implement, and (4)
Evaluate and Adapt.
In June 2016, the Fraud Reduction and
Data Analytics Act of 2015 (FRDAA) required
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
to establish guidelines for federal agencies to
create controls to identify and assess fraud
risks to design and implement antifraud control activities. The act further required OMB
to incorporate the leading practices from the
Fraud Risk Framework in the guidelines.
The Payment Integrity Information Act of
2019 repealed FRDAA but maintained the requirement for OMB to provide guidelines to
agencies in implementing the Fraud Risk
Framework.
In its 2016 Circular No. A–123 guidelines,
OMB directed agencies to adhere to the
Fraud Risk Framework’s leading practices.
In October 2022, OMB issued a Controller
Alert reminding agencies that they must establish financial and administrative controls
to identify and assess fraud risks. In addition, the alert reminded agencies that they
should adhere to the leading practices in the
Fraud Risk Framework as part of their efforts to effectively design, implement, and
operate an internal control system that addresses fraud risks.
The Federal Marketplace Approved Subsidized Coverage for Nearly All of Our Fictitious Applicants in Plan Years 2024 and
2025, Suggesting Weaknesses Persist
Our covert testing of enrollment controls
in the federal Marketplace suggests weaknesses have persisted since our tests in plan
years 2015 through 2016. All four of our fictitious applications received subsidized coverage through the federal Marketplace in
late 2024. Additionally, although our work is
ongoing, as of September 2025 18 of our 20 fictitious applications for plan year 2025 were
receiving subsidized coverage. We will continue to monitor the status of these applications during plan year 2025.
ALL FOUR OF OUR FICTITIOUS APPLICANTS
RECEIVED SUBSIDIZED COVERAGE IN LATE 2024

To test enrollment controls, we developed
and submitted four fictitious applications to
obtain insurance coverage with APTC
through the federal Marketplace. We applied
for coverage for these four applicants in October 2024. We submitted the applications
outside of the open enrollment period, using
a special enrollment period for low-income
applicants. In two cases, we applied for coverage directly through HealthCare.gov. In
the other two cases, we applied via telephone
with assistance from an insurance broker.
The brokers that assisted us used EDE systems to submit our applications.
The federal Marketplace approved fully
subsidized insurance coverage for all four of
our fictitious applicants for November
through December 2024. The combined total
amount of APTC paid to insurance companies for all four fictitious enrollees was
about $2,350 per month. While our fictitious

H224

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

enrollees are not generalizable to the universe of enrollees, they suggest weaknesses
in enrollment controls—such as identity
proofing and income verification—in the federal
Marketplace
through
both
HealthCare.gov and EDE systems.
The results of our covert testing for plan
year 2024 are generally consistent with results of similar testing we conducted for plan
years 2014 through 2016.

Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from
Washington (Ms. DELBENE).
Ms. DELBENE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to express my unwavering support for this extension of the enhanced
ACA tax credits.
For the last year, my colleagues and
I have fought to keep these enhanced
tax credits. While this vote is later
than it should have been, it is not too
late to do what is right for the American people and for my constituents
like Gerry, who has already seen a 60percent increase in his premiums;
Steve, whose plan went up by over 40
percent; and Mitch, who is looking at a
420-percent increase for him and his
wife.
Republicans and the Trump administration promised to bring down prices.
Instead, they have made healthcare a
luxury that only some can afford.
I believe everyone should have affordable,
quality,
accessible
healthcare. Because of that, I will be
voting in favor of this legislation and
supporting the extension of the enhanced ACA tax credits.
Mr. Speaker, I urge all of my colleagues to join me.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from Florida (Mr. HARIDOPOLOS).
Mr. HARIDOPOLOS. Mr. Speaker, I
am honored to be here this afternoon
to talk about what is so important to
all of us, and that is healthcare, not
just health insurance.
A clean, 3-year extension brought by
the minority would send $110 billion directly to insurance companies.
As the chairman just mentioned, a
recent GAO report showed that 23 out
of 24 fraudulent enrollees were approved and received taxpayer subsidies
directly to insurance companies. The
GAO even reported that they were not
required to provide documentation,
such as Social Security numbers or income verification. It was money sent
directly to insurance companies from
taxpayers.
Democrats said healthcare would be
affordable, yet since the implementation of this bad idea, premiums are up
80 percent. At the same time, nearly 20
percent of the individual market
claims are denied by insurance companies.
In 2024, 87 percent of the revenue
made by insurance companies selling
ACA exchange claims came from taxpayer dollars.
To quote an article from The Wall
Street
Journal,
Democrats
sold
ObamaCare on the false pretenses that

it would make healthcare affordable.
Let me say that again: false pretenses.
Extending the subsidies would perpetuate that fraud.
We passed a bill before Christmas
that would reduce costs by 11 percent,
and that was from the CBO. The CBO
said that, and we are not exactly the
biggest fans of that unique organization. Our plan would actually fight
fraud, which was highlighted in the
GAO report.
Finally, we would actually give
choice to individuals as opposed to this
one-size-fits-all debacle. We want
healthcare, not a plan to simply fund
insurance companies.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from California (Ms. CHU).
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, 1 week ago,
Republicans skyrocketed healthcare
costs for 22 million Americans. They
chose to let the ACA tax credits expire,
even though there was bipartisan support to extend them.
Now, families are seeing premiums
jump by hundreds, even thousands, of
dollars a month. That is utterly devastating and was entirely avoidable.
Middle-class families are being forced
to cancel coverage. People with cancer
are going uninsured. Small business
owners are being told to pay 34 percent
more, or $40,000 a year, or go without
care.
Republicans knew this would happen,
and they did it anyway. Now, we have
a chance to fix it. Democrats have a
clean, 3-year extension of these tax
credits on the floor today with bipartisan support.
Let’s make sure families get the help
they need. We must vote ‘‘yes’’ on this
bill.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Virginia
(Mr. BEYER).
Mr. BEYER. Mr. Speaker, every day,
more Americans are being hurt by the
Republican healthcare crisis. Tax credits that help working people afford
healthcare are vanishing, and Americans are watching billionaires get huge
tax cuts while the cost of living goes
up.
My Republican friends knew that refusing to renew these tax credits would
cause healthcare costs to skyrocket.
b 1630
Mr. Speaker, they decided to cancel
work for 2 months and simply ignored
the affordability problem. President
Trump even called it a hoax.
Democrats put forward this bill to
help the American people. Thanks to a
few sensible colleagues on the other
side, we were able to force a vote on it.
While Trump continues his self-dealing corruption and growing fondness
for attacking foreign countries, his administration is lawlessly killing and
lying about the death of an unarmed
woman in Minneapolis.
Republican leadership in Congress
had to be forced to even allow a vote on

January 8, 2026

this bill. Democrats here are focused
on a bill to lower costs for tens of millions of Americans and prevent many
from losing healthcare.
Mr. Speaker, we speak about life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. We
can’t be free, it is hard to be happy,
and lives are cut short with no
healthcare.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Illinois
(Mr. SCHNEIDER).
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to strongly and proudly support
Leader JEFFRIES’ discharge petition to
extend the ACA premium subsidies.
Just 8 days ago, President Trump and
the Republican Congress let the ACA
subsidies expire. Consequently, rather
than working on their new year’s resolution, 22 million hardworking Americans are forced to decide what sacrifices they need to make to afford
their insurance or whether they need
to sacrifice their families’ healthcare.
That is why today is a happy day. We
are one step closer to helping millions
of Americans afford healthcare. Getting to this day wasn’t easy, but Democrats stayed united and stood firm.
After fighting for months, we are
joined by Republican colleagues who
recognize that we have a responsibility
to help ensure Americans can afford to
provide healthcare for their families.
Mr. Speaker, it is our job to bring
down the cost for Americans. It is our
job to make life better for Americans.
It is our job to ensure that every family has access to affordable and quality
care. Let’s do our job. Let’s extend the
ACA credits. I urge my colleagues to
support the discharge petition.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from California (Mr. PANETTA).
Mr. PANETTA. Mr. Speaker, for the
past year we have been talking about
the damage done by not extending tax
credits for the Affordable Care Act.
Now this year, no longer is it theory. It
is fact. It is no longer talk. It is pain.
The fact is 20 million people are feeling the pain with their healthcare
costs going up. Millions more are losing health insurance. In my district,
tens of thousands are going to be paying more for healthcare.
Today, the fact is that we can do our
jobs and, rather than take healthcare
away, we can actually help fix it. I
commend all of my Democratic colleagues and, yes, even a few on the Republican side that signed the discharge
petition and will vote for this bill
today, a day in a week that has been
absolutely hectic.
Rather than constantly responding to
the craziness from this administration,
by voting ‘‘yes,’’ Congress can finally
focus on the substance of fixing
healthcare. The fact is this bill is a
short-term fix for extending tax credits. It is also a vehicle for our Senate

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

colleagues to use so that we in Congress can provide a long-term fix to
provide people with affordable and accessible healthcare.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from Nevada
(Mr. HORSFORD).
Mr. HORSFORD. Mr. Speaker, I rise
to speak about being on the right side
of history. I have taken the time to listen directly to the people of Nevada’s
Fourth District and all across my great
State. They have shared their stories,
their concerns, and their fears about
their healthcare.
I am talking about people like Richard and his wife who have worked to do
everything right. They budgeted. They
made sacrifices. Yet, today, they are
paying $1,200 a month for health insurance, up from $280 a month just a
month ago because vital healthcare
lifelines were allowed to expire.
Richard told me that they can identify places to make cuts in their lives,
but what worries him is what they will
be forced to give up. That includes
fewer groceries, fewer essentials, and
fewer visits with family.
Mr. Speaker, I get it. Some in this
Chamber want to make this about politics. The reality is this is life and
death. It is life and death for the 15
million Americans who are at risk of
losing healthcare, while Republicans
found the time and the money to give
tax cuts to billionaires but no time to
give relief to middle-class families.
Mr.
Speaker,
I
thank
Leader
JEFFRIES and Democrats. I call on my
Republican colleagues to join us, and
let’s be on the right side of history.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, may I inquire as to how much time is remaining.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from Massachusetts has 101⁄2
minutes remaining.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the distinguished gentleman
from New York (Mr. SUOZZI).
Mr. SUOZZI. Mr. Speaker, everyone
here knows that affordability and the
affordability of healthcare is the top
concern of Americans today. Failure to
extend these tax credits will cause
health insurance premiums to skyrocket all across our land.
In my district, Mr. Speaker, if you
utilize the premium tax credits, a family of four making $130,000 has to pay
81⁄2 percent of their income for health
insurance premiums, or about $10,000 or
$11,000 a year. If we refuse to act, their
bill will go to $30,000 a year, or $1,500
more per month. That is crazy. They
won’t even buy their insurance. As a
result, it will reduce the risk pool,
which will cause everyone’s premiums
in our country to go up.
That is why for months the Problem
Solvers Caucus has been working
across the aisle, both here in the House
and the Senate, to find bipartisan solutions to this very real affordability crisis.
Mr. Speaker, let’s deliver a huge victory for the American people. Let’s

overcome the partisan toxicity of
Washington, D.C. Let’s get Democrats
and Republicans, Members of the House
and the Senate, to work together to
serve the needs of the American people.
I urge all of my colleagues to vote
‘‘yes.’’
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from the
Virgin Islands (Ms. PLASKETT).
Ms. PLASKETT. Mr. Speaker, I rise
in defense of affordable healthcare for
all Americans, even though my own
constituents are not afforded the same
benefits as Americans living in the 50
States. We are not part of the exchange. We have no SSI. We have caps
on Medicaid in jurisdictions, unlike
elsewhere.
If my colleagues need a clear illustration of what happens when Affordable Care Act benefits are taken away,
look to the Virgin Islands and Puerto
Rico, which are excluded from those.
Our healthcare system is in crisis. Hospitals operate under Medicare formulas
from the 1980s with chronic shortages
of supplies, medication, equipment,
and staff.
Patients bring sheets and diapers to
the hospital. Doctors pool their money
to pay vendors. Hospital funding gaps
exceed $34 million. More than 3,000 people have lost Medicaid. Puerto Rico’s
capped Medicaid funding forced reliance on borrowing and debt, which contributed to their 2017 bankruptcy.
The failure to extend enhanced premium
tax
credits
has
doubled
healthcare costs for 20 million Americans. My colleagues don’t want the
healthcare system we have. Pass this
legislation.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the distinguished gentleman
from Virginia (Mr. SCOTT), the ranking
member of the Committee on Education and Workforce.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I rise in support of the bill to extend
the Affordable Care Act’s enhanced
premium tax credits through a clean, 3year extension.
Last year, the Republicans blocked
the extension of these credits in the
big, ugly bill. With the expiration of
the tax credits last month, the health
premium costs have skyrocketed, causing millions to lose their coverage.
When more people lose coverage,
costs go up for everyone. Uninsured patients often delay seeing a doctor and
end up needing more costly care at the
emergency room. When there are more
uninsured, hospitals, especially in
rural areas, face financial hardships
and may be forced to close. In other
words, those unpaid bills do not disappear. They are shifted onto everybody else, and everyone suffers.
Today, Congress can step in to address the sharp premium increases and
provide stability for working families
across the country. I urge my colleagues to support this bill and to support affordable healthcare.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from California (Mr. GOMEZ).

H225

Mr. GOMEZ. Mr. Speaker, it is about
damned time that this bill is actually
going to get a vote. Here is why. The
Republicans in the summer passed
their One Big Beautiful Bill Act, which
I am glad they are not trying to
rebrand anymore. It cut Medicaid by
almost $1 trillion. It took away food
stamps. Then they refused to extend
the ACA subsidies that would help ACA
tax credits, that would help people in
their own States.
That is what the Democrat majority
next year is going to do. We will continue fighting for our own people
throughout the country. It doesn’t
matter if a constituent is in a red
State or a blue State, if someone is
hurting because of the Republican majority this year. Donald Trump has
taken away healthcare. He has taken
away food stamps. He has taken away
opportunities. We are going to make
sure that we reverse all that.
The first step is these ACA tax credits because it is going to help working
families. The party in the majority
now said they were going to lower the
cost of living, but they failed. Now we
are going to step up.
b 1640
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from Illinois (Ms. UNDERWOOD).
Ms. UNDERWOOD. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today in support of my bill to extend the Affordable Care Act tax credits and to put an end to the Republican
healthcare crisis.
This Republican majority wasted all
of 2025 by refusing to extend the tax
credits in time to prevent the premium
hikes that families across the country
are facing right now. Costs are outrageous. House Democrats had to use a
discharge petition to force them to do
the right thing and finally hold this
vote.
We have heard a lot of confusing lies
from the majority today. Mr. Speaker,
the truth is that the ACA tax credits
from my legislation work. They are incredibly popular, yet Republicans
chose to let them expire on December
31.
Today, we have a chance to fix their
mistake, lower costs, and protect care
for millions of Americans. I urge a
‘‘yes’’ vote.
I thank Leader JEFFRIES, Mr. NEAL,
Speaker PELOSI, and Brandon Casey for
working with me on this.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from Oregon (Ms. SALINAS).
Ms. SALINAS. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to urge my colleagues to pass
this legislation to prevent families’
healthcare costs from skyrocketing.
I will share just a few messages from
my hardworking constituents who will
be impacted.
Kelly from Salem wrote: ‘‘My policy
is going to increase from $40 to $191. I
will have no wiggle room in my budget,
no room for emergencies.’’

H226

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Rachel from Amity says that her
plan will increase from $511 to $1,328
per month. She wrote: ‘‘We will probably choose to only insure our child.
We cannot afford 25 percent of our income going to health insurance.’’
Janice from Salem said that her
monthly costs will go from $465 to
$1,100. ‘‘I will go without health insurance if I can’t bring it way down to no
more than $500 a month. I am 5 years
away from retirement.’’
Mr. Speaker, these are just three stories from about 16,000 in my district,
and there are millions just like these
across our country. Our constituents
are counting on this body to lower
their costs and save their healthcare.
Mr. Speaker, I urge an ‘‘aye’’ vote.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield 30
seconds to the gentleman from Illinois
(Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI).
Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI. Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of extension of the
ACA tax credits.
I met Shadene Butchart in Chicago.
She has ALS. Since the ACA tax credits have expired, her health insurance
premium consumes the entirety of her
husband’s Social Security check. She
will not be able to afford any health insurance to cover this incredibly distressing disease.
I rise strongly in support, and I urge
my colleagues to support it, as well.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I have no
further speakers, and I am prepared to
close.
May I inquire as to how much time is
remaining.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from Massachusetts has 4 minutes remaining.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I am prepared to close, and I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, it is too bad that we
had to play this out to the anxiety and
consternation of the American people.
Think of what this might be like if you
didn’t know a month ago whether or
not your children were going to have
health insurance. Think of the anguish
that you might feel proceeding into the
holidays while not knowing whether or
not that child would be able to complete the doctor’s appointment that
you had made for them because you
didn’t have health insurance.
I didn’t hear the other side complaining about keeping 26-year-olds on
their parents’ health insurance. How
about the idea that, in the ACA, we
were able to abolish preexisting conditions being routinely used to deny the
opportunity to access even primary
care for millions and millions of Americans.
Mr. Speaker, I call attention to this
because I have watched over these
years how the ACA has not only become more popular, but the American
people have come to expect the benefits of the ACA.

This argument for those of us who
were here and participated at the time
was not really complex at all. The argument was that we would proceed on
the basis of the notion of universal access and that you wouldn’t have to
worry that if you went to the emergency room, you somehow might be
turned away because you had not been
able to pay another bill.
We don’t get a chance on this Earth
to predict when we are going to get
sick. Those are the basic actuarial realities of what insurance is about. By
way of example, we don’t get to buy
homeowners’ insurance after the house
has burned down. We don’t get to buy
life insurance after we die.
The idea of what we did here was to
spread the notion of risk, an entirely
reasonable consequence, authored by
former President Obama and, by the
way, the steadfast determination at
the time of Speaker PELOSI.
This was negotiated across the board
with all members of the healthcare system, and we came up with a reasonable
solution that we continue to build
upon.
Mr. Speaker, I will point out a couple
of pretty important statistics: 4 years
straight of record enrollment in the Affordable Care Act, and 24.3 million
Americans have now signed up.
That is what we had in mind. When
you look back at these enhanced premium tax credits, we keep hearing the
other side say that there are billionaires and millionaires who are driving
the benefit. JCT has said that nobody
over $500,000 is getting this benefit. We
are open to these conversations as we
go forward, as well. Yet, only 38 percent of their tax cuts inure to the benefit of people at the lower end of the
economic spectrum.
By ending these enhanced tax credits, we will stop the Republican assault
on the ACA. They have repeatedly said
that they want to work with us, but
there has been no effort on the Republican side to work with us on expanding and extending these tax credits.
There has been no concerted effort
from our Republican colleagues to really put on a piece of legislation, a tax
bill, that stands up under the magnifying glass of critical analysis. It is
patchwork. It is announced every time
we get near some cliff in the debate
that somehow they have a healthcare
plan. We haven’t seen it yet.
Mr. Speaker, I am going to close by
saying the same words that I opened
with: This is a most significant day.
This is a happy day for the American
people.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, I will remind the body
that the reason why these enhanced
subsidies are expiring is because the
Democrats are the only ones in this
Chamber who voted for them to expire
on December 31. Apparently, they regret that vote because they focused

January 8, 2026

most of their dollars on making permanent environmental tax policy in the
Green New Deal.
Mr. Speaker, they are the only ones
who have voted to take away these
subsidies. It is laughable, Mr. Speaker,
when you hear Members on the other
side say that the Republicans created
this healthcare crisis.
Guess what. It was the Democrats
who wrote the Affordable Care Act that
is being debated on the floor right now.
They are upset because, as of December
31, it reverted back to the Affordable
Care Act, which they have championed,
what they passed, not Republicans,
Democrats.
Mr. Speaker, the healthcare crisis is
clearly created by the Democrats.
We have highlighted the fraud and
waste within the exchanges. More than
half of the people on the exchanges did
not even file one medical claim last
year, but those insurance companies
were being subsidized.
b 1650
I want to remind the American people that not $1 goes to them. It all goes
to the big health insurance companies
that have been doing very well, while
premiums for every single American
have been rising for the last decade and
a half.
Mr. Speaker, with that, I urge this
body to vote ‘‘no.’’
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 780,
the previous question is ordered on the
bill.
The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on passage of the bill.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 230, nays
196, not voting 5, as follows:
[Roll No. 11]
YEAS—230
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (LA)

Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)

Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fitzpatrick
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois

January 8, 2026
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Hurd (CO)
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Joyce (OH)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
LaLota
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren

Lynch
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Miller (OH)
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Nunn (IA)
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
DesJarlais

Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger

H227

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Valadao
Van Orden
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)
Wittman

NAYS—196
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (PA)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
Langworthy
Latta
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell

McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger

Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube

Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—5
Baird
Hunt

McCaul
Murphy

Rutherford

b 1713
Messrs. CRAWFORD and SCOTT
FRANKLIN of Florida changed their
vote from ‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

PERMISSION FOR MEMBER TO BE
CONSIDERED AS FIRST SPONSOR
OF H.R. 1600, H.R. 1601, AND H.R.
670
Mr. WALKINSHAW. Mr. Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that I may
hereafter be considered as the first
sponsor of H.R. 1600, the Crimea Annexation Non-Recognition Act; H.R. 1601,
the Defending Ukraine’s Territorial Integrity Act; and H.R. 670, the Lady Liberty Act, bills originally introduced by
Representative Connolly of Virginia,
for the purposes of adding cosponsors
and requesting reprintings pursuant to
clause 7 of rule XII.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Virginia?
There was no objection.
f

MOMENT OF SILENCE FOR CONGRESSMAN RICHARD T. ‘‘DICK’’
SCHULZE
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, we rise today in memory
of Congressman Richard T. ‘‘Dick’’
Schulze, who died on December 23 at
the age of 96.
Congressman Schulze represented the
Philadelphia suburbs from 1975 to 1993
in the people’s House. He was the driving force behind designating historic
Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, a national
park.
Dick was the ranking member of the
House Ways and Means Committee and
twice chaired the Republican Study
Committee. He also served as chairman
of the National Prayer Breakfast.

President Ronald Reagan appointed
Congressman Schulze to the Presidential Advisory Committee on Federalism, an honor that Dick deeply valued.
Dick’s lifelong interest in conservation and wildlife issues led him to
found the Congressional Sportsmen’s
Caucus and Foundation in 1989. President George H.W. Bush would later appoint him to serve on the National
Fish and Wildlife Board.
Mr. Speaker, for 18 distinguished
years, Congressman Schulze served in
the House of Representatives. He was
known for being a fair-minded, commonsense legislator who worked with
Members on both sides of the aisle.
Funeral services will take place on
Saturday in Malvern, Pennsylvania.
Our thoughts are with his wife of 33
years, Nancy, his four children, and all
of his family.
May God bless Congressman Dick
Schulze.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair would ask all Members and those
in the gallery to rise for a moment of
silence.
f

b 1720
NATIONAL BLOOD DONOR MONTH
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize
January as National Blood Donor
Month.
Since its inception in 1970, National
Blood Donor Month recognizes the millions of Americans who help save lives
by donating blood. Statistics show that
every two seconds, someone in this
country needs blood.
On average, one in seven hospital patients need blood, and approximately
29,000 units of red blood cells are needed every day in the United States.
Over the last 50 years, public awareness for blood donation has increased.
Now approximately 13.6 million volunteers donate blood annually.
In the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, more than 5,000 blood drives
were held in 2025, according to the Red
Cross. I am encouraged to see constituents ready to roll up their sleeves and
help those in need. In fact, one of the
most challenging times of the year to
collect blood donations is in the winter
months.
Mr. Speaker, I hope all Americans
will take the time to consider donating
blood this month. It is important to
know that one blood donation can save
lives.
f

SOCIAL SECURITY CUSTOMER
SERVICE
(Mr. SUBRAMANYAM asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)

H228

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker,
74 million Americans depend on Social
Security, but because of the Trump administration’s actions, customer service has completely collapsed. The agency faces 6 million backlogged cases, 12
million delayed field-office transactions, and some of the worst wait
times in history.
Why is this happening? It is because
the Trump administration pushed out
7,000 Social Security employees. That
is 12 percent of their workforce. Offices
were reorganized overnight, hiring was
frozen, and thousands of workers were
reassigned.
This has real-life consequences for
my constituents, like a 75-year-old
stroke victim who hasn’t received his
check for months because he can’t
drive or use a computer, or an immigrant who may lose his job because a
name correction appointment is weeks
away, or the retiree who waited hours
just to schedule an appointment on the
phone.
Social Security is not a political experiment. It is a promise. The American people paid into the system and
earned these benefits. They shouldn’t
have to fight their own government to
receive them.
f

REMOVAL OF NAME OF MEMBER
AS COSPONSOR OF H.R. 6646
Ms. JAYAPAL. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent to remove the gentleman from Texas (Mr. GOLDMAN) as
cosponsor of H.R. 6646.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
BEGICH). Is there objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Washington?
There was no objection.
f

HONORING SONNY MORRIS ON HIS
RETIREMENT
(Mr. CARTER of Georgia asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor Sonny Morris,
a dedicated public servant who is retiring after 40 years on the Winder City
Council.
First elected in 1985 and taking office
in January of 1986, Councilman Morris
has spent four decades serving the people of Winder, Georgia, with consistency, humility, and a deep commitment to his community.
Through periods of growth and
change, he has remained a steady voice
for residents and a trusted leader in
local government. Councilman Morris
has approached public service with a
clear focus on doing what is right for
his city.
His long tenure reflects not only the
confidence placed in him by voters but
also his willingness to listen, to collaborate, and to show up year after
year for the people he represents.
Serving as grand marshal of the 2025
Winder Christmas Parade was a fitting

way for the community to say thank
you. I was honored to participate in
that parade and to meet Mr. Morris.
Winder is stronger because of Sonny
Morris, and his legacy of service will be
felt for years to come.
f

DELAYED WILDFIRE RESPONSE
EFFORTS
(Ms. BYNUM asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. BYNUM. Mr. Speaker, early last
year, the Flat fire burned over 23,000
acres of land in central Oregon, destroying homes and forcing thousands
of people to evacuate.
Our historic fire crews were eventually able to contain the fire, but they
were unnecessarily delayed because
someone was flying a drone in the area,
and it punctured a hole in the plane.
Our historic fire crews cannot afford
this delay. It is not just happening in
Oregon. There has been an increase in
drones interfering with fire responses
across the country. We know that a
quick response is critical to containing
wildfire and saving homes and lives.
That is why I introduced the Wildfire
Aerial Response Safety Act along with
Congressmen
Neguse,
Crane,
and
Ciscomani.
As Representatives from States with
dangerous wildfire seasons, we understand how important it is to address
this issue and that it should not be partisan. I am calling on the House to
take up our bill to prevent unnecessary
delays to wildfire response efforts.
f

CONGRATULATING MONTANA
STATE UNIVERSITY BOBCATS
(Mr. DOWNING asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DOWNING. Mr. Speaker, I have
risen before the House several times to
recognize the historic rivalry between
the Montana State University Bobcats
and
the
University
of
Montana
Grizzlies, but today I rise with enormous pride to honor the Montana State
University Bobcats for their historic
FCS National Championship victory in
Nashville.
The Cats left it all on the field. They
played with grit, heart, and determination, carrying the weight of a State
that believed in them. From blocked
kicks and dramatic momentum swings
to a fourth-quarter comeback and the
first overtime finish in FCS title game
history, this contest delivered everything that makes college football unforgettable.
This win marked Montana State’s
first national championship in 41 years,
ending a drought that stretched back
to 1984. With Montana programs reaching the championship stage in four of
the last five seasons, it was only fitting
that the trophy finally returned to the
home of the Treasure State.

January 8, 2026

The young men in blue and gold
made Montana proud. Their victory belongs not only to this university but to
an entire State.
Mr. President, if you are watching,
we would love to see them in the White
House. Go, Cats, go.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to direct their remarks to the Chair.
f

REPORTING GANG ACTIVITY
(Ms. KAPTUR asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to reintroduce the bipartisan
Gang Activity Reporting Act with the
gentlewoman from Iowa (Mrs. HINSON),
my fellow appropriator.
This legislation has an urgent purpose: to give law enforcement the accurate, comprehensive data they need to
combat gang violence and to keep our
communities safe.
From 2021 to 2024, law enforcement
agencies reported more than 69,000 incidents of gang activity nationwide. Over
half involved violent crime. Yet, today,
Federal gang data remains fragmented,
inconsistent, and incomplete.
That gap puts officers at risk and
leaves communities, especially in rural
America, without the tools needed to
respond effectively. Our bill would require the Attorney General to submit
an annual report to Congress on gang
activity investigations and prosecutions.
While recent FBI data show violent
crime trending downward, we know
progress does not mean the work is all
done. This legislation strengthens public safety, supports law enforcement,
and helps protect families from Ohio to
Iowa, and coast to coast.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
please support this critical Gang Activity Reporting Act.
f

b 1730
PRAYING FOR ZARIEA PATRICK
OF HARRISON HIGH SCHOOL
(Mr. CRANK asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. CRANK. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to highlight the resilience of
Harrison High School senior Zariea
Patrick.
In 2023, during Zariea’s sophomore
year, she and her Harrison classmates
were playing basketball when Zariea
took a hard elbow to the side of her
head as she went for a layup, leaving
her with a concussion.
As her symptoms worsened, an MRI
at the hospital confirmed a tumor
lodged in the right side of Zariea’s
brain. What followed were regular trips
to the hospital for chemotherapy,
which took a terrible toll on her physical well-being.

January 8, 2026

H229

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

In the spring of 2024, they believed
that the tumor showed improvement.
Unfortunately, she recently learned
that she would have to start chemotherapy all over again. Despite this,
her perseverance and her bright smile
continue to light up the entire community.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you join me
in praying for Zariea during her battle
with this tumor.
f

DELIVERING ON COMMITMENTS TO
OREGON’S
THIRD
CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT
(Ms. DEXTER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. DEXTER. Mr. Speaker, in my
first year in Congress, I made a simple
commitment to my district: to listen
and to get things done.
This week, I am proud to share that
I am delivering on that commitment. I
secured over $6 million in Community
Project Funding for seven transformative community-led initiatives
across the district in Portland, Gresham, Sandy, and Multnomah County.
These investments will help prevent
youth violence, modernize emergency
response systems, strengthen wastewater infrastructure, expand behavioral healthcare, and protect the clean
water our communities depend on.
Each project came directly from
local leaders working to solve urgent
issues on the ground, and I fought to
make sure every single one received
funding.
This is what government should be:
responsive, collaborative, and focused
on our people delivering results for
them and our families.
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of this
progress, and I am just getting started
for the people of Oregon’s Third.
f

FRAUD IN MINNESOTA
(Mr. FINE asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. FINE. Mr. Speaker, I met with a
lot of angry constituents over the last
2 weeks. They are angry about how expensive America has become. They are
angry, in large part, because they realize one simple truth: The Somali pirates are not in the Horn of Africa anymore. They are right here in our country, and their captain is Tim Walz.
While my constituents suffer today,
81 percent of Somali families are on
welfare. Nine billion dollars was stolen
from child nutrition, housing, and autism services in Minnesota, largely
through Feeding Our Future, a program that theoretically opened more
than 250 sites and was supposed to be
feeding 91 million meals. It was not
doing that.
There was a Medicaid program, the
Early Intensive Developmental and Behavioral Intervention program, where

the Federal Government was paying 64
percent and fake autism treatment
firms were created.
Our constituents are suffering. Before we ask them to continue to suffer,
we owe it to them to root out everyone
who was involved in this fraud and hold
everyone accountable, and that is exactly what I intend to do.
f

HONORING THE MEMORY OF BILL
HARRIS
(Ms. DELAURO asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the memory of one of
our Nation’s most effective and determined advocates for children and families: the singular Bill Harris, who dedicated his life to this cause.
From founding KidsPac, a political
action group dedicated to promoting
public investments for children, to enacting the legislation that created The
National Child Traumatic Stress Network in 2000, funded at $10 million that
has now grown to being a nearly $100
million initiative, Bill was a passionate leader, a persuasive advocate,
and he did not suffer fools.
He was never satisfied with symbolic
action or minor gestures. He pushed for
systemic change and substantive legislation. Together, we were able to expand the child tax credit in 2003 to
cover more low-income families.
The Wall Street Journal called these
families ‘‘the lucky duckies,’’ and in
that spirit, Bill gifted me a set of rubber duckies that remain in my office
today.
Our proudest achievement—and I say
ours because it was a team effort—was
the expanded monthly child tax credit
that was signed into law in 2021 as part
of the American Rescue Plan.
In 2021, child poverty was nearly cut
in half, hunger by a quarter, and it provided economic security to middleclass and working families.
While many may never have heard of
Bill Harris, it was his tenacity and his
doing, and we will secure its future in
his name. We have much to do. We will
do it with his spirit.
f

RURAL HEALTH
TRANSFORMATION PROGRAM
(Mr. SHREVE asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. SHREVE. Mr. Speaker, a simple
principle should guide us: where we live
should not determine the quality of
healthcare that we can get, but for too
many Hoosiers, especially in our rural
communities, this isn’t the reality.
That is why the Working Families
Tax Cut Act matters. Through the new
Rural Health Transformation Program,
Indiana is receiving $207 million in
first-year funding, the first of 5 years
of
support,
to
strengthen
rural
healthcare statewide.

This funding will support hospitals
and strengthen emergency care for
Hoosiers who can get that care close to
home. For communities from Connersville to Richmond and across Rush,
Shelby, and Henry Counties, this
means quality care closer, shorter
drives for appointments, faster response times when minutes count, especially for our seniors, veterans, and
working families.
This is the right kind of investment,
helping our rural communities stay
healthy without raising taxes, without
growing bureaucracy, and without
leaving Hoosiers behind.
f

CHAMPION OF THE WEEK: CONRAD
PIERO
(Mrs. SYKES asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Mrs. SYKES. Mr. Speaker, today, I
rise to recognize Conrad Piero as
Ohio’s 13th Congressional District
Champion of the Week.
On December 18, Conrad, a loss prevention specialist at a Walmart in Canton, Ohio, was working in the store
when a man being held for allegedly
shoplifting pulled a gun on a Canton
police officer who was present and attempting to question and detain the
suspect.
The man pointed the gun at the officer and pulled the trigger, but thankfully, the weapon malfunctioned and
did not discharge. In a remarkable act
of
bravery,
Conrad
immediately
stepped in to pull the gun away from
the suspect as he tried to point and
shoot at the officer for a second time.
Both the Canton Police Department
and Walmart said that Conrad went
above and beyond in his service to our
community, and I could not agree
more.
What could have been a terrible and
tragic situation went without anyone
being harmed through his remarkable
act of courage. It is average citizens
doing remarkable things just like this
that help make our community the
birthplace of champions. Conrad is certainly a champion in his own right, and
he has made Canton and Ohio’s 13th
Congressional District proud.
Mr. Speaker, I extend my sincere
gratitude to Conrad Piero for his heroic actions and congratulate him on
being named champion of the week.
f

CALIFORNIA IS THE MOST
POPULAR STATE TO LEAVE
(Mr. KILEY of California asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, today, the Governor of my State,
Gavin Newsom, gave his state of the
State address in which he declared that
California leads the Nation. Now, the
Governor isn’t wrong. As the residents
of our State know all too well, California does lead the Nation.

H230

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

California leads the Nation in fraud.
California leads the Nation in unemployment. California leads the Nation
in homelessness. California leads the
Nation in poverty. California leads the
Nation in illiteracy. California leads
the Nation in gas prices. California
leads the Nation in electricity prices.
California leads the Nation in housing
prices. California leads the Nation in
debt and deficits. Just this week, we
learned that for the sixth straight
year, California leads the Nation in
outbound U-Haul rentals. The greatest
State in the country has become the
most popular State to leave.
That, Mr. Speaker, is the true state
of our State during this Governor’s
tenure.
f

b 1740
HONORING GOVERNOR JIM HUNT
(Ms. ROSS asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. ROSS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor former Governor Jim Hunt, a
giant in North Carolina history who
sadly passed last month. Governor
Hunt leaves behind an extraordinary
legacy as a fighter for education, economic development, equality, innovation, and so much more. He was the engine for positive progress in our State.
Hunt was known nationally as the
Education Governor. He worked relentlessly to ensure that every North Carolinian had access to high-quality and
public education and every teacher
earned a decent salary.
Governor Hunt was a visionary who
pushed the economy in North Carolina
into the modern era, propelling us from
economic stagnation to global leadership in technology and innovation.
Personally, he was a mentor to me. I
will carry his legacy with me forever.
North Carolina is a better place because of Jim Hunt.
f

HONORING PAM MOLL
(Mrs. FEDORCHAK asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
her remarks.)
Mrs. FEDORCHAK. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to honor a valued member of
my team, Pam Moll, who retired last
week after an extraordinary career
serving North Dakotans. Pam served as
my constituent services director. During my predecessor, Kelly Armstrong’s
tenure, she had the same role.
For 7 years, she has been a steady
and trusted presence for veterans seeking answers, seniors seeking help, and
families simply trying to be heard.
Pam is the kind of public servant most
Americans never see but whose work
touches countless lives.
She understood that behind every
case file and every form is a real person, and she never lost sight of that.
Her legacy is not just measured in

years of service but in the countless
lives she helped improve.
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of North Dakota, I thank Pam and wish her the
very best in this next chapter.
f

REMOVING PFAS FROM OUR
ENVIRONMENT
(Ms. STEVENS asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. STEVENS. Mr. Speaker, PFAS
are everywhere, and they are endangering Michiganders’ lives. PFAS, as
we know, are toxic forever chemicals
that persist in the environment, contaminate the water we drink, and accumulate in the body. Sadly, Michigan is
ground zero for PFAS pollution.
I am proud to have worked across the
aisle to deliver results for Metro Detroit and Michigan in this regard, but
we must do more. That is why today I
am introducing the PROTECT Act. It
is bipartisan legislation that takes urgently needed steps to remove PFAS
from our environment and prevent future contamination in the air we
breathe.
By listing PFAS as hazardous air pollutants, this bill sets the foundation
for strong, science-based standards
that will reduce emissions. The PROTECT Act also holds major polluters
responsible for the cleanup of these
poisons, delivering real transparency
and accountability to affected communities.
Mr. Speaker, I thank my bipartisan
cosponsors from Michigan and across
the country for joining me in this important effort. I urge my colleagues to
support this bill.
f

FIXING THE IMMIGRATION CRISIS
(Mr. GROTHMAN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. GROTHMAN. Mr. Speaker, I attended a hearing today in the Judiciary Committee. There was some confusion in the committee about what we
should be doing to enforce our immigration laws and who is at fault for the
mess we have in Minneapolis.
There are some people who are apparently under the impression we should
only enforce our immigration laws if
the people who came here illegally
commit another crime. If we think
about it for 2 seconds, that is completely ridiculous.
Right now, every year in this country, about 850,000 new citizens are naturalized citizens. When I was a child,
that was under 200,000. That is without
taking into account people who become
citizens because of birthright citizenship, which is not even intended under
our Constitution.
We must not fall for the idea that all
a person has to do is sneak across the
border and hang around here and not
commit a felony and, therefore, they
come in here.

January 8, 2026

I feel so sorry for our great President
Trump. He was left with such a mess
when Joe Biden let in 10 million people,
and he is now honor bound to remove
them from this country. That is why
we have a mess in Minneapolis.
f

CELEBRATING SOUTH OAK CLIFF
HIGH SCHOOL AND DESOTO HIGH
SCHOOL
(Ms. CROCKETT asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. CROCKETT. Mr. Speaker, today
I rise with immense pride to celebrate
two exceptional football teams from
Texas’ very own 30th Congressional
District for their championship wins
this season. They are South Oak Cliff
High School and DeSoto High School.
This win comes as no surprise to
those of us who call the district home.
These young men showed up, put in the
work, and, once again, proved that if
we are looking for champions, all eyes
should be on Texas–30.
I am proud of each of these students’
commitment, as well as every faculty
member and parent who supported
them along the way. Their dedication,
commitment, and passion made these
wins possible.
I anticipate celebrating the many
successes yet to come. Celebrate big,
keep striving for greatness, and continue standing out.
Go Bears and go Eagles.
Mr. Speaker, I will not yield back. I
will say something real quick about
this ICE situation.
The reason we have a mess as it relates to ICE has nothing to do with
President Biden. We need to accept responsibility for what is going on, and it
is the mess of this administration.
f

HOLDING ICE ACCOUNTABLE
(Mr. CASTEN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. CASTEN. Mr. Speaker, yesterday
ICE murdered an American citizen.
Renee Good was a wife and a mother
who has now become ICE’s latest victim. To those at DHS and in this
Chamber who have created and rewarded a culture of murder, I ask the
same question that God asked Cain:
What have you done? You have slain
your sister who gave you no offense.
The voice of her innocent blood cries
out from the ground where it was
spilled, where you try to cover and
hide. But we saw what was done.
What kind of monster shoots an unarmed, fleeing woman in the head?
What kind of monster watches the
video of that crime and chooses to lie
to the American people as they defend
the murderer and defame the victim?
How do we prevent ourselves from descending to their monstrous depths?
Mr. Speaker, I will tell my colleagues
how. We prosecute the murderer with

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

the due process he denied Renee and
demand accountability up the entire
chain of command. Our job is not to
bear their sins. Our job is to make sure
this never ever happens again.
f

b 1750
RECOGNIZING GEORGE HINCKLEY
(Mr. VINDMAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. VINDMAN. Mr. Speaker, it is my
honor to recognize George Hinckley on
his work in founding Smart Community STEM Camp.
This camp is a youth program that
teaches kids coding and how to fly and
operate drones, provides mentorship,
and brings communities together.
As camp director, George encourages
young Virginians who are interested in
pursuing technology-based careers as
their pathway to success.
George’s dedication to STEM education is contributing to the future of
learning and exposes students to diverse opportunities.
Mr. Speaker, George’s leadership and
unwavering commitment to this program are truly deserving of this recognition. I am honored to congratulate
him on this well-earned moment and
recognize him as this week’s Constituent of the Week.
I congratulate and thank George for
all that he does for our students.
f

ENOUGH IS ENOUGH
(Ms. STANSBURY asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
her remarks.)
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today on the House floor with a heavy
heart for the family and the community of Renee Nicole Good.
My heart is heavy and not just because of the unabashed and violent
killing that happened last night by an
ICE agent in Minneapolis, but because
I am also sad for our country, to see
the Vice President of the United States
and officials impugn a young woman
who leaves behind her community and
an orphaned child.
This is not our country. Shame on
you. To those of you who are continuing to provide cover for this lawless, unconstitutional, abusive, and
violent administration, shame on you.
I will be joining to file Articles of
Impeachment against Secretary Noem.
Enough is enough.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to direct their remarks to the Chair.
f

IN REMEMBRANCE OF THE
HONORABLE DOUG LAMALFA
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. MOORE of
Utah was recognized for 60 minutes as
the designee of the majority leader.)

GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days in
which to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material
on the topic of this Special Order.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Utah?
There was no objection.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
am saddened and honored at the same
time to be able to host, alongside my
California colleagues, a special hour
dedicated to the memory of Congressman Doug LaMalfa from California.
As I looked at some of my notes here
of the amazing things that he had accomplished and who he was, I realized
that we are going to hear that over the
next hour.
The thing that my team and I were
reflecting on earlier today, and all I
wanted to share as we kick off this memorial to an amazing man, was that, as
vice chair, I get to, every week, host an
evening of floor time for my colleagues
on a myriad of topics. Doug LaMalfa
was here every single time. Every time
we needed him to be here, he was here,
but he was here whether we asked him
or not. Most times, he was the only
one.
Yet tonight, when I asked my colleagues if they wanted to share a message on Doug, the reverse: It is a
packed house.
That is all I wanted to share, to
think about the legacy that he has left
and the importance that he has to so
many of our colleagues. He was always
here for me, and we are all here today
for his family. They are hopefully able
to take some comfort and solace in his
memory as we share this.
We have a lot of folks who want to
share a message, and we are going to
kick it right off. I am just going to go
around the room and start calling on
people as we move forward.
We are going to first hear, of course,
from the California delegation.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from California (Mr. CALVERT).
Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Speaker, the sudden passing of our close friend and colleague, Doug LaMalfa, has caused both
shock and sadness throughout the entire House of Representatives. We lost
a friend and a colleague. His northern
Californian constituents lost their tireless advocate in the House.
Most tragically, his family lost a
husband, a father, and a grandfather.
Doug was a proud family man. He
and his wife, Jill, have four beautiful
children. He just recently became a
grandfather.
Doug was a fourth-generation rice
farmer and a contributor to our State’s
important role of producing the food
that sustains America. His experience
as a farmer provided the foundation for
his future as a legislator, both in Sacramento and here in Washington, D.C.
Mr. Speaker, it comes as no surprise
that in 2024, Doug was unanimously

H231

elected to serve as the chairman of the
Congressional Western Caucus, one of
the largest congressional membership
groups on Capitol Hill, focusing on
rural policy and issues that affect the
West and beyond.
Doug left an indelible mark on this
institution and the people whom he got
to know along the way. For those who
knew him, they understood his unique
love of nicknames, movie quotes, and
NASCAR. They understood his dislike
of food waste, smartphones, and ketchup on hot dogs.
Doug’s sense of humor, collegial
manner, and expertise will be sorely
missed. While he is no longer with us,
Doug’s significant contributions to agricultural and rural policies will endure long after his passing.
I will very much miss my friend and
my colleague. My thoughts and prayers
are with his wife, Jill; the entire
LaMalfa family; his friends; and his
staff.
God bless you, Doug.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman for his remarks.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from California (Mr. MCCLINTOCK), a
distinguished colleague and very close
friend of Mr. LaMalfa.
Mr. MCCLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, the
Romans had a saying: ‘‘Time is fleeting, remember death’’; ‘‘Tempus fugit,
memento mori.’’ It reminds us that life
is not a gift. It is just a loan, and when
it comes due, all that matters is what
we have given to others.
Doug LaMalfa was the kindest and
most sincere person I have encountered
in more than 40 years of public service.
He passionately defended the working
men and women of the rural community where he was born and raised and
grew up, but he always did it with a
good-natured smile and a quiet, respectful manner.
Just 3 weeks ago, on December 15, I
took my seat on an early Washingtonbound flight from Sacramento, about
eight rows behind Doug.
When I looked up, he was standing
there in the aisle with an outstretched
hand. He leaned over, and he quietly
said to me: TOM, I know this is a hard
day for you, and I want you to know
that my prayers are with you and Lori.
You see, that was the fourth anniversary of my dear wife Lori’s death, and
how he knew that, remembered it, and
offered such warm comfort on such a
cold morning tells you what a truly
caring and wonderful man he was. And
now he is gone, for time is fleeting.
Yet, death can’t take the kindnesses
and memories that he gave us all, or
the wisdom, common sense, and
achievements that he gave our country. Our Nation, our State, and our
community have all suffered an irreplaceable loss, and rural America has
lost its most tireless and effective advocate. Most of all, we have lost a good
man, a very good man.
To his family, I can only say that
you are not alone in your grief. Your
community and your country grieve
with you.

H232

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from California
(Mr. VALADAO).
Mr. VALADAO. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor my dear friend, fellow
farmer, and colleague, Congressman
Doug LaMalfa.
I have known Doug for about 16
years, going back to our time together
in the State legislature. From day one,
his commitment to the people of northern California, especially those in agricultural communities, was clear.
In Congress, Doug was one of the
fiercest advocates for wildfire mitigation, disaster recovery, California
water issues, and farmers and ranchers
who keep this country fed.
As chairman of the Western Caucus,
he fought tirelessly for domestic energy production, public land access,
and rural communities that way too
often get overlooked.
Beyond his lasting legacy as a public
official, Doug was my friend. We served
together in the State legislature, and
one year, on my birthday, he stopped
by my office, not with a card but with
a bag of rice and just a little Post-it
Note that said: Happy birthday.
I brought that bag home, gave it to
my mom, and she made Portuguese
rice pudding for him, and I brought it
back. The next week, he brought me
another bag of rice, and still to this
day brought up that he wanted more.
Doug just had one of those senses of
humor that you loved.
Doug was a friend to all and someone
you could always count on for leadership, loyalty, and just a good laugh. He
will be deeply missed in the Halls of
Congress.
My prayers are with his wife, Jill, his
children, and all of his family and
loved ones during this incredibly difficult time.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker,
this is going to be a special hour,
thanks to the gentleman from California.
Mr. Speaker, I yield time to the gentlewoman from California (Mrs. KIM).
Mrs. KIM. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
with a very heavy heart to honor our
colleague Doug LaMalfa.
Doug was larger than life, but what I
will remember most is how he lived big
in the small moments with warmth, attention to detail, and genuine kindness.
Doug was the only Member of Congress who ever called me by my Korean
name, Kim Young Oak. He didn’t have
to remember it. He never needed to do
that, but that small, thoughtful gesture meant the world to me and spoke
volumes about who Doug was.
b 1800
Doug was a strong, conservative leader who served with a deep love for our
country and brought the heartland to
Washington, not the other way around.
As a fourth-generation rice farmer,
he never forgot who he worked for—
farmers, families, and rural communities who were too often ignored by
Washington.

He will be missed. We will all miss
him. My heart is with his family, his
staff, and all who are mourning this
tremendous loss.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. (English translation of the statements made in Korean is as follows:)
Young Oak Kim Sister
Thank you!
You did well!
You did well!
Gim Yeong-ok uiwon-nim
Gamsahamnida
Sugohasyeosseumnida
Sugohasyeosseumnida Take that,
Doug.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from California (Mr. OBERNOLTE).
Mr. OBERNOLTE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
with an incredibly heavy heart to
honor the life of my friend, Congressman Doug LaMalfa.
Doug was one of the most effective
Members of this Chamber. He was deeply passionate about issues that affected
his constituents in northern California.
As most of the Members of this
Chamber know, we all have little silos
where people come to us for advice. I
always could count on Doug to give me
the straight scoop on anything related
to water, agriculture, or rural America. That is why we elected him as the
chairman of the Western Caucus 2
years ago, and he did a phenomenal job
in that role. I will miss his service
there.
I will also miss the man that he was.
He was an incredibly decent man, a
man of exceptionally high moral character. Everyone that knew Doug would
remark on his authenticity. When you
met Doug, what you saw is what you
got. He was a man of deep kindness,
never had a cruel or unkind word for
anyone in the years that I knew him.
He was a man of incredible humility,
and anyone in this Chamber knows
that we could use some more of that in
here.
Above all, Mr. Speaker, I will miss
my friend. I will miss our conversations about cars. He was a car guy; I
am a car guy. I would tease him every
summer when we came back into session because he was restoring a De
Tomaso Pantera, and I would ask him:
Doug, what progress did you make on
the Pantera this summer? He would
hang his head and say: Nothing.
On this playing Galaga with him, a
little known fact about Doug LaMalfa,
he was a fierce competitor at Galaga.
Above all, I will miss our conversations.
I am honored to be here joining my
colleagues in saying farewell to Doug
and to honor his life. Godspeed to my
friend, Doug. We will miss him.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from California
(Mr. FONG).
Mr. FONG. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor the life and legacy of my
friend and colleague, Doug LaMalfa.
Doug was a steadfast champion of
rural California and for the issues that
matter most to millions of Americans

January 8, 2026

across the West, starting in the California legislature to the Halls of Congress.
He fought for water storage and forest management. He fought for energy
abundance. He fought for the farmer.
He fought for common sense.
I had the privilege of serving alongside him on the Committee for Transportation and Infrastructure and as a
fellow member of the Western Caucus
during his time as chairman. He would
always greet me with a big smile by
the nickname ‘‘The Fongressman.’’
Over the years, I was fortunate to be
mentored by Doug. He was a great role
model and friend. His guidance, leadership, and example left a lasting impact
on me and on so many others who had
the honor of working with him.
Doug will be remembered for his deep
love for his family, his faith and core
principles, his unwavering dedication
to his community, his humility, and
his enduring legacy as a leader and
lawmaker.
I am personally grateful for his
mentorship and know he will be profoundly missed by all who knew him.
I certainly will vow to honor Doug’s
memory by continuing to champion
the values that we both share that
unite California’s Central Valley to the
rural communities like Doug’s in
northern California.
I will continue fighting for rural priorities in Congress just as Doug did.
Amanda and I are praying for his
wife, Jill; his family and loved ones;
and his staff during this difficult time.
His absence leaves a void that will
never truly be filled.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from California
(Mr. KILEY).
Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, Doug LaMalfa was my neighbor.
Our districts bordered one another.
This was true during my time in the
State legislature as well.
The region of our State that he represented is an area where people often
feel like their voices are not heard in
the corridors of power, in places like
Sacramento and Washington, D.C.
Doug LaMalfa made it his mission to
make sure that their voices were
heard. He used every opportunity he
had to make sure their voices were
heard, but he didn’t just speak for the
communities that he represented. He
advocated, and he used every policy
tool available to see that their values
were reflected in policy here. He was a
leader in our delegation and in the
whole Chamber on issues like water,
forest management, and agriculture,
and that leadership, of course, culminated in his chairmanship of the
Western Caucus, the second largest
caucus in the entire House of Representatives.
I know we are all still so shocked and
in grief over his loss, but Doug
LaMalfa’s legacy in the North State
will be felt for generations to come.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Arizona

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

(Mr. BIGGS), the area also known as
southwestern-ish California.
Mr. BIGGS of Arizona. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today with a heavy heart to honor
the life and legacy of my friend and
colleague, Congressman Doug LaMalfa.
As you know, Doug was a happy warrior who cared immensely about his
country, his State, and the people he
served. A few years ago, he took time
out of his busy schedule to travel with
me to Arizona to better understand the
border crisis and the serious impact it
was having on my State as well as his
own. Doug was always willing to listen,
learn, and engage on the issues that
matter most. He was the most curious
man.
I thoroughly enjoyed working with
him on a wide range of policies and
challenges that uniquely affect the
West and the hardworking communities we both represent.
Doug was a true friend. He will be
deeply missed in this Congress and beyond. My team and I continue to pray
for Doug, his family, and for all who
loved him during this particularly difficult time.
May God bless Doug LaMalfa’s memory and may he rest in peace.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from California
(Mr. ISSA).
Mr. ISSA. Mr. Speaker, a lot can be
said about my friend and colleague, my
Western Caucus chair, but today was a
special day for us. We had lunch today
as California members, and Doug paid
for it because every week somebody
sponsors it. His death was so sudden
that it literally had been prepaid. It arrived, and we sat there thinking of the
person who had the best joke every
week, who had a constant, positive
sense of humor, even about dire times.
We talked not long ago about how
much he got done during the shutdown
and what it was like to actually meet
with his constituents multiple days in
a row, day after day. That was Doug
LaMalfa—a farmer, a family man, but
most importantly, somebody that
could always find the positive and the
funny about whatever we were doing.
We are a body of 431 right now. At
our best, we are a body of 435. It is the
one that we are missing that can make
a difference, and that was Doug. He
will be missed for a very long time by
all of us.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, we
will continue on to the great State of
California with bipartisan voices in
support and in remembering Mr.
LaMalfa.
I yield to the gentlewoman from
California (Ms. LOFGREN).
Ms. LOFGREN. Mr. Speaker, there is
mourning across the aisle and across
the State of California. I chair the
California Democratic delegation, and
we are deeply saddened by the loss of
Doug LaMalfa. It was a pleasure to
serve with Doug since his election in
2013.
He was a man who cared so deeply for
the communities that he represented in

California’s First District. As has been
said, he is a fourth-generation rice
farmer. He was one of the strongest
voices in this body for rural America
because he knew firsthand the struggles that our agricultural sectors were
facing.
He and I worked very closely together on the bipartisan Farm Workforce Modernization Act which would
provide stabilization for farmworkers,
farmers, and the ag sector, and he
added so much because he really knew
how farming worked and what would
work and what wouldn’t work, and he
was a collaborator.
We also introduced together the bipartisan Utility Resilience and Reliability Act that really was commonsense safety standards to minimize
power outages.
b 1810
Now, Doug and I didn’t agree on everything. I am a proud Democrat. He
was a proud Republican, but he was always approachable, and he was a colleague with whom you could disagree
without being disagreeable. It is a
quality that Members should strive to
emulate here.
He was a good man, friendly, with a
sense of humor, a gentle giant. Our
deepest condolences are with his wife,
Jill; their children; and his staff. It always hurts to lose a friend and a colleague, but I know that Doug’s legacy
will be remembered by all of us and the
Californians he so proudly served and
served with.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from California
(Mr. HUFFMAN), a gentleman on the
Natural Resources Committee, a committee that Mr. LaMalfa cared so much
about.
Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Speaker, there
were few people in the Congress that
tangled with Doug LaMalfa more than
me. There is probably some competition for that honor among House
Democrats, but I was certainly right
up there.
Yet, I can tell you as we honor Doug
today, I know plenty of people who disagreed with him, but I don’t know anyone that disliked him. When you hear
these qualities about his authenticity,
his warm sense of humor, just how relatable he was, that is all very, very
true.
I go back almost 20 years with Doug
because we were in the State legislature together. A lot has been said
about his sense of humor, which is also
very, very true. I want to just share
something that I always think of with
Doug because it speaks to the type of
humor which is really, I think, something that tells you about the man.
There are plenty of people who have a
great sense of humor at other people’s
expense. Doug LaMalfa had a very
gentle and disarming sense of humor.
One of our colleagues together in the
State assembly was our former colleague and the current mayor of Los
Angeles, Karen Bass. I will always re-

H233

member how Doug used to crack her
and me up by calling her Bassomatic.
That was the nickname. His staffers
back here are far too young to remember the ‘‘Saturday Night Live’’ skit in
which Dan Aykroyd puts a bass in a
blender and makes this gross smoothie
and drinks it. It was funny, and that is
the kind of thing that Doug would pull
up spontaneously and crack everyone
up. I loved that.
I will tell you, Karen Bass loved it
too. She liked it so much that she went
up to Doug’s district when she became
speaker of the assembly, and I remember he just not only welcomed her
there—this is a person he had very little in common with, a southern California urban African-American member that voted together with him almost never, but Doug gave her the VIP
tour of his farm and of the Sacramento
Valley and rice country. He got her up
in a combine and had her do things
that I am sure she will never forget. I
think he loved every minute of that.
That is how I am going remember
Doug. He was a great guy. I am certainly thinking and sending best wishes to his family and everyone who
loved him.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. The list is very
long of individuals on this side of the
aisle that like to tangle with the ranking member himself as well but also
very much like him. Thank you for
those awesome words.
I yield to the gentleman from California (Mr. THOMPSON), my colleague
on the Ways and Means Committee.
Mr. THOMPSON of California. I
thank the gentleman for yielding and I
thank him especially for holding this
Special Order hour for someone who we
are all going to miss. He was a really
great guy.
I am honored to be able to reflect a
little bit on the life and the service of
an extremely dedicated Member of
Congress, Doug LaMalfa.
I served northern California alongside Doug from the day that he was
sworn in to this body. His area was an
area that I represented when I was in
the State senate. In Congress, we represented neighboring regions of our
State. We shared many of the same
challenges and worked together on
issues that matter deeply to the people
that we both served.
I was proud to work with him on bipartisan efforts to support our farmers
and ranchers, to strengthen wildfire
prevention, to build Sites Reservoir,
and to address the growing home insurance crisis facing families across all of
northern California.
He and I worked together to deliver
over $500 million in tax relief to fire
victims in our district that lost their
homes then had to sue in order to get
the financial relief to rebuild their
homes only to find out that they were
going to be taxed on that money that
they got in the suit, which wasn’t in
itself enough to even rebuild their
homes. He was caring, and he was a
terrific fighter for the folks that we
worked for in delivering this.

H234

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

He believed in practical solutions,
and I always respected and appreciated
his collaboration on the issues important to our constituents.
I am saddened by the loss of my longtime colleague and friend. Jan and I extend our deepest condolences and keep
Doug’s wife, Jill; their children; their
grandchild; and his devoted staff in our
prayers during this very difficult time.
I thank the gentleman again for
hosting this Special Order hour.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. I yield to the
gentleman from California (Mr. COSTA).
Mr. COSTA. Mr. Speaker, I thank the
gentleman for yielding me time to do
what is fitting and appropriate, and
that is, honor the life of our colleague,
a life well lived, a Member of the House
of Representatives who did such a good
job on behalf of his constituents who
he represented faithfully since coming
to Congress in 2013.
Doug and I knew each other before
then. We had interactions on a number
of issues that we were mutually passionate about beginning with rural
California and people who live in rural
areas, which both reflected his and my
background.
He, perhaps, represented if not the,
one of the largest congressional districts by geography in California, a lot
of northern and eastern California. A
lot of my colleagues when they think
about California they think of Los Angeles or the Bay Area, but we have
parts of California where the communities are a white spot in the middle of
a major highway or, you know, are 400,
600 people.
Doug was a Member’s Member and a
Representative who believed that his
entire constituency was his passion. He
would go to some of those remote areas
to indicate and to listen on how he
could be a better Representative and
make their views known here in our
Nation’s Capital.
I served with him the entire time
that I have been on the House Agriculture Committee, three different
farm bill reauthorizations, and he was
always willing to meet halfway. Of
course, we understood the ag issues affecting California, and he was very
proud, very proud to represent the
upper Sacramento River Valley and all
the wonderful people there.
When disaster struck his district
with the wildfires, he was among the
first to be there with the challenges of
some of the floods in Lake Oroville and
Yuba areas. He was there. He reminds
us why we serve: not only the passion,
but the desire always to put our constituents first and to help people. Let
that be a role model for all of us.
Doug, we miss you. Doug had a life
well lived. He was a person who cared
passionately about our country and
about the people’s House. May you rest
in peace. I give my condolences to your
wife and your family. I thank all of you
for giving us an opportunity to serve
with our friend, Doug LaMalfa.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. I yield to the
gentleman
from
California
(Mr.

GARAMENDI), our final Californian for
the evening.
b 1820
Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman for yielding. I
look at the photo and say, Doug, for 12
years, you and I represented the Sacramento River. We developed a friendship based upon the working part, but
mostly upon sharing, sharing things.
We would get on the airplane to fly to
Washington, and you had your seat all
the time. We said hello and talked
about what was coming and then going
home. It was a friendship that was deep
and meaningful. There was plenty of
work to do.
The Sacramento River is the most
important river in California after the
Colorado. It was yours. You had the
upper, and I had the lower part of it.
Together, we worked to protect the
river, to protect the farmers, and to
protect the flow of water. It is good
work, and you did a good job. You were
good at representing your district and
representing the very complex issues.
I remember standing on one of the
levees, and you were talking about
your rice field. I said, Doug, let me
talk about my cows in my fields. He
said, Okay, you go ahead, but I am
going to go first.
You shared your knowledge with me
and with others. You were good. You
were really good at the work you did
for your people. You were a quality
Representative.
I miss you. I miss the work that we
did together on the Sacramento River
Valley and all the issues that we had.
It is a long list, and it would take another hour to go through them all.
I miss you, and Patti misses you because she would get up from her seat
and go back to your seat, which you always had on that plane, and the two of
you would talk and share.
I know your family misses you. I
know your constituents miss you. Doug
LaMalfa, you are going to be remembered by those of us who have had the
honor of working with you.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Minnesota
(Mr. STAUBER), who is a close friend
and colleague on the Natural Resources
Committee.
Mr. STAUBER. Mr. Speaker, this
week started off very difficult with losing Representative LaMalfa. I had the
privilege of serving with him for 7
years on the Natural Resources Committee. He also chaired the Western
Caucus this past year. He did a wonderful job.
He was that gentle giant, Mr. Speaker, that you could always count on. He
was a person of reason, but as you got
to know Doug, Mr. Speaker, he was an
even better person. He was a humble,
Christian, faithful person.
Mr. Speaker, we need more of that in
this body, especially now.
We know that Doug is with his Savior. We know that his Savior chose this
time earlier this week, but Doug is

January 8, 2026

resting in eternity with Almighty God,
his Savior, Jesus Christ.
To his wife, Jill, I thank her for allowing him to serve not only in the
California Legislature but here in this
body. I thank her for allowing him to
travel, as Mr. GARAMENDI just said, all
that way to and from the great State
of California. After those long trips, he
would come in, and you knew on Monday or Tuesday nights, the start of the
session, when he would come in here
wearing some tattered clothes. He was
a little bit disheveled, but he had had a
long day.
He was here for the people of his district, and he left a legacy that we all
should cherish, honor, and remember.
That is why we are here today, Mr.
Speaker. We are honoring Doug. He always had a nickname for every one of
us.
Doug, I know you are resting in
peace for eternity, but I thank you for
serving this great Nation. I thank you
for serving the great State of California in the way you did. You left a
legacy. You helped all of us become
better Representatives.
To Jill, our thoughts and prayers are
with her and her four children. God
bless you and take care of your family.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Colorado
(Mr. HURD).
Mr. HURD of Colorado. Mr. Speaker,
our colleague Doug LaMalfa passed
away on Monday, and I want to take
just a minute—he would have liked
that—to honor him the best way that I
know how: plainly.
Doug believed that we should speak
clearly, not in jargon. He had a
whiteboard in his office labeled unacceptable words, and he meant it. The
words ‘‘stakeholders,’’ ‘‘empower,’’ and
‘‘equity’’ were banned. He thought government should sound more like the
people it serves. He hated what I called
LaMalfa-isms, overcomplicated government explanations for simple things,
like saying that the transportation infrastructure is undergoing a temporary
operational suspension pending structural optimization instead of just saying that the bridge is closed for repairs.
Doug loved this institution. He loved
the West. He loved 1-minute speeches. I
will miss his humor, his directness, and
the clarity he brought to a town that
too often hides behind big words. May
he rest in peace.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Mississippi (Mr. GUEST).
Mr. GUEST. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to remember the life of my
friend Doug LaMalfa, whom I would
refer to as the gentle giant.
Doug was known by all for his love of
agriculture and the great outdoors. As
chairman of the Western Caucus and as
a California Republican, he was a rare
breed on Capitol Hill. His time will always be remembered for his love of this
great Republic, a government that he
believed in, the Founding Fathers, and
the principles of government of the

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

people, by the people, and for the people.
Mr. Speaker, I believe that there is a
Scripture in the Old Testament that
captures the impact that Doug had on
the lives of his friends and colleagues.
It is Proverbs 27:17. It says: ‘‘As iron
sharpens iron, so one man sharpens another.’’
Doug made all those who knew him
better people, and his impact will live
on long after his passing. I know he
will be missed by all, and my prayers
are with his family and friends.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentlewoman from Hawaii
(Ms. TOKUDA).
Ms. TOKUDA. Mr. Speaker, I chuckled when Ken mentioned pet peeves and
names. We need to add quinoa and potatoes to that list. He definitely didn’t
like those. For the record, my nickname was Barracuda, so figure that one
out.
God works in mysterious ways. In the
face of disaster, I found a friend in
Doug. Doug and I didn’t agree on a lot
of things, but we always showed up for
each other. We cosponsored bills,
worked on disaster funding and rural
health, and traded a lot of jabs and
took funny pictures of each other in
our Agriculture Committee hearings. I
gave him Spam musubis, and he
brought me my favorite lemon almonds
from Oroville.
I will never forget November 8, 2023.
Doug stood here on this floor, and he
marked 5 years since the Camp fire. I
was marking 3 months since the
Lahaina fire in Maui. He came up to
me and gave me a hug after, and he
said: We are going to get through this
together.
I believed him. I still do. He gave me
hope.
Doug and I are two very different
people. It would have been the most
unlikely of friendships, except that he
was one of the kindest, most gentle,
and genuine people I have ever met.
I don’t know about you, Mr. Speaker,
but the House floor feels a little less
warm and a bit empty without Doug,
but maybe I just miss my friend.
To his wife, Jill, and the LaMalfa
‘‘family’’; ‘‘family,’’ our prayers, our
aloha, and our love are with you.
May you rest in aloha, my friend,
until we meet again.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mahalo to the
gentlewoman from Hawaii. That is
‘‘thank you’’ for the stenographers who
need clarification on the foreign languages today.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from Kansas (Mr. MANN).
Mr. MANN. Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday,
this Chamber lost a kind friend, loving
husband, proud father, and tireless advocate for rural America and the Western United States.
Doug LaMalfa brought joy and sincerity into the Halls of Congress every
single day and fought for the good of
northern California.
I first met Doug in freshman orientation. Of course, he was a more senior

Member than I was, but we go to leadership
elections,
and
because
‘‘LaMalfa’’ was near ‘‘Mann’’ in the alphabet, I sat right behind Doug, who
quickly introduced himself to me,
found out I was from Kansas, and spent
3 minutes digging through his phone to
find pictures of a road trip that he took
in one of his classic cars right through
Kansas. Seven minutes later, I walked
away from Doug very aware of all the
stops that he had made in my great
State. From that moment on, I was always the Mann from Kansas.
During our time together on the
House Agriculture Committee, Doug
routinely brought the priorities of
farmers and ranchers in his district directly into committee hearings and
roundtables.
His
multigenerational
family farm grounded him and his beliefs, making him an even better advocate for the abundant agricultural producers of California’s First District.
Audrey and I are praying for Doug’s
loved ones as they grieve through this
tragedy.
Psalm 34:18 says: ‘‘The Lord is close
to the brokenhearted; he rescues those
whose spirits are crushed.’’ It is our
prayer that Doug’s family, friends, and
team would feel that closeness as they
honor, and we all honor, his life and
legacy.
b 1830
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
now yield to the gentlewoman from Illinois (Mrs. MILLER).
Mrs. MILLER of Illinois. Mr. Speaker, Doug was one of the first friends
that I made when I joined the Agriculture Committee back in 2021.
I soon learned that we had a lot in
common. We are both fourth-generation family farmers with a shared love
for the land which we call home. Doug
was also one of the first Members to
join my Congressional Family Caucus
and was a strong advocate for parents
and children.
One of my funny memories was somehow we were having a conversation
about what we would do if we had to
bug out of D.C., and he offered to give
me a ride in his classic Cadillac—I
guess he had it here—and give me a
ride to Illinois, as he headed to California.
I was deeply saddened to hear of his
passing. Mr. Speaker, because Doug accepted Jesus Christ as his Savior, he is
now in the presence of the Lord.
I am praying for his wife, Jill, and
their children. May they receive comfort from Revelation 21:4 and the promise that: ‘‘He will wipe away every tear
from their eyes, and death shall be no
more, neither shall there be mourning,
nor crying, nor pain anymore, for the
former things have passed away.’’
We thank Doug for his friendship,
and we will carry on with the work
that he started. He will be missed.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Tennessee
(Mr. ROSE).
Mr. ROSE. Mr. Speaker, I thank the
gentleman from Utah for yielding and
for arranging this Special Order.

H235

It is with a heavy heart that I rise
today to honor my friend and colleague, Representative Doug LaMalfa.
He was a true champion for rural
America and a staunch supporter of
our Nation’s farmers.
I often describe Doug as a gentle
giant. You will hear others say that.
He was tall and broad enough for me to
assume I better not mess with this guy.
His impact on Washington is just as
giant. However, I suspect many of us
will remember his gentle side the most.
Members of this body, including myself, often counted on Doug’s lighthearted comments, for his moments of
levity. Doug always handled himself
the way we would all aspire to. He
spoke calmly, with conviction, and
with his constituents top of mind.
Representative LaMalfa fought hard
for the issues that mattered to California’s First Congressional District and
for farmers, broadly, across our country. As an eighth-generation Tennessee
farmer, I found it easy to relate to
Doug, a proud fourth-generation rice
farmer.
Throughout our service on the House
Ag Committee, I appreciated having a
partner with similar perspective and
values as we worked to set ag policy. I
learned quickly to trust his instincts. I
will miss that.
Doug and I were avid competitors. I
will miss that as well. Long before I
served with him on the Ag Committee,
I came to consider him a very worthy
opponent, and I will miss those days
very dearly as I move forward.
I will close by extending my condolences to his family, including his wife
and children. While Doug will be
missed here, I can only imagine how he
will be missed at home. We will be
praying for them in the days ahead.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. ROSE and
Mr. LaMalfa shared that rivalry with
our vice chair time, and I thank him
for spending time with us tonight.
On to the great island of Guam, I
yield to the gentleman from Guam (Mr.
MOYLAN).
Mr. MOYLAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life and service of
Congressman Doug LaMalfa, a dedicated public servant who spent his career standing up for rural America and
the communities he called home.
A fourth-generation rice farmer from
northern California, he brought a deep
understanding of hard work, responsibility, and service into public life.
Those values guided him as he served
in the California State Assembly, the
State senate, and later in the United
States House of Representatives.
In Congress, he was a strong and respected voice for agriculture, natural
resources, and rural communities. His
colleagues recognized that commitment when he was unanimously elected
chairman of the Congressional Western
Caucus.
I had the honor of working alongside
him as a colleague and a friend on the
Natural Resources Committee, where
his connection to the land and the people he represented was always clear.

H236

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

His work strengthened rural communities and left a lasting mark on policies that affect them.
My thoughts are with his loved ones
and the people of northern California.
May we honor his memory by continuing the work he cared so deeply
about.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Washington (Mr. NEWHOUSE).
Mr. NEWHOUSE. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate Mr. MOORE doing this Special
Order this evening. It is truly an honor
and a privilege for me to join my colleagues in honoring the life and the
legacy of our good friend, Doug
LaMalfa.
Throughout my time in Congress, I
worked hand in hand with Doug on the
many issues that face the American
West. He had a love for his work. He
had an understanding as a fellow farmer in the value of the rural way of life,
and he fought to protect all of those
things.
When I stepped down as chairman of
the Western Caucus, Doug was the
clear choice to take the gavel. He was
elected unanimously to lead the caucus
into its next chapter. Truly, Congress
and the people of California’s First
Congressional District have lost a true
advocate for the issues that we all face.
Mr. Speaker, Doug was much more
than a colleague. Doug was a dear
friend. He had a kind soul and a sincere
love for all of the people in his life, as
you have heard this evening. While
Doug may have towered over you, as
you shook his big hand, you were never
small in his eyes. He was humble, generous, a loyal friend, and liked by everyone he met.
I am going to miss Doug’s big grin, as
he always greeted me as Lieutenant
Dan. Joan and I are going to truly miss
Doug. We send our deepest condolences
to his wife, Jill, and their four kids
during this incredibly difficult time. I
thank and ask all of my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle to join us in honoring the great work that Doug accomplished over the years.
May we preserve his legacy. May we
be more like him, and may he rest in
peace.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. I yield now to
the gentleman from Wisconsin (Mr.
GROTHMAN).
Mr. GROTHMAN. Mr. Speaker, when
we heard that Doug passed away, I
asked several people the same question. They all agreed overwhelmingly:
If something were to happen to this institution and only 10 of us survived and
we had to build it up from scratch,
Doug would be one of the 10 people we
would want to start out with and
maybe one of the top five or maybe
even the top one, but everybody around
here knows what a special guy Doug
LaMalfa was.
I used to have a lot of discussion with
him around this time back in the parlor, talking about the bills today, how
to vote on this or that. As a politician,
you can’t resist it when you decide how

to vote on something, what is the politically right thing to do, what politically will help me get reelected.
I never heard Doug talk that way.
Doug always talked about the right
policy, doing the right thing, and then
selling it back home, which was one of
the reasons why I think he was so special.
Another thing that was so special, in
all the conversations I had with him, I
never remember him saying anything
negative about anybody. I say a lot of
negative things about people, so I am
really jealous of a guy like Doug
LaMalfa who manages never to say
anything bad about anybody.
One final thing, the other thing I
know about Doug is we met every
Thursday morning in a Bible study
known as Capitol Ministries, which is
really a Bible study for the erudite
Christian, men of deep faith. I will tell
you, Doug—a lot of people talk about
it—was just such a good Christian. So
in any event, a great Christian, a great
Congressman, I will never forget Doug
LaMalfa.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Georgia
(Mr. CARTER).
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor my friend and
my colleague, Congressman Doug
LaMalfa.
Doug was always a steady voice for
his district and a principled Member of
this House. He was serious about policy, direct in his approach, and deeply
committed to the people he represented, but anyone who has worked
alongside Doug also knows he had
quite a sense of humor.
I learned that early on. Doug and I
both did a lot of 1 minutes. He used to
intentionally leave this speaking podium raised up to above my head to remind me of how short I was and how
tall he was.
However, that small moment says a
lot about Doug. Doug worked hard. He
took his job seriously, and he still
found room for good-natured humor
and friendship.
Tonight, we thank Congressman
LaMalfa for his service, his leadership,
and the many moments he shared with
all of us.
b 1840
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentlewoman from Utah
(Ms. MALOY).
Ms. MALOY. Mr. Speaker, it is hard
not to smile when I stand here and talk
about Doug LaMalfa, even on this really difficult week because Doug always
made me smile.
From the beginning, he made me feel
like I was really special, and I have
learned this week that that is maybe
the least special thing about me because everybody here felt like they
were Doug LaMalfa’s best friend.
The night I was sworn in as a Member of Congress, I started getting texts
on my phone from a number I didn’t
recognize. They were pictures of me

January 8, 2026

being sworn in from an angle that
looked suspiciously like the House
floor, which is against the rules.
I promised him I would never tell
anyone where I got those pictures, so I
am not going to tell you, but I still
don’t know how he had my number the
minute I got sworn in.
He has never missed a chance to get
me to sing Utah’s State song with him
whether we are in an airport or on the
House floor or walking through the
tunnels. He never failed to accompany
that with jokes from ‘‘My Cousin
Vinny’’ about the ‘‘youts.’’
I hope that hearing all of these
memories and all of these stories that
people have of Doug will comfort his
family, his staff, and everybody else
who is missing him at this difficult
time because, even though I am smiling, I am deeply mourning for my
friend, Doug LaMalfa.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Oregon
(Mr. BENTZ).
Mr. BENTZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
honor Doug LaMalfa, my good friend.
His office is right across from mine and
his district is right across from mine in
California from Oregon. This meant we
worked together over and over again
on issues involving water to try to save
it from the grasp of misguided environmentalists.
He was a great friend and an incredible advocate for his district. He did his
very best for his constituents. He never
gave up. He focused on wolves, water,
forests, and fire. May my good friend
find solace in Heaven and may his family find comfort in knowing he was a
man of integrity, faith, and truly deserving of our honor and our deepest
respect.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Idaho (Mr.
FULCHER).
Mr. FULCHER. Mr. Speaker, I am
honored to join my colleagues this
evening to honor a dear friend, Congressman Doug LaMalfa. Being from
the great State of Idaho, the land of famous potatoes, I am the one the good
Congressman referred to as ‘‘Mr. Potato Head.’’ I had the privilege of working with Doug on the pressing issues
facing the West and America’s rural
communities.
There are no adequate words to express my sorrow upon learning of his
passing, but his legacy and spirit lives
on. My prayers are with his wife, Jill,
and the entire LaMalfa family during
this time of unimaginable grief.
Mr. Speaker, from Mr. Potato Head
to that rice farmer from California,
here is my final: Way to go, Idaho. God
bless.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Oklahoma
(Mr. COLE).
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, obviously
like all of us here, I am here to pay
tribute to our dear departed friend,
Doug LaMalfa.
I first got to know Doug before I ever
met him because I had so many Indian

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Tribes from California calling me, saying that we have got this great guy
running for the House of Representatives who we know from the State legislature in California. He cares about
who we are, represents our interests,
and understands the trust responsibility. American Indians, Native Americans, had no better friend in the House
of Representatives than Doug LaMalfa.
Then as I got to know him as a person
in addition to a political figure, I understood why people were so attracted
to him: the sheer decency of the man,
the sheer authenticity of the man, and,
frankly, the happy warrior style that
he approached every single issue with.
I don’t think I have ever been so
shocked in my life when I learned that
we had lost him because I knew he was
coming back to fight the good fight for
the things in which he believed, the
State which he loved, and the institution which he cherished.
I will add my voice to the many
voices tonight that remind America
that we lost a great American, we lost
a great Californian, and we lost a great
human being.
My prayers are with Jill and the family. My thoughts are with his constituents because they lost somebody who
each and every day came to this floor
determined to advance their interest,
to protect their values, and to make
this country stronger and better.
Mr. Speaker, I will miss Doug
LaMalfa, but I will miss what he stands
for and what he fought for and how he
represented those things more than
anything else.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Arizona
(Mr. GOSAR).
Mr. GOSAR. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today like every other person with a
heavy heart to honor the life of my
dear friend and colleague, the gentleman, the giant from California,
Doug LaMalfa.
Doug was a devoted public servant, a
fierce advocate for rural America and
the West, and a man who deeply loved
his country and the people that he was
honored to represent.
As a lifelong resident of northern
California, he understood the land, the
communities, and the values of his district in a way that cannot be taught,
only lived.
He fought tirelessly for the farmers,
the ranchers, and the communities too
often ignored by the coastal elites, and
he did so with candor and conviction
and a sense of humor that made even
the hardest days feel better.
Doug was more than a colleague. He
was a friend. He was a brother. His
leadership, his wisdom, and his heart
for service will be deeply missed.
Doug’s legacy of faith and service and
love endures.
Lord, accept this gentle giant, this
dedicated giant, Doug LaMalfa. May
his family have the goodwill to know
that he lies in your comfort.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from North
Carolina (Mr. ROUZER).

Mr. ROUZER. Mr. Speaker, I thank
my colleague and friend for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, boy, do I have many
stories that I could tell, but I will not.
No one cared more for the people of
California and for America than Doug.
As a fourth-generation rice farmer, he
was the true embodiment of the steward of the land and a great steward of
common sense, too, I might add.
He understood the needs of rural
America and had such a genuine desire
to serve the people who lived there.
Doug and I worked closely on many
issues, but one of my fondest memories
was hosting him in North Carolina for
an agriculture roundtable. He engaged
with my constituents, speaking their
language, and truly listening to their
concerns.
Doug LaMalfa stood tall, both literally and figuratively, for the people
who feed this country. To know Doug
was an honor and a privilege. His absence will have a profound void in this
Chamber. This body and the Nation
will miss him deeply.
Mr. Speaker, my prayers are with his
wife, Jill; his children; his grandchildren; the entire LaMalfa family, including his great staff. I thank them
for sharing him with us in service to
our country.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Montana
(Mr. ZINKE).
Mr. ZINKE. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
tribute of our friend and colleague,
Doug LaMalfa.
When I arrived in Congress in 2015, I
noticed a large man with long hair. He
was a big man, but the biggest thing
about Doug LaMalfa was his heart.
As Secretary, I got the opportunity
to tour his district that had been devastated by wildfires. I walked with him
and looked at the devastation, the despair of people losing their lives and
everything they had, and Doug knew
them by name.
He cared. He cared about every Member of this institution, but, more importantly, he cared about the people he
represented. He cared about their life,
their values, and represented them as
well or better than anyone that has
ever served in this great body.
Mr. Speaker, today, we mark the
passing but also the privilege of knowing a great man. It is my hope, Mr.
Speaker, that we all learn from Doug
LaMalfa and understand that we represent the people. We give prayer to his
family, but take solace to know that
Doug is with his maker.
b 1850
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Utah (Mr.
OWENS).
Mr. OWENS. Mr. Speaker, as with my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle, I
stand before my colleagues with a
heavy heart to honor the life and legacy of my dear friend and esteemed
colleague, Doug LaMalfa.
Doug’s sudden passing this week
leaves a void not only in this Chamber

H237

but in the hearts of all who knew him.
To a person, a testament from everyone who has crossed his path would be
this: What a really good man.
As a Member of the Western Caucus,
I witnessed firsthand Doug’s fierce advocacy for farmers, ranchers, and hardworking families who form the backbone of our Nation. It was inspiring.
On the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, I saw the same
tenacious commitment to his beloved
State of California as he championed
water rights and fought for the conservative values at the very core of our
American culture.
Doug was a steadfast warrior for the
country and State he loved. He will be
sorely missed. His faith, grit, and authenticity have inspired us all. Rest assured, we will continue to carry on the
torch that Doug championed so well.
We know where Doug is at this moment. Our prayers are with him, with
Jill, and with his family. Rest in peace.
May God bless him.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Alabama
(Mr. PALMER).
Mr. PALMER. Mr. Speaker, I am
proud to rise this evening with my colleagues to honor Doug LaMalfa in the
joint remembrance of his life. He was
one of this body’s best Members.
Doug was a dear friend whom I will
miss. He was a talented and trusted
colleague who was serious about his
work, representing his constituents as
he was constantly seeking to move policy that helped them and our Nation.
Doug was a rice farmer, an occupation that he loved and that in many respects was foundational to his work
ethic, his love of the land, and his love
of the people and rural communities.
More than anything else, he was a
faithful follower of Jesus Christ. I will
miss Doug and our weekly Thursday
morning Bible studies.
I will miss his humbleness, his even
temper, his humor, and his presence in
this body. I will miss hearing him call
me Francis Gary Powers after the U.S.
spy plane pilot who was shot down over
Russia and captured in the 1960s.
My wife, Ann, and I are praying for
God to comfort Doug’s wife, Jill; his
children; his family; his staff; and all
who, like those who have gathered in
this Chamber this evening, knew and
loved Doug LaMalfa.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. THOMPSON).
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today with a heavy
heart to share a few words about my
dear
friend,
Congressman
Doug
LaMalfa.
Doug was a husband, a father, and a
fourth-generation rice farmer. He dedicated more than 20 years to public
service, both in this House and in the
California State Legislature.
Doug was a giant in both stature and
character. After meeting Doug, you
couldn’t help being struck by his kindness and gentle manner. He had a reputation as an affable colleague, a principled legislator, a fierce advocate for

H238

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

rural America, and one heck of a muscle car driver, which I experienced
firsthand. All of them rang true.
Doug was an expert on farming, forestry, and water issues. He chaired the
House Agriculture Subcommittee on
Forestry and Horticulture, and he was
chairman of the Western Caucus.
We traveled the country together,
coast to coast, north to south, meeting
with men and women who feed this
great country. They are memories I
will always treasure. He was supposed
to be with me in Pennsylvania this
weekend. His presence will be sorely
missed.
In a town full of self-important figures, Doug was authentically normal. I
will certainly miss his wisdom, his
sense of humor, and incredible friendship. I turned the tables on Doug when
it came to nicknames. I affectionately
named him the ‘‘Governor of Jefferson,’’ and he eagerly accepted that.
Doug was a man of great faith, and I
find comfort in knowing he was welcomed into the arms of our Lord and
Savior, Jesus Christ. Rest easy, Brother. We will take it from here.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman from Utah (Mr.
MOORE) has expired.
Mr. JOHNSON of Louisiana. Mr. Speaker,
On January 5th, our dear friend and colleague, Doug LaMalfa, passed away unexpectedly at the age of 65. A lifelong resident
of Northern California, Doug was a fierce fighter for the people he represented and for his
state’s vast and beautiful natural resources.
Representing one of California’s largest districts, Doug never hesitated to drive hundreds
of miles to meet a handful of constituents. He
drew no distinctions between those living in
the more remote corners of his district and
those in the big city. Doug believed everyone
deserved to have their representation and
voice heard in Congress. It’s that spirit of duty
and selfless service that made him so admired
among his friends and colleagues, and which
made him one of the most respected people
in this institution.
Doug became a close friend of mine during
my tenure as Vice Chairman of the House Republican Conference, where my weekly responsibility was to recruit other Members to
help me amplify the House Republican message on the House Floor. Even in late night
sessions and on days when others had left
town early, Doug was always faithful to show
up, eager to speak to the greatness of this
country and about our tireless work to improve
the lives of the people he represented. For
that commitment, his kindness, his optimism
and faith, and his sense of humor, I and all of
my many Republican colleagues will miss
Doug dearly. He was in every sense a giant
among us.
f

PROTECTING HEALTHCARE FOR
MILLIONS OF AMERICANS
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Ms. RIVAS of
California was recognized for 60 minutes as the designee of the minority
leader.)
GENERAL LEAVE

Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may

have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material into the RECORD on the
subject of my Special Order hour.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from California?
There was no objection.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, as a Member from California, I yield to my colleague from the great State of Utah,
Congressman BLAKE MOORE, so they
can continue honoring Congressman
Doug LaMalfa.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker,
sincere appreciation to the Congresswoman. I thank her very much. That is
a great way to honor Doug.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from Georgia (Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT).
Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia. Mr.
Speaker, I just want to say Doug was a
kind and gentle giant. He was firm and
fair. He was wise, and he was funny.
I remember one day in the Agriculture Committee when he spoke for 5
minutes. He spoke so long that he finally remembered that he forgot to
leave people any time to answer his
questions. It was a pretty funny moment for the committee. He laughed
about it, and he didn’t make that mistake again.
Mr. Speaker, I will say this about
him. He was 100 percent American.
When the local sheriff’s department
asked for help with people who knew
how to operate diesel equipment, Doug
showed up. Doug is the one. He is the
Member of Congress that we saw on
camera, getting on a bulldozer, saying:
I love the smell of diesel power in the
afternoon. It smells like victory.
Mr. Speaker, Doug LaMalfa and only
Doug LaMalfa.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentlewoman from North Dakota
(Mrs. FEDORCHAK.)
Mrs. FEDORCHAK. Mr. Speaker, I
am happy to be here today as a freshman Member. I didn’t know Doug long,
but I met him on one of our first days
in the orientation sessions and the
planning sessions for Congress. He was
warm. He was friendly. He was helpful
to a new freshman who didn’t know
much.
From there, I learned how fun he
was. He loved to play with my last
name, ‘‘Fedorchak.’’ He used to say:
‘‘How much wood could a Fedorchak
chuck if a Fedorchak could chuck
wood?’’
It always made me laugh. I also
learned quickly that not only was he
fun but he was thoughtful, he was pragmatic, and he was a really, really good
thinker. I turned to him on issues that
I found to be difficult. I wanted to get
his thoughts on them.
He was a strong conservative. He was
warm, kind, and principled. In my
mind, he was exactly the kind of leader
that Americans want. He is going to be
dearly missed. I feel robbed that I
didn’t get to work with him more, and
I will keep him and his family in my
prayers.

January 8, 2026

Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from Utah (Mr. KENNEDY).
Mr. KENNEDY of Utah. Mr. Speaker,
I thank the gentlewoman for yielding
time.
Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of symbolism that is happening at this point.
I appreciate the bipartisanship. I thank
the gentlewoman for yielding time. It
is a reflection of what really should
happen around this place. We should
love and help each other and try to find
common ground. It is a great representation of how Doug LaMalfa served.
He was a man of the people. He
served his people well. He was a man of
the land. He loved his land. He loved
his rice. He would talk about it with
me and everybody else here regularly.
He also loved people sufficiently to
give them nicknames.
My nickname had something to do
with the villain in ‘‘Ocean’s Twelve.’’ I
was the ‘‘Night Fox.’’ I don’t know if I
agree with that characterization. He
was the guy that did a break dance
across a laser dance floor to steal
things. Maybe some around here would
think that is the kind of person that I
am. I knew it was all in good taste and
good fun. Doug game nicknames to everybody.
Mr. Speaker, I will point out the last
thing about Doug is that he loved his
country. He knew that on the top the
Capitol rotunda was a statue called the
Statue of Freedom. Doug served not
only his people but he served his God.
He certainly loved both. In serving his
country, he understood he was serving
freedom.
Mr. Speaker, I hope that I, as well as
all of us, can live up to Doug’s standard
of service, his love for people, and his
love for God.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from Utah (Mr. MOORE).
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, to
close, I again thank the gentlewoman
from California (Ms. RIVAS) for yielding a few more minutes to finish out
these thoughts in Doug’s memory.
Mr. Speaker, I will wanted to give a
quick closing message to his wife, Jill,
and his four children: Kyle, Allison, Sophia, and Natalie.
I get an hour every week to do these
floor messages. I am lucky to get five
Members to come. I try to fill up 20
minutes, 15 of which your dad would
actually take. He would go on and on.
I would try to get him to wrap up so I
could go to dinner. He was always
there for me.
Tonight, we ran over time with the
amount of people who wanted to come
and take time out of their very busy
schedules to come and share a brief
message. They sat for an hour to spend
60 seconds to reflect on your dad and
your husband.
I hope you can take from that some
sense of appreciation and connection
that we all have with your dad and
what an amazing man he is.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

b 1900
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, my condolences to the family of former Congressman Doug LaMalfa.
Mr. Speaker, I am glad to be here on
the floor today to lead this important
discussion with my Congressional Progressive Caucus colleagues about protecting healthcare for millions of
Americans.
Earlier today, the House voted to
pass
Democratic
Leader
HAKEEM
JEFFRIES’ bill to extend the Affordable
Care Act’s enhanced premium tax credits for 3 more years. I thank Leader
Jeffries for his relentless leadership to
make today’s vote a reality.
House Democrats have been fighting
for months to save these critical tax
credits and for years to protect the Affordable Care Act from Republicans’
constant attacks.
The ACA tax credits are the reason
that record numbers of Americans have
health insurance today. The ACA tax
credits lower monthly premiums and
make coverage realistic for working
families, small business owners, seniors
not yet eligible for Medicare, and people who fall through the cracks of employer-based insurance.
Because of these tax credits, people
can go to the doctor before a problem
becomes an emergency. They can manage chronic conditions. They can live
with dignity instead of fear of bankruptcy.
Democrats did not give up on the
American people, unlike many Republicans, who chose to let these tax credits expire 1 week ago. That is right.
When the ball dropped in Times Square
on New Year’s Eve, millions of Americans saw their healthcare premiums
rise. That is a direct result of the
healthcare crisis that Republicans created through their inaction on Americans’ most pressing concerns.
Over the past year, instead of working on meaningful solutions to lower
the cost of groceries, lower the cost of
housing, or protect healthcare, Republicans chose to rename the Gulf of Mexico, redefine what a showerhead is, rename The Kennedy Center, look into
annexing Greenland, and regulate
fridges and gas stoves.
Yet, in all seriousness, there are real
problems that our country is facing.
ICE is terrorizing communities across
the country, and yesterday, masked
agents murdered Renee Nicole Good in
broad daylight in Minnesota. Trump is
entertaining entering another war with
Venezuela. Vaccines are being rolled
back, which will make students and
communities sicker. Americans are
struggling to afford basic goods.
Speaking of affordability, we are in
the middle of an affordability crisis
that Republicans refused to address.
Republicans chose to shut down the
government instead of extending the
ACA tax credits to help Americans afford healthcare.
During the longest shutdown in government history, my colleagues and I
heard from our constituents about how

Republicans’ inaction to extend the
ACA tax credits would impact them. I
hand-delivered several of these stories
from my freshman colleagues to
Speaker JOHNSON so that he could see
how his shutdown was creating hardship for Americans from California to
New Hampshire, Washington, and everywhere in between.
In my district, the San Fernando
Valley in Los Angeles, nearly 31,000
people
would
have
seen
their
healthcare costs rise if the ACA tax
credits expired, and nearly 11,000 people
would have lost access to healthcare
entirely.
Additionally, a 60-year-old couple in
my district earning nearly $83,000 per
year would have seen their annual premiums rise by nearly $14,000, and a
family of four earning nearly $130,000 a
year would have seen their annual premiums rise by over $6,000. This is just
in my district.
Republicans were willing to let this
happen to Americans across the country, regardless of political affiliation.
I am proud to have voted with my
colleagues to pass Leader JEFFRIES’
bill to extend the ACA tax credits and
protect healthcare, but our work is not
done. The Senate needs to take up this
bill immediately so that Americans
don’t have to worry about their premiums skyrocketing. In the richest
country on Earth, no one should have
to worry about choosing between paying for groceries, making rent, or having healthcare.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Washington (Ms. RANDALL), my cohost for tonight’s Special
Order hour and my friend and fellow
freshman classmate from the beautiful
State of Washington.
Ms. RANDALL. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, I am glad to be here together on the House floor today to lead
a conversation about how we fix our
broken healthcare system.
Across our country, working families
are feeling the pain of rising costs from
every direction. Donald Trump and
congressional Republicans have failed
the American people. They promised to
lower costs. Instead, costs keep going
up. Housing is more expensive. Electricity bills are through the roof.
Childcare costs keep rising.
Now, Republican leadership, who love
to extend tax breaks for billionaires,
are making things worse by, for
months, refusing to extend the Affordable Care Act’s tax credits for regular
people. These tax credits, which expired on December 31, could have been
continued had Republicans not skipped
every opportunity to prevent it, but
they chose to walk away from the negotiating table.
Let’s be clear about why these tax
credits exist. They were created because the U.S. has the most expensive
healthcare system in the world, and
without help, millions of working families are simply unable to afford coverage.

H239

This was never a handout. It was a
lifeline. Yet, because Republicans refused to act before December 31, millions of Americans have faced skyrocketing healthcare costs.
In my district, I hear from neighbors
every day about how devastating it has
been to lose these tax credits. Right
now, families who rely on the ACA in
Washington’s Sixth are facing an average increase of $1,500 a month in
healthcare costs. That is some people’s
rent, three car payments. That strips
the ability to put anything away in
savings.
Even if you are on private insurance,
monthly costs are estimated to rise
across the board by 21 percent in Washington because of the overall strain on
our system. When healthy people are
priced out of insurance, costs go up for
everyone else. That is just math.
This Republican-created crisis will
price out an estimated 80,000 Washingtonians from coverage, and that
doesn’t even include the millions more
in Washington and across the country
who are losing care because of the cuts
to Medicaid and Medicare.
Mr. Speaker, who is being hit hardest
when these tax credits disappear?
Women who are already struggling
with restrictions to reproductive care,
who make less money than men do, and
who are on the front lines of growing
childcare crises.
Who else will be impacted? LGBTQ
Americans, who are more likely to rely
on the ACA because of lower incomes
and employment discrimination, on top
of this administration rapidly stripping
away access to their lifesaving care
and protections.
Families really struggling to get by,
living paycheck to paycheck, are more
likely to work jobs without employerprovided benefits, making the ACA
their only real option for coverage.
I want to make this clear: Republican leadership let tax credits expire
in order to pay for tax breaks for billionaires. They didn’t make an abstract budget decision. They decided
that their wealthy and well-connected
donors deserved the very best that this
country has to offer while condemning
everyday Americans to lose health insurance and to have to wait until they
are sick enough to end up in the emergency room.
I will say what we all know: We don’t
have a genuine healthcare system in
this country. We have a sick care system, a system where people are forced
to delay care until a problem becomes
a crisis, a system where chronic conditions go unmanaged or managed with
unprescribed medication, a system
where cancers are caught later when
treatment is more expensive and outcomes are worse, and a system where
more people die.
One thing drove me to public service
and has continued to drive me: Everyone deserves access to healthcare. That
is why, in the State legislature, I
worked every day to protect and expand access to care, passing laws to expand postpartum Medicaid so that new

H240

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

parents received the care that they
needed after childbirth, establishing a
universal healthcare commission, removing barriers to behavioral health
and dental care, and lowering prescription drug prices.
I have seen the way families thrive
when access to care is expanded and
the devastation that follows when it is
taken away. While families are worried
about whether they can afford insulin,
inhalers, or mental health care, Republican leadership chose inaction. They
found time to give tax breaks to corporations but not to protect healthcare
for working people before tax credits
expired.
That tells you everything you need
to know about Republican leadership
priorities.
President Trump says that he has
concepts of a plan and has been making
empty promises for a decade, but the
American people don’t need concepts.
We need affordable healthcare now.
I am very glad that 17 of my Republican colleagues joined Democrats
today in doing the right thing by voting to extend the ACA tax credits for 3
more years to protect access to affordable healthcare. I hope that my colleagues in the Senate follow suit by
passing this bill immediately, but I
also know that it is not enough.
We need a universal healthcare system, a system where you can go to the
doctor, receive the care you need, and
walk out without worrying about what
other bills you will have to skip to afford it.
We need a system where losing a job
doesn’t mean losing your healthcare
and where starting a business doesn’t
mean risking your life in addition to
your livelihood.
We need a system where no one lies
awake at night wondering if they will
be able to afford insulin, whether they
will be able to afford it if their kid
breaks their arm, or whether they will
be able to afford it if their spouse has
a pregnancy complication or a cancer
diagnosis.
It is not radical. It is not unrealistic.
It is humanity.
The United States, arguably the
wealthiest country in the world,
doesn’t have a universal healthcare
system like every advanced nation in
the world does. It is time for our Nation’s leaders to stop making excuses.
It is time for us to find real solutions
that put the American people first.
b 1910
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from New York (Mr.
TONKO).
Mr. TONKO. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the gentlewoman yielding and
thank both Congresswoman LUZ RIVAS
of California and Congresswoman
EMILY RANDALL of Washington State
for hosting us with this Special Order
hour. I know with them being two
freshmen Congresswomen, and I know
at least one other freshman Congresswoman that will be joining in the dis-

cussion, that it just reflects the tremendous amount of talent and passion
to make a difference in this freshman
class. We are so blessed to have them
in the Caucus. It is so important to
witness the efforts that the two congresswomen hosting us have made in
regard to accessibility and affordability. It is most appreciated.
After months of pushing, Democrats
succeeded in forcing a vote to extend
ACA subsidies that offer lifesaving
healthcare benefits to millions of families. That extension passed the House
just hours ago, but the fight isn’t over
to secure these benefits and meaningfully lower costs for Americans. The
Senate must act at once to restore
these benefits and ease the burden of
rising costs for people like Mekhiya,
one of my constituents from New
York’s 20th Congressional District.
Mekhiya was born and raised in
Schenectady, New York. She recently
turned 26 and was bumped off of her
parents’ health insurance plan. She
made the smart and responsible choice
to switch to an ACA plan. Because Republicans let vital ACA subsidies lapse
last year, she no longer knows how she
will afford coverage. This is at a time
when she and her wife are thinking
about starting a family together.
So often I hear the reaction from
those on the right saying: Just get a
job. Well, Mekhiya already works at a
job, in fact two jobs; one for her local
school district and one as a manager at
McDonald’s. All told, between both
jobs, she works some 16 hours a day.
Neither position offers affordable or
comprehensive enough healthcare, so
an ACA plan is her only real option.
In this, the richest country in the
world, the richest country in the history of the world, this is simply unacceptable. No one should be spending
nearly all of their waking hours working multiple jobs and still unable to afford basic healthcare coverage for
themselves and their family members.
Yet this is the painful reality for millions of Americans.
Faced with this impossible scenario,
Mekhiya said that she may try to work
even more hours to make ends meet,
but there are simply not enough hours
in the day to work much more than she
already does.
We have the chance here in Congress
to ease the immense burden being carried by Mekhiya and the tens of millions more seeing a spike in healthcare
premiums. I urge my colleagues in the
Senate to do right by families and act
without delay to lower healthcare and
help working family people breathe a
little easier.
Make no mistake, the fight to lower
costs is far from over. We have got to
put our foot on the gas when it comes
to driving down those healthcare costs
and making life much more affordable
for the American people.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from the great State of
California (Mr. GARAMENDI).
Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, indeed, it is a great State because we

January 8, 2026

have great freshmen Representatives. I
thank them for this Special Order hour
and the opportunity to really talk
about a critical issue for our constituents in California and really all across
America.
If we go back to the beginning of the
Trump administration and we think
about the various issues that he has
put forth and the burdens that he has
placed on America, one of the most important is in the big, ugly bill. If you
take a look at the big, ugly bill and
you get into the details, well, there are
the enhanced tax credits for the Affordable Care Act, and we will talk about
that in a few moments; but also in the
big, ugly bill is the big problem coming
up at the end of this 2026 year.
They have put in place a dismantling
of the Medicaid program. They pushed
it off until after the election, but the
facts of the matter are those impacts
are already being recognized across the
healthcare system. It is going to affect
every American and particularly those
that are relying on Medicare.
Now, if we talk about what the issue
is today—and thank goodness, the
Democratic leadership in this House
put forth an opportunity to solve one
of the most critical problems that face
Americans right now, and that is the
expiration of the Affordable Care Act
tax credits. That has happened. Today,
on this floor, there was a vote. Fortunately, the House of Representatives,
led by the Democrats and a handful of
Republicans, pushed forward an extension, a 3-year extension of the Affordable Care Act subsidies which will be
exceedingly important.
The Affordable Care Act enhanced
premium credits expired. They expired
last year at the end of the year, and 4
million Americans immediately faced a
problem. The expiration of these tax
credits not only raised the cost for individuals in the marketplace, but it
also raised the healthcare costs all
across America because it rippled down
into all aspects of the healthcare system, the insurance, and the operations
at hospitals and clinics. These harmful
impacts won’t stop at the Affordable
Care Act insurance premiums. Those
costs are now across the system.
Let me level with the American people. The Republican healthcare crisis
will make the American people wait
longer for healthcare. It will make
Americans
pay
more
for
worse
healthcare systems. And for people who
live in rural, as well as urban areas,
your clinics and your hospitals are
shut down. Why? Because the Republicans have been after a challenge dating back to the 1960s when the Medicare program was put in place to eliminate the government’s operations
there.
There is still time to avoid this crisis, and today, this House, led by the
Democrats, took action to solve at
least one of the major pieces of that,
the Affordable Care Act enhanced premium tax credits. It is up to the Senate Republicans now.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Hello, where are you, Senate Republicans? Are you paying attention? It is
in your House. You have the opportunity to save this system, Senate Republicans. I know that Senate Democrats are already on board. They want
to do this. Let’s get this done.
So let’s challenge the Senate Republicans, see where they stand. We know
where a whole lot of our Republican
colleagues in the House of Representatives stand. They did not stand with
Americans. They didn’t stand with
those people in your districts, in my
district, that are going to lose their Affordable Care Act insurance premiums.
We have got work to do. This isn’t
the end of this healthcare crisis. This
is just one more step along the way to
try to find some way to overcome the
terrible burden that the Trump administration and the Republicans have
placed on Americans as they go about
trying to provide healthcare coverage
for themselves, for their families, and
for their communities.
We met that challenge today. The
Democrats here in the House of Representatives met that challenge today,
and we forced through a 3-year extension of the Affordable Care Act insurance premium subsidies. We are thankful that many, and a handful of Republicans, stood with us in this.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from California (Mr.
TAKANO), my colleague and friend and
the ranking member of the Committee
on Veterans’ Affairs.
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, I thank
my California colleague for yielding to
me and thank Congresswoman RIVAS
for co-hosting, and I thank Congresswoman EMILY RANDALL from Washington for also co-hosting this important Congressional Progressive Caucus
Special Order hour.
Now, we are here because this heretofore do-nothing Republican Congress
has let 22 million Americans get priced
out of their healthcare.
I learned of a coffeehouse owner in
Riverside, a good friend of mine, whose
health insurance went from $600 a
month to $1,100 a month. We are here
because my Republican colleagues
think our national budget is too tight
to ensure that our seniors and families
can afford healthcare, but it is flush
enough with enough cash to fund escapades in Venezuela and billions of new
spending on ICE and giving billionaires
permanent tax cuts.
We are here because Democrats are
the ones that are keeping healthcare
front and center for this body. Republicans wish we would stop talking
about this, that we would stop bringing
it up, but we will not stop because
healthcare is vital. It is essential to
every American.
b 1920
It was the Democrats that forced this
do-nothing Congress to actually act.
Neither Speaker JOHNSON nor President
Trump
wanted
to
make
healthcare more affordable, so we took

it upon ourselves to pass a 3-year extension of these vital tax credits, 3
years that match with the remaining 3
years of this Presidency.
Mr. Speaker, 17 Republicans joined us
to actually lower costs and to make
health insurance affordable. Now, I am
sure the President will have in his
mind that he should target for retribution these 17 Republicans for defying
him, for defying the orthodoxy of the
Republican leadership. He can choose
to lead with fear, to be more concerned
about Venezuelan oil or how many
more people he can deport or how much
more he can enrich himself, or he can
use his considerable influence and
power over Republicans, over Senate
Republicans.
We saw the reach of his power today
as Republicans unanimously voted for
water projects for poor people in Colorado and for a Native American Tribe
in Florida, reversed themselves and
sustained his veto. They voted for
these two measures before. That is how
immense his influence is. The question
is: Will he get seven Republicans to do
something right for the American people and lower healthcare costs, and will
he use his influence to help Americans
lower healthcare costs for all Americans or will he act in retribution? He
can lower healthcare costs for all by
expanding the pool of insureds.
The fight is not over. We still have to
get through the Senate, but the key to
all this is President Trump. Will he demand that the Senate pass a 3-year extension of this bill, 3-year extension of
healthcare tax credits? That is the big
question.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentlewoman from the great State
of Arizona (Mrs. GRIJALVA).
Mrs. GRIJALVA. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Representatives Rivas and Randall for leading on this very urgent
healthcare issue.
Millions of Americans who depend on
the Affordable Care Act are selecting
their plans right now, and what they
are seeing are healthcare options that
they cannot afford due to Republicans’
refusal to extend premium assistance.
I am here today speaking on behalf of
my constituents in southern Arizona
and those throughout the Nation. I am
here for the parents that are going
through their monthly budget trying
to figure out what they can give up
just to be able to pay for these premiums. I am speaking for those who
have the horrible feeling in the pit of
their stomachs because they know the
risk of being uninsured, being one hospital visit away from bankruptcy.
My Republican colleagues and, certainly, Donald Trump might not understand this, but health insurance is not
a luxury. It is a necessity.
The facts are clear. Republicans paid
for their trillion-dollar tax giveaway
for the wealthy by cutting healthcare,
plain and simple.
Over 10 million people will lose their
Medicaid, and now millions more could
lose their health coverage because they
can’t afford their premiums.

H241

Mr. Speaker, 22 million people, including 400,000 Arizonans with marketplace coverage, are already seeing their
healthcare premiums skyrocket. These
cuts mean the closure of rural hospitals in Arizona, job losses in our
healthcare sector, higher healthcare
costs for those with private insurance,
and the overall stress to an already
stretched thin healthcare system.
The State of Arizona has estimated
the impact of Medicaid cuts alone to be
$34 billion over the next 10 years.
For every $1 billion tax cut there is
an estimated loss of 36,000 jobs across
multiple industries. While the economic impacts will be devastating
throughout the State, the most immediate impact will be on those going
without needed healthcare.
Already a community health center
in my district is feeling the impact of
the healthcare cuts. In 2025, they saw
significant cuts in their Ryan White
part B funding.
Due to these cuts, some positions had
to be eliminated and workflows realigned, including the loss of medical
case management and treatment adherence support.
The impacts are real. For instance, a
29-year-old woman was diagnosed with
HIV during her pregnancy. She is a
mom of two young kids, 7 and 1 years
old. She has struggled with mental illness, depression, and cognitive delay.
Because she lacks daily adherence support for her lifesaving Valley fever
medication, she has been hospitalized
three times due to sepsis related to the
condition.
Another 18-year-old with HIV who
works as a landscaper has not been
able to get back on his medication due
to the loss of insurance. His employer
does not provide insurance, and he
makes too much money to qualify for
Medicaid. Now the health center team
is trying to get support from pharmaceutical companies for this individual.
These are the types of stories of real
people that simply want to live their
lives. Illness and disease do not discriminate, neither should Congress.
Americans have had enough of cutting
programs that Americans need for
basic survival, enough of the attempts
to repeal the Affordable Care Act,
enough
Republicans’
skyrocketing
costs.
It is up to Donald Trump and the Republican Party to decide if they will
join Democrats to restore these tax
credits or whether they will keep making life unaffordable for hardworking
Americans. I urge the Senate to act
immediately and take up the premium
extension bill passed by the House.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentlewoman from the great State
of Oregon (Ms. HOYLE).
Ms. HOYLE of Oregon. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentlewoman for yielding.
This has been a week. We invaded Venezuela; threatened to invade Greenland; put Cuba, Mexico, and Colombia
on notice that they could be next; had
the administration and many of my

H242

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

colleagues, who know better because
they were here, try and rewrite the history of what happened on January 6;
and an ICE agent shot and killed a
woman in Minnesota, and DHS immediately blamed the victim with no pretense of wanting to find out what the
facts were. An hour ago we just had
two more people shot by an ICE agent
in Portland, Oregon.
These are dark times, and it is really
easy to get bogged down in the negative, but today, something really good
happened. Mr. Speaker, today, 17 Republicans joined Democrats to override
the Speaker’s attempt to stifle the will
of this body to vote to extend subsidies
for the Affordable Care Act for 3 years.
My district is just over 17,000 square
miles. It is mostly rural with rural hospitals hanging on by a thread. Some of
them have just 15 percent commercial
payer mix. Without the Affordable Care
Act subsidies, we will have more uninsured people, and these hospitals could
go under.
Prior to being in Congress, I worked
at the United Way before the Affordable Care Act working on healthcare
access, and my county had a 21 percent
uninsured rate. We have a lot of farmers, small business people. We have
people that couldn’t afford insurance.
Now our uninsured rate is just under 8
percent. That is because of the subsidies.
I have had people call me. One
woman called and said she was paying
$87 a month. She now will have to pay
over $1,000 a month, and she can’t afford her medication or the treatment
that keeps her alive. I have people,
small business people in my district,
that are calling to say this is the first
time they have ever had to go without
insurance.
The fact of the matter is this is the
right policy.
Now, if people want to talk about
how to deliver quality, affordable, appropriate healthcare with less money
going to hedge fund-owned medical
practices or to insurance companies, I
would love to work with my colleagues
on that. We have a Medicare for All bill
that anybody can get on. That is what
we should be moving toward.
The bottom line is this: I remember
when my mother, who was working as
a contractor because her job got
shipped offshore, didn’t have insurance
and she badly broke her leg, lost her
home, went bankrupt, lost everything,
and had to start over.
b 1930
Many people in this country will lose
everything. This is the right thing to
do for right now, and then we should
work together and be responsible as
Congress to lower the cost of
healthcare, take out the middleman,
decrease the price of pharmaceuticals,
and make sure that people have access
to healthcare wherever they are in this
country.
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working with my colleagues on both sides of

the aisle to do that, and I encourage
the Senate to take up this bill and get
it done so that we can actually do what
we got sent here to do, which is the
work of the people.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentlewoman from the great State
of Arizona (Ms. ANSARI).
Ms. ANSARI. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Representatives Rivas and Randall for
hosting this Special Order hour.
Mr. Speaker, I represent Phoenix,
Glendale, and Guadalupe, communities
where families are working hard every
single day to stay afloat. Across this
country, including throughout Arizona,
millions of families are struggling to
afford basic healthcare. With costs rising on everything that they need to
live, housing, food, and childcare, they
have been through enough.
The ACA enhanced premium tax
credits were a lifeline for these families, but Republican inaction allowed
these tax credits to expire on December
31 because they don’t care about regular people.
The consequences were immediate.
For many families in Arizona, ACA
marketplace premiums have already
more than doubled as a result of Republican negligence. That means parents are skipping doctors’ appointments for their babies, seniors are reconsidering prescriptions, and families
are facing the very real possibility of
going uninsured.
Take Cricket, for example, a constituent in my district. At 63, Cricket
is self-employed and not yet eligible
for Medicare. She has relied on ACA
coverage for 8 years, paying $350 a
month.
Last year, she suffered a head injury
that required emergency care, and ACA
kept her bill around $1,000 instead of
$10,000, saving her from potential bankruptcy. She fears rising premiums. The
ACA is her lifeline, and without it, she
could lose her home and everything
else that she has built.
Today, the House of Representatives
finally voted to extend these enhanced
premium tax credits for 3 years. Despite 17 Republicans standing up to
Donald Trump and to their own leadership, I want to point out that not a single Republican from Arizona’s delegation chose to put their constituents
first and extend the lifesaving subsidies. That is egregious, and that is
unacceptable.
There is still so much more work to
do, even after today’s passage in this
House. We must apply pressure to the
United States Senate to pass a clean 3year extension of these ACA tax credits.
Arizonans cannot afford any more
delays. Let’s be clear: Extending these
tax credits is necessary, but it is certainly not enough. We need to pass
Medicare for All. We are the richest
country in the world, and we pay more
for healthcare per person than any
other developed nation.
On average, we spend at least double
per person as countries like the United

January 8, 2026

Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and
Japan spend on healthcare, so we
should be the healthiest. We are not.
We are 48th in the world for life expectancy.
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, what
most of the countries doing better and
paying less than us have in common?
They have universal healthcare. Americans’ physical and financial health depend on us doing the same.
It is time to take real action to bring
down healthcare costs for Arizonans
and for people all across the United
States. That means Medicare for All
before more Americans lose their
healthcare or go into medical debt.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from the great State of
New York (Mr. GOLDMAN).
Mr. GOLDMAN of New York. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman
from California and Representative
RANDALL for hosting this Special
Order.
Seven days ago, the Affordable Care
Act’s enhanced premium tax credits expired. For years, these credits allowed
millions of Americans to afford health
insurance that they would otherwise
not be able to get. For tens of millions
of others, these tax credits drastically
lowered premiums—for some families,
by as much as thousands of dollars.
They gave working families essential
relief amidst an ongoing cost-of-living
crisis that Donald Trump has only
made worse.
Without these tax credits, an estimated 5 million Americans will lose
their insurance as a result of higher
premium costs.
Today, House Democrats successfully
forced this body to vote to extend
those tax credits so that those 5 million Americans can hold on to their
health insurance with a 3-year extension of these premium tax credits, and
it passed this body.
Now, this bill goes to the Senate,
which must pass it in order to save
health insurance for millions of Americans.
In my State of New York alone, more
than 140,000 people relied on the tax
credits. These credits also supported an
additional 1.7 million New Yorkers who
would probably otherwise not be able
to afford health insurance.
One constituent of mine who lives in
public housing and holds a good job
told me that without these tax credits,
her monthly premiums have gone from
$450 to more than $1,000, which she simply cannot afford. She is in her sixties
and will be left with no health insurance.
It is not just those eligible for the
tax credits who will suffer. That is because when people lose coverage, they
don’t stop getting sick. They delay preventative care. They skip prescriptions. They end up in emergency
rooms. Emergency rooms become overrun, and care gets worse and more delayed. Costs rise for everyone, and all
outcomes suffer.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Because of months of inaction by
Donald Trump and congressional Republicans, those tax credits have expired and will be gone without this legislation that we passed today. This is
nothing short of a crisis, and it is a crisis created entirely by the President of
the United States and his Republican
Party.
Let me say this clearly to the American people. If you cannot afford health
insurance anymore, you have one person and one party to blame: Donald
Trump and the Republican Party. It is
the same party that cut taxes for billionaires and cut Medicaid for workingclass Americans.
Mr. Speaker, you can count on one
thing at all times with this Republican
Party: They will always choose billionaires over babies.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, may I ask
how much time I have remaining.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
WIED). The gentlewoman from California has 16 minutes remaining.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I thank my
colleagues who participated in this
Special Order hour on the ACA tax
credits. The Affordable Care Act tax
credits are why our country has a
record-high number of insured people.
Like many of my colleagues who
today shared stories of their constituents and how this will impact them and
their daily lives, I also have heard
many stories from my own constituents. This includes Angel from San
Fernando. Angel’s husband is self-employed, and she works part time. Because of the ACA, they can have reliable healthcare that covers her husband’s preexisting conditions. Angel is
dreading the update that will make
healthcare more costly. They will have
to make it work, but it will come at an
extreme hardship. Angel and her husband are two of the over 31,000 people
in my district who will see their
healthcare costs rise if the ACA tax
credits are not extended.
Another constituent from North Hollywood said that their costs will more
than double. They write: ‘‘My husband
and I are already scraping by, living
paycheck to paycheck each month.
Rent and groceries are both harder to
pay for. I also have two kids who are on
Medi-Cal.’’ Families of four like this
woman’s will be forced to pay over
$6,000 more this year if the ACA tax
credits are not extended.
Mr. Speaker, I am sure Congresswoman RANDALL has heard hundreds of
stories from her constituents, too, and
would like to share some with us.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Washington for the purpose of a colloquy.
Ms. RANDALL. The gentlewoman is
right. I think all of us have been receiving stories, texts, emails, and
phone calls from neighbors, friends,
families, and constituents around the
country who are impacted by rising
healthcare costs because of the decisions that Republican leadership has
made.

b 1940
It is certainly not just my district.
We know that in central Washington
and Washington’s Fourth District, a
family of four earning $66,000 a year is
seeing annual premium increases of
$2,651.
In Louisiana’s Fourth District, we
are seeing a family of four that is earning $66,000 have the same increase.
In Texas, a 60-year-old couple earning
$85,600 a year would see their premiums
increase 333 percent, $20,466.
The numbers can sometimes feel abstract, right? What are those numbers?
They are people.
Amanda in Bremerton told us that
for her family, the ACA credits were
the only way that she could afford
healthcare. If they lose the discount
with the ACA, they wouldn’t be able to
have healthcare, period. Her family
members won’t be able to afford the
medications that they need to help
keep them alive.
Healthcare should be affordable for
all citizens in the United States.
Amanda is worried that they will possibly lose their home if they get sick
and have to go to a doctor.
Andrea from Tacoma works for a
California-based company. The insurance that they offer would cost her
$1,000 a month, which is out of her
budget,
but
obtaining
insurance
through the Washington marketplace,
with ACA tax credits, allowed her to
purchase it for just $300 a month, less
than a third of what her employersponsored coverage would be. She still
struggles to make this payment.
If
she
can
no
longer
afford
healthcare, Andrea is going to feel the
impact significantly. She makes just
too much money to receive Apple
Health, our version of Medicaid. She is
pregnant. She will be swimming in
medical debt. She says she is the only
one who provides for her and her children.
Our neighbors deserve better, and
they deserve us to keep fighting, not
just for this ACA tax credit extension,
which we will continue to put pressure
on the Senate to pass, but also for a
system that meets our needs nationwide.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Congresswoman RANDALL for sharing
those stories. We are hearing these stories from all over the country, not just
blue States, but also red States, everywhere.
The Affordable Care Act tax credits
keep healthcare affordable for all
Americans. If the Senate does not act
immediately, constituents like Stephen from Van Nuys will bear that burden. Stephen and his wife are both
independent contractors who pay for
their own health insurance. In 2026,
they are facing a monthly increase of
over $1,000 a month each. This is absolutely unacceptable in the United
States.
Before I close, I thank Congresswoman RANDALL for joining me for tonight’s discussion and would like to

H243

yield to her for any closing remarks
she may have.
Ms. RANDALL. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Congresswoman RIVAS.
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day,
this comes down to a simple question:
Who is Congress fighting for? Right
now, Republican leadership is offering
Americans higher healthcare costs, less
coverage, and more uncertainty.
By refusing to extend the Affordable
Care Act tax credits before they expired last month, they made healthcare
costs more expensive for working families when people are already stretched
thin.
I have heard from families across my
district who are forgoing coverage this
year because of the absurd premium increases.
A small business owner in Bremerton
said that her new monthly premium for
her family of three would be more than
her mortgage, costing $35,000 a year.
She is now being forced to look for a
new job that includes health benefits
and told us it is very likely she will
have to sell her home in order to pay
for insurance.
If the Senate doesn’t pass the 3-year
ACA extension immediately, families
will be locked into these higher prices
for 2026, and they will lose coverage.
People will delay care, skip prescriptions, or avoid seeing a doctor, not because they don’t need it, but because
they can’t afford it. That is not a
healthcare system that works.
Healthcare is a human right, and
your ability to get it shouldn’t depend
on how much you earn, where you live,
or whether your employer offers coverage. No one should have to choose between paying rent and seeing a doctor
or between putting food on the table
and buying a prescription.
The ACA tax credits exist because
Congress recognized a simple truth.
Without them, millions of Americans
would be priced out of care. These credits make coverage possible for seniors
who are not yet eligible for Medicare,
for small business owners, and gig
workers, for families who earn too
much to qualify for Medicaid but not
enough to absorb soaring premiums.
Allowing these tax credits to expire
was a choice, and it was the wrong one.
Americans are being screwed by this
administration. Tariffs are screwing
our farmers and raising prices. Trump
is killing energy projects that raise our
utility bills, and Republicans screwed
around with our health insurance by
refusing to extend the ACA tax credits.
Congress has a real opportunity right
now to take action: to lower costs, to
protect coverage, and to improve the
health of people across the country.
Extending the ACA tax credits will
keep families insured, reduce financial
strain, and prevent avoidable deaths.
This is a moment for leadership, a
moment to put people over politics. Republicans in the Senate must act to extend these tax credits. We must make
it clear that in this country access to
healthcare is not a privilege; it is a
right worth protecting.

H244

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

I am glad to be a partner in this fight
with Representative RIVAS and all of
my other Democratic colleagues who
spoke on the floor tonight.
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Congresswoman RANDALL and thanks
again to my other colleagues who
spoke tonight.
Today’s
vote
will
help
keep
healthcare affordable for millions of
Americans, but our work isn’t done.
The Senate needs to pass this bill immediately, and then we need to get
back to work on progressive and equitable solutions that leave no family behind.
Families are still facing high costs
for housing, childcare, groceries, and
other everyday necessities. House
Democrats and the Congressional Progressive Caucus will continue to stand
with the American people to protect
their healthcare against Republicans’
attacks and keep the American Dream
attainable for all.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
f

CONGRESS IS A MATH-FREE ZONE
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. SCHWEIKERT
of Arizona was recognized for 30 minutes.)
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Mr. Speaker, I
was actually going to come here and do
some things on demographics and some
things that are optimistic, but I actually think we should first jump into
the fact that we work in a math-free
zone.
If you listen to the people coming behind the microphones, particularly
today, it is as if they have read none of
the CBO reports, none of the HHS reports, or the other things, particularly
in regard to the ACA, which are subsidies. They are subsidies on top of subsidies to insurance companies.
Did you read the reports? Last year,
41 percent of those subsidies on subsidies of the people that had the enhanced subsidies paid no premium, so
they had no skin in the game, which is
not what we were promised when
ObamaCare came into existence a
dozen years ago.
We actually showed an economic report. I did entire floor speeches on it
showing that only a third of that $35
billion, $40 billion a year subsidy on
top of the subsidies actually goes to
healthcare.
We also showed that a third of the
folks never made a claim because now
we are finding rampant fraud of people
who were signed up because if they
don’t have a premium to pay, they had
brokers signing them up, and they had
no idea they had coverage.
Where is the passion to actually deal
with the fact that particularly the
left—and I have got to blame my brothers and sisters on the Republican side,

we have done the same. We have turned
healthcare into financial engineering,
instead of having it be about the cost,
access, and delivery of having our
brothers and sisters get healthier.
Is it you have sold your soul to the
insurance companies? Remember, the
ACA model is an insurance company
model. You promised them rates of return, you promised them a market, so
this is 7 percent of the healthcare market, and 94 percent of that 7 percent
gets a subsidy.
Let’s actually do math because you
have been listening to—oh, yeah, there
has been actually no math today as
people talked about subsidies on top of
subsidies. The CBO report that updated
yesterday—and I can do this off the top
of my head—basically said the 3 years
cost $80 billion.
The reason it is lower than my $105
billion is because they made an assumption that this year, if the Senate
were to pass these, that there will be a
delayed sign-up, so there will be half a
year or so where people—but if they did
a claw back, the actual number on
these subsidies is about $105 billion.
Okay. Even if you do the CBO’s number of $80 billion for 3 years of subsidies
on top of subsidies, and then you put in
the 10 years of interest, you know, because of the interest window, this costs
$111 billion.
b 1950
Understand what the left is telling
you. They are basically saying they
don’t give a damn about healthcare. It
is financing. If we wanted to change
the price of healthcare, we would actually be looking at the innovations that
are going on and start to legalize them,
but there are too many damn lobbyists
walking up and down our hallways here
trying to stop us.
Look, here is an article from 2 days
ago. Bless the State of Utah. If you are
like me—I have hypertension. Can you
imagine that? I have had it since I was
a teenager. I take a calcium inhibitor.
It lowers my blood pressure. Hopefully,
I don’t pop an aneurysm, but every 90
days, I have to pick up the phone to
renew a doctor’s prescription or go
visit the doctor, even though it is the
same prescription I have had for decades.
Utah just created AI that will take
my data and renew my prescription. It
will save a fortune for the people of
Utah—cost, access, not subsidies.
Stanford medical reviewed basically
being able to use certain wearables.
Their new AI model predicts disease
risk as you sleep from over 100 health
conditions. They take some data as
you are sleeping off your wearables,
and boom, basically you are wearing a
medical lab. Except the problem is, it
is not allowed to prescribe. That would
be illegal because that would require us
to actually do things, modernize access
to healthcare, use the technology to
crash—oh, we can’t use technology to
crash the price. It would really annoy a
whole bunch of the lobbyists. People

January 8, 2026

are lined up at our doors. People would
show up at our fundraisers.
OpenAI chat health to connect data
from health apps medical records—
there is a revolution coming where we
as people of America can stay dramatically healthier.
Why aren’t we doing the discussion of
what to do to lower the price of
healthcare instead of having debates of
another $100 billion that goes on the
very credit cards of the people who
get—the insurance companies that get
the subsidy that only as—our model is
38 percent of that subsidy actually ends
up going into healthcare. We are still
trying to figure out where the hell the
rest of the money went.
Have we lost our minds? Why is it so
much easier to just keep borrowing
money and borrowing money and borrowing money and say: I am giving you
something, but I am putting it on your
credit card. It is like we are engaging
in a level of financial lunacy here.
Now, let’s actually go on to the even
more difficult part of this discussion. I
am doing this because I want us to
start to have a benchmark. If there is
anyone out there listening that has
ever had to tolerate—because I have
been doing these for a decade, and I am
just exhausted. I am frustrated. I am
angry.
My brothers and sisters here, Democrat and Republican, I like most of
these people, and I am crushed. I am
just absolutely intellectually, emotionally, even physically crushed at the inability to tell the truth. We don’t want
to tell the truth because our constituents get pissed off at us when we walk
them through the math. The constituents look back and say, so you have
been lying or the politicians have been
lying to us for decades. The answer is
yes, but it is not Democratic. It is not
Republican. Much of the crisis that we
are facing is demographic.
I am not going to explain all of this
chart, but I am basically going to tell
you, if you look at the financial lines
on this chart, Mr. Speaker, it basically
says, in 3 years, over half the money
this Federal Government spends will go
to those 65 and up. In 3 years, half the
money we spend will go to those 65 and
up.
Now, I need you to work through
something with me. I have already presented the Moody’s Analytics report
that is saying, in 8 years from now, 30
percent of our spending, 30 percent of
tax collections, will go just to interest.
You are now seeing, in 3 years, the majority of our spending will actually go
to benefits here. We have a math problem. Today, we have fewer 18 year olds
than we had 20 years ago, but we have
double the number of 65 year olds.
We can sit here and blame each
other, but it is just demographics. It is
happening over the entire industrialized world, but we are not allowed to
actually have an honest discussion
about it because the moment you say
something, the other side is writing political commercials to rip your face off

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

because you told the truth about math
and demographics.
It is real simple. Mr. Speaker, you
are going to run for U.S. Senate. In
your next term, the Medicare trust
fund is empty. The Social Security
trust fund is empty. It takes that first
year, 2033, to just cover that shortfall
that is over $638 billion. If you don’t fix
it, you double senior poverty. You double the number of baby boomers who
will live on the street, and everyone’s
Social Security check has a 24 percent
cut.
How many people have you heard
this week get behind the microphones
and say maybe we should actually
start to adopt technology, modernization, deal with the reality of our fiscal
cliff that is coming? Instead, I watch a
parade of my brothers and sisters here
say: I have an idea. It costs more
money, but it is a really good idea.
Let’s just put it on the credit card.
It is out of order, but I will get to it.
I am going to say it a couple of times
because I did a presentation of a report
from I think it is the Massachusetts or
Boston economic council, freaky smart
professors. If you use a 6 percent discount rate, which you can argue something lower, but sometimes you have
to talk about math. A child born
today, you need 104 percent of that
child’s lifetime income, so more money
than they make in their entire lifetime, just to cover Federal pension
benefits, Social Security, Medicare,
military, Federal employees, and railroad retirement.
Does anyone care? Does anyone care?
What is wrong with this place? The immorality that the next generation will
be poorer than us—but we are not allowed to say that because, let’s be honest, people want more stuff. If we keep
giving them more stuff, they vote for
us. They might even contribute.
Look, let’s just continue to do some
of the basic demographics. From 2004
to 2024, you see this one line here,
those are 18-year-olds. Somewhat similar, but now you start to get to 2035
and start to understand, without immigration, you have a world where you
functionally have more 65-year-olds
than you have 18-year-olds.
We are having debates right now.
There is a report out that—now, it is
not adjusted for self-deports—saying
that the United States had about
400,000 as a first snapshot growth in
2025. We have another report that says
the United States had zero population
growth last year. We have another report that says the United States will
have zero population growth this year.
b 2000
Mr. Speaker, are we going to tell the
truth about math? You want our Social
Security. You earned it. You deserve
it. You want our Medicare. You earned
it. You deserve it. In 7 years, both of
those trust funds are empty.
What are we going to do? The argument is we will just borrow more
money because, God forbid, we have

any conversation about the cost of delivering healthcare. That will upset
someone’s business model or bureaucracy’s model. It is hard to read.
The basic point was trying to show
we are having terrific economic
growth. I will show some slides here.
With our GDP growth, some of the tax
policies and some of the regulatory
policies adopted in the last year are
working.
Our problems are spending. Almost
all the spending growth is interest because we are refinancing. We have $30
trillion out there we have to bring to
market over the next few years. I think
this year refinance was going to be
about $11 trillion. That is bonds, notes,
and paper that come due, plus another
$2 trillion probably in virgin. That is
new issuances. They are subject to the
higher interest rates today than we had
5 years ago.
That is why our interest coverage
costs have gotten so much more expensive. That is why if we do total interest
from last year—the interest we also
pay back to the trust funds from the
money we borrowed from the trust
funds—we spent $1.2 trillion on interest
last year. Interest was the second biggest expense in this government last
year, and it is getting worse.
What happens when we produce economic growth? We see this in red here.
Our debt projections are actually every
bit as bad as last year. That means for
every dollar we take in, in tax receipts—remember that our tax as a
percentage of GDP is basically back to
the mean that it has been for decades.
For every dollar we take in, we will
spend $1.43. That is $1 in and $1.43 out.
How long can we carry that on, Mr.
Speaker? Yet, you start looking at
where we are demographically.
What frustrates me is this is just
what we are. There is not a magic:
Well, we will suddenly have more children. Really?
This is happening all over the industrialized world. We have countries that
buy you a house on your third or
fourth child, and it didn’t increase fertility rates. Yet our pension systems
were designed on four or five workers.
Remember that Social Security and
Medicare are pay as you go. We had a
benefit of building reserves when the
baby boomers were in the labor force.
They ultimately were designed as pay
as you go.
I have been in a 50–50 district for
years. The political consultants lose
their minds. They tell me I am not allowed to talk about the truth in math,
but no one here wants to go near it, not
even the people in 20-point or 30-point
partisan districts. Will anyone here
help us plan for the future?
This future is coming fast. We have
economists now say we have functionally 3 years before we get in the interest cycle back and forth. I will try to
explain that one of these days.
You have to understand when we hit
in—what was that? In 2020, we had 2.7
workers per Social Security retiree. We

H245

are actually getting to the point over
here where we think we are down to 2.3.
In the coming decades, it is even less.
So you and your spouse, you and your
partner, functionally have your own retired person. It is just to understand
the basic economics of the math.
Then we have the brain trusts who
say we will just borrow the money each
year. Did they hear the math? In 2033,
the year the trust funds are empty, it
is well over $600 billion. You are going
to borrow basically half. That is 40 percent equal to what is the—well, actually almost 60 percent equal to today’s
defense budget. We will just throw that
on the credit card. The next year it is
bigger, and the next year it is bigger.
There are good things happening. The
GDP numbers, which means the baseline economic growth numbers, are remarkably healthy. There is huge investment going on right now in technology that could actually boost productivity. Therefore, it will boost
wages.
Where is the unified theory here? We
are going to do another reconciliation
where we are going to tell the markets
that we will start limiting the spending so we get lower interest rates and
so we can have more market growth.
People can afford houses, all the input.
Instead, you have a government that
for every dollar we spend, we have to
borrow another 43 cents. This is insane.
I was going to try to walk through
some things I consider really hopeful.
These are the contributions to GDP
growth. Many of these contributions in
the GDP growth, if we can get our policies and our regulatory designed properly, we can get some pops and productivity. Pops and productivity means
pops in people’s wages and pops in tax
collections.
We have to get all the stars aligned
at the right time. I just don’t see us
doing that because somehow it is not
part of our lexicon. I will do presentations. We have too many people, particularly even on my side, who say
things that aren’t mathematically
true. We hear something, and we repeat
it. The customs duties, tariffs, are
helpful. It is not as much money as so
many people think.
Mr. Speaker, I am blessed to chair
the Joint Economic Committee. I am
number four on Ways and Means. I
chair the Oversight Committee. I am
the guy running a bunch of committees
and am responsible for a number of
these really uncomfortable investigations. I am blessed to have a staff that
is a hell of a lot smarter than I would
ever have hoped to have been at their
age.
We start to work out charts like this.
I am going to make some people mad.
As a matter of fact, I am not even
going to bother with that one. I will
walk us through the straight number.
We are still vetting the number because we are doing predictions. All of
this could mean nothing if the Supreme Court tomorrow changes its
rules on the President’s authority to

H246

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

do the enhanced tariffs—let’s just call
them that—and whatever authorities
the President may have to supplement
those tariffs.
We have to understand our latest articles that we are looking at saying,
for 2026, $215 billion of what we call
customs receipts—tariffs—the baseline,
if there had been no changes, it would
have been $84 billion. Mr. Speaker, is
everyone working with me on this?
That means there was $131 billion of
new tariff money coming into the
budget this fiscal year.
If we pull out our calculator, so far in
the first quarter of this fiscal year, we
have been borrowing $8 billion a day.
We are hoping it actually comes back
to the mean of being about $6 billion.
Let’s do $131 billion divided by 8. We
functionally are covering 2 weeks of
borrowing. It is helpful. It is not a solution.
Yet I will do the speech. I ask anyone
who is watching if they have some suggestions of how I can actually start to
break through because I am exhausted.
Then I will watch someone come up. I
am sitting in my office, and I am
watching the floor. On occasion, I will
pull out my calculator. I am just enraged because of the mathematical
lying that goes on behind these microphones over and over. This is the survival of our Republic.
Let’s actually do something that is
semi-optimistic here. Let’s look at
waste and fraud. I had a meeting with
a wonderful woman the other day. She
actually is involved in our county
party. She is really smart and absolutely lovely. I hope I misheard her.
She seemed to believe that if we just
didn’t have that fraud in Minnesota, we
could have covered a whole bunch of
our national debt. She was genuinely
concerned. It sounds like she was trying to quote what she actually thought
she heard on cable news.
b 2010
Mr. Speaker, I had to walk her
through saying, okay, here is the best
projection. Remember, some of this
fraud may have happened over a decade. We are still getting all the numbers. There have already been a number of prosecutions, ‘‘Minneapolis
woman pleads guilty in $250 million
Feeding Our Future fraud scheme.’’
She stole $250 million. There are a
number of these articles that I have
here, but you still have to do the math.
The fraud, just to give you an idea of
the scale of our Nation’s borrowing, is
only a couple of days of borrowing.
How do I help people understand the
perspective of the scale and the fact
that everything that we as Members of
Congress vote on is borrowed?
If you told me today that I have to
balance the budget, I can do it. Every
part of government has to be shut
down—no Park Service, no Congress,
no EPA, no FDA. Everything that is
discretionary is gone. Today, my math
is that several hundred billion dollars
of mandatory spending have to be gone.

We are borrowing so damned much
money now that we have to borrow
money just to cover our Medicare obligations.
Do we understand? What if I came to
you tomorrow and said that I can end
most of the fraud in the IRS and the
government and the SNAPs and all of
these subsidies, like welfare and nutrition support programs?
We have actually had a bill for 6 or 7
years to use AI to audit the Pentagon.
The Pentagon, I think, last year was
its ninth audit. It failed. It could not
pass an audit.
The same technology that we wanted
to use to audit the Pentagon, it turns
out that all of these programs, you just
put that in the back end. Instead of
doing the pay-and-chase model that,
for some reason, the left seems to embrace, why let the fraud money ever go
out the door?
I want to give you a simple example.
How many of you have a credit card?
How many of you have ever gone to a
place where you have never purchased
from before, and you stick your credit
card in because I am going to buy some
fishing tackle or whatever the hell you
are buying, and suddenly, you get this
text message saying: Is this you? Can
you put in your PIN? Can you put in
your code?
That technology has been around for
a decade. If the credit card companies
now have even more advanced AI to
know that someone isn’t you, that it is
fraud, and that the data on your application and other things are fraud, you
are telling me that we put billions and
billions at risk trying to help our
brothers and sisters, only to later find
out that we have been financing
scammers.
I have a passion for dealing with the
long-run debt of this country. How do I
convince the American people that we
are going to have to do hard things
when they are able to point and say
that you haven’t taken care of the filth
and the stealing from our society, from
our taxpayers? How do I get them to
trust me when I still have scam artists
robbing them?
Mr. Speaker, we have proposal after
proposal to use technology to stop the
scamming. Will it ever get a hearing
here?
There almost seems to be a war to
stop us from using technology because—I actually can’t give you an
honest answer. We know that, for
years, I have been trying to fix technology at the IRS, and the IRS union
loses its mind thinking: You are trying
to get rid of us.
When we have been doing the audit
at the Pentagon, the unionized auditors come and want to have meetings
with me. They are concerned that we
are trying to get rid of their jobs. I am
just trying to protect the American
taxpayers, but the technology already
exists in the private sector. It is time
we adopt it.
On healthcare, I just want to give
this as an example. Utah, a couple of

January 8, 2026

days ago, announced that they are
going to allow AI as a pilot program in
Utah to prescribe. It is for the renewal
of your prescriptions. As I was talking
about before, my calcium inhibitor, my
hypertension medicine, the same one I
have had for decades, I could plug in
my data to the AI, and it would order
my prescription, and it would be sent
to me. It functionally has almost no
cost.
We have dozens of examples that I
have brought to the floor here over the
last—actually, dozens and dozens of examples that I have brought to the floor
here over the years, showing how we
could crash the price of healthcare instead of doing the scam of let’s just
keep subsidizing the subsidy and the
insurance companies. How about we
change the accessibility and use technology to make it less expensive?
We are actually working on a
thought experiment—and this will be
the end—a crazy thought experiment.
President Trump and the White House
actually get a lot of credit, though we
worked on this for years. Glutides,
GLP–1s, I believe by the end of this
month, one of the tablet versions will
be available for $149 a month.
If obesity is responsible for 47 percent
of U.S. healthcare spending, according
to the Milken study, what would happen in our society, particularly where
we have States where technically over
half of their populations are considered
obese? What would happen if access to
the drug and, hopefully, nutrition and
all the other things that need to go
with it—but just do this thought experiment with me. The lobbyists weren’t
able to stop access to the glutides.
You might be on the cusp of a revolution of people who are morbidly obese,
who have multiple chronic conditions,
and who are losing their feet are about
to get healthier.
Let’s actually start accepting the
technology, thinking creatively. With
that, Mr. Speaker, we might be able to
do some amazing things out there.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

REFLECTING ON IMPACT OF
ILLEGAL ACTION IN VENEZUELA
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Ms. KAPTUR of
Ohio was recognized for 30 minutes.)
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, this past
weekend, I prayed, and thanks to God
for saving the lives of every single one
of our precious soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, and intelligence officers
who were deployed secretly to Venezuela by the President of the United
States without consent of Congress.
Importantly, this operation was
planned and executed in violation of
the United States Constitution, Article
I, Section 9, Clause 7: ‘‘No money shall
be drawn from the Treasury, but in
consequence of appropriations made by
law.’’ That clause also requires publication of all publicly expended money,
funds.

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

None of that came to Congress, even
in some of the most sequestered private meetings—nothing, no information, no support.
This military operation expended billions upon billions of U.S. taxpayer
funds. The prior speaker, Congressman
SCHWEIKERT, talked about the deficit
going up. Well, where did the money
that was not appropriated come from?
No one could be more grateful than I
that our valiant combat teams all
came home safely. Without question,
because of funds that have been provided over the years, their readiness
and performance resulted in their safe
return. However, the commanding officials who are responsible for their deployment have not responded to requests by Congress to report from
which accounts the money was withdrawn—billions and billions of dollars,
for almost 6 months—for the deployment and actions in the Gulf and Atlantic theater.
The Trump administration has failed
to account for the funds that they have
expended. Commanding officers and administration appointees have withdrawn billions and billions of dollars
from the U.S. Treasury, from our taxpayers, without legal authority, as
constitutionally required. For this, the
executive branch and those who are in
charge must be held accountable. That
day will come.
b 2020
The draw down of billions of Federal
taxpayer dollars to conduct these military operations has been expended
without a vote of Congress, nor even a
notification. I can attest the administration has failed, despite two requests
I have made in public and private
meetings with the highest level of Department of Defense officials and this
administration, to provide the Committee on Appropriations of both
Chambers of Congress the details of
which accounts were drawn down and
how much will it be to carry out these
costly continuing operations. Tonight,
for a third time, I place on the public
record asking the U.S. Department of
Defense: What funds have been expended in years 2025 and are being expended currently, and from which specific accounts, and are projected to be
expended from which accounts in this
year of 2026 in the Venezuelan operations.
Billions and billions and billions of
taxpayer dollars have been spent and
are being spent in the Gulf and Atlantic theater for these operations since
midyear last year. Secretary of State
Rubio has claimed the Venezuelan invasion was not a military operation.
Do you believe that? He calls it a law
enforcement action. Really? Did these
funds flow from the Department of Justice? Congress doesn’t know. Thousands upon thousands of America’s finest have been positioned and missed
holidays and family days on dozens of
battleships, some lifted in the air and
then dispatched to ground action. This

operation was much more than a law
enforcement action. It was an action of
war and regime change in another nation.
This country is powerful enough to
do almost everything, but you can’t
violate the Constitution. That is different.
Can Secretaries Hegseth and Rubio
give us examples of other so-called law
enforcement actions that have cost
U.S. taxpayers billions and billions of
dollars? Moreover, this Presidential administration has not legally appropriated a single dollar. Rather, it appears billions and billions of dollars
have been expended, some might say illegally transferred and some might say
stolen, from other Department of Defense accounts or from executive accounts or from other Federal agencies
to conduct these costly Venezuelan operations. From where? So now the simple question: How much did it cost to
capture the dictator of Venezuela,
Maduro, and his wife?
I ask, Mr. President, how much
money and exactly from which accounts? Give me the specific numbers
and accounting titles from which billions and billions of America’s taxpayer funds were transferred. These
shorted accounts are going to have to
be refinanced. How and when?
Secretary Hegseth, Secretary Rubio
and perhaps OMB Director Russell
Vought, their chief budget manager, it
is your sworn constitutional duty to
provide the American people which Defense or other Federal department and
agency accounts have been shorted because you transferred untold billions of
dollars to depose Venezuela’s dictator
Maduro and his wife.
Do you know that our own citizens
can’t get through to the Social Security office because you have cut the
staffing back so much? Do you have
any idea what is actually happening at
the local level in this country? No one
in this Chamber is a fan of Maduro, and
the people of Venezuela have a
humongous, difficult task of building
their country forward now, but why behave deceitfully when you swore an
oath to the Constitution of the United
States.
Now, based on President Trump’s
press conference this past weekend, it
seems that this lengthy and costly deployment of U.S. military into the Gulf
and the Atlantic aims to reclaim very
dirty crude oil deposits with out-ofdate refineries in Venezuela. How many
refineries are there? One? Who formerly owned them? Is it only the
former Chevron facility? What is the
business plan going forward, starting
with how are we going to reimburse the
accounts that were raided here?
For the sake of the American people
who are footing the big bill for all of
this, here is an idea. What if Congress
considers a taxpayer recovery fee on
every Venezuelan or American energy
company that will benefit from the
heroism of America’s military. How
about putting some of that money into
military housing, which is a disgrace.

H247

Let’s refund it back to our taxpayers
in the form of an energy rebate to help
them pay their rising utility bills.
That is, Congress could mandate that
any company that draws up Venezuelan dirty crude oil for their corporate coffers should instead be required to share in the cost of the operation and rebate any profit to the hardworking American taxpayers. The military operations amount to billions of
dollars, so any energy company benefiting from the heroism of our military
should pay an energy tax refund to U.S.
taxpayers. Think about it.
U.S. energy prices are rising and even
doubling across Ohio, our Buckeye
State, and many other localities across
our country due to the rise of data centers. Meanwhile, this administration is
cutting off funds for modern energy
systems. Wouldn’t such a rebate not
only be sensible but welcome and
impactful for America’s households
that are seeing rising energy bills
every month and rising water utility
bills?
Historically, the human lust for
crude oil—and Venezuela’s crude is
very dirty—is legendary. It is a subject
about which the American people are
going to become even more keenly
aware. Why? Because the blood of war
and the quest for dirty crude oil are
tightly bound. Far too many members
of our military have lost their lives to
defend the interests of dirty crude.
That isn’t always in the headlines, but
underneath, that is exactly what it is.
The Saudi oil kingdom is but one example of the bondage of blood and oil
to military dictatorships and war. To
gain a sense of it, I recommend a book,
‘‘Sleeping With the Devil’’ by Robert
Baer. You will learn a lot about blood
and war and the sacrifice of the people
in our military of this country over
several generations.
Over the last three-quarters of a century in particular, the rush and fixation for crude has become a very costly
cause of U.S. war deaths across our
military forces. Thousands upon thousands of our war dead have been sacrificed in such conflicts for which I will
now put figures on the RECORD.
Over the last century, time and
again, in war after war, excepting for
World War II, but for the China-BurmaIndia theater, our most precious U.S.
military has rendered hundreds of
thousands of selfless Americans, men
and women, who have been ordered to
battle and sacrificed their lives to gain
access to the world’s crude oil deposits.
The time for foreign oil conquests
should be over. Frankly, America must
not live in the past. We must keep inventing. We can’t go back. We have got
to go forward. Our energy future is
right here at home. Over the last 50
years, new American energy sources
have been invented. All exist in our
homeland, with more to come. I am
just so proud of the inventiveness of
the American people. The discovery of
natural gas in the Utica and Marcellus
shale deposits at the border in Ohio

H248

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

and Pennsylvania is absolutely enormous, the largest on our entire continent. We are seeing whole communities changed and revitalized because
of this. That was only made possible by
the Department of Energy’s invention
of fracking technology since President
Jimmy Carter first founded the Department when he was President of the
United States in the 1970s. Ohio’s nuclear industrialized north is being positioned to grow through fundamental
modernization. That can’t come soon
enough for me. We have got to replace
our 50-year-old nuclear power plants
across this country.
Our objective must be to make America energy independent here at home in
perpetuity. Our military has gone to
war too many times in the last century
to engage in wars in oil-rich places.
How President Trump is going to run
Venezuela remains a mystery. My concern remains how much is this going to
cost the taxpayers of our country. He
has already expended billions, without
the approval of Congress, to decapitate
the corrupt leaders of Venezuela; but
the White House can’t even tell Congress how much has been expended, nor
which accounts their budget director,
Russell Vought, moved money out of to
cover the billions and billions spent on
this Venezuelan operation.
b 2030
What this administration is carrying
out is in clear violation of the appropriations authority of Congress. It is
undermining our Constitution under
Article I. That is the beginning of the
Constitution. I recommend every
American go back and look. It puts everyone in danger when you don’t follow
the law.
Operating dilapidated oil platforms
in Venezuela is really not the President’s job. That is what he says he is
going to do. Now, the President does
have responsibility for America’s security, and so does Congress, to assure
our energy independence, but he is
shortchanging many programs across
the Federal establishment that would
make energy independence in perpetuity a reality.
Our energy portfolio domestically
must be balanced and comprehensive, a
truly all-of-the-above strategy in order
that there be competition not reliance
on dirty crude. That day should be
over. That means continuing progress
on renewable energy systems like modern nuclear, green hydrogen, fusion,
biofuels, solar, hydroelectric, geothermal, and capturing thermal waste
heat. Though the President does not
like wind power, in some remote and
coastal locations they do make sense.
The administration’s Venezuela obsession is going to prove to be, I am sad
to say, very expensive. Whatever happens will also take time. Forces of sabotage may lurk in an impoverished nation of over 30 million people, and its
institutions are run down. Is the
Trump administration assuming the
task of nation building? That could add
billions and even trillions to our debt.

When I asked Secretary Hegseth how
many billions of dollars the Venezuelan
operation had cost us in the United
States to date, I asked where the unappropriated funds had come from. He
rather dismissively blew me off and
stated: From the general accounts. Mr.
Speaker, there is no such thing. I asked
that he identify the specific accounts
at the Department of Defense from
which he diverted funds to pay for this
operation. He did not reply.
For example, I have been told military housing has been shorted to spend
billions on military action. Secretary
Hegseth then had a second thought. He
said: Call my office. I asked him directly with whom in his office should I
speak, and he replied: Anyone. Mr.
Speaker, I am from the working class
town of Toledo, Ohio. We understand a
dodge when we hear one. I then reasked
the question yesterday in a bipartisan
convening here in the Congress: From
which accounts, Mr. Secretary, were
funds diverted to pay for the billions of
dollars being expended in the Gulf and
Atlantic theater. Again, he dodged and
refused to answer.
The Secretary of State calls this
Venezuelan deployment ‘‘a law enforcement action.’’ I have never seen—and
please anyone listening to this, if you
have seen a law enforcement action
that has cost multiple billions of dollars, please let me know. Call my office.
The briefings we received before
Christmas were hollow, and as we know
now, totally misleading. The bipartisan
briefing yesterday described the operation but not the costs.
Again I ask: Name the accounts exactly from which billions of dollars
have been diverted to pay all the expenses of this major continuing military operation? Is the administration
going to hire mercenaries in the next
several months? If so, exactly from
which accounts and which companies?
I would prefer any funds be rebated
to our American people for the rapidly
rising costs of energy because of the
emergence of AI and data centers. The
operation executed by our military
that the administration has just perpetrated is not a law enforcement action by any stretch of reasonable consideration. It is an act of war and occupation.
Are funds being taken from our nuclear Navy shipbuilding program which
is already 2 years behind schedule? Are
funds being subtracted from cybersecurity accounts that are so essential to
national security and our future? What
about military housing, which I mentioned for servicemembers and their
families all across this country and
world, or how about the healthcare of
those who have served in theater?
I can guarantee this: There aren’t
enough people at the Veterans Administration to answer the phones when
our vets call in and ask for appointments because they are being shorted
on doctors and nurses. The thousands
of people they need to hire that Elon

January 8, 2026

Musk erased from Federal employment, that is un-American.
The American people have an absolute right to know account by account
how much this U.S.-Venezuela military
oil operation has cost over the last several months. Rebuilding Venezuela is
not the top priority for the people of
the district I represent in northwestern
Ohio.
While we observe billions being spent
in Latin America for oil, the Trump administration has just canceled millions
of dollars to Ohio manufacturers who
were hoping to make their operations
more energy efficient to compete with
China and other countries around the
world who compete so unfairly.
Those projects to manufacturing
companies in Ohio have been halted by
the administration over the course of
the last year and then just again before
the holidays. The U.S. Department of
Commerce, for example, canceled all
Federal assistance for manufacturing
extension long relied upon in Ohio and
across our country, especially in manufacturing areas that were depleted
after the passage of NAFTA to help
spur business extensions for small- and
medium-sized manufacturers.
When we get the tax refunds from oil
that is going to be spent in Venezuela,
let’s help some of these companies that
need to build the future for our communities.
The question must be asked: Why
does the administration expend billions
for capturing dirty, defunct crude refineries in a foreign country, rather
than investing in the future of American companies right here at home?
The American people deserve an answer. This is not a small amount of
money. They deserve transparency by
the Trump administration.
I lived through the first Arab oil embargo of this country as our people endured the great harm it caused. Our
Nation should not be funding recovery
of defunct, dirty crude oil companies in
foreign nations, rather, investment is
needed here not just in our northwestern Ohio district but nationwide to
modernize and advance modern energy
systems.
Our grid needs modernization across
our Nation. Why? The poor condition of
the existing grid and the recent doubling of electric bills across our region
due to a surge of data centers consumes massive amounts of power. Our
grid is old. All over the country we
must focus on building new energy systems at the cutting edge of American
technology. Dirty Venezuelan crude is
not the answer. We can’t live in the
past.
America needs investment in new, diversified energy platforms, in green hydrogen, in modern nuclear. I know our
young people will do this. I just know
they are going to grow into this, in
natural gas applications and advanced
biofuels, more powerful thin film energy arrays, including solar, thermal
heat recovery, fusion, advanced batteries. Our region has oil refineries

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

whose platforms have been made cleaner. They need help in dealing with RINs
inside our own Nation. Why not help
them?
Nuclear power plants in our region of
Ohio are over a half century old. We
don’t need old nuclear, we need modern, safer nuclear. We need the President’s help to modernize Ohio’s Nuclear North with a new grid. Our industrial corridor produces heavy truck and
car platforms, steel, strategic metals,
cryogenic hydrogen, biofuels, renewable fuels, natural gas, advanced solar,
and nuclear power. I would like the
President to take as much money as he
just spent in the Gulf on this Venezuelan operation and modernize the
electric grid across the Great Lakes region that I represent. There is enough
money in that to cover other areas of
the country.
America should be excelling in new
grid replacement and creating jobs, but
guess what, Mr. Speaker, we are very,
very far behind.
The people of my region work in
manufacturing. They work in steel.
They work in strategic materials. We
prefer not to import steel here. We
make it. We build cars. We prefer not
to import. We build tanks. We can’t
import our defense industry base. We
must build it. That is what we do. Our
region operates among the top 10 finest
National Guard F–16 Fighter Wings in
this whole Nation. Mr. Speaker, 20
years ago our, pilots flew the first biofueled F–16 aircraft out of a major base
in our country.
b 2040
We grow crops for biofuels right
where we live, and those fuels went
into those planes. We don’t import it.
Our military is looking for more renewable fuels. The American people
and our military need domestic energy
investment in our country, not Venezuela. We need jobs here, not in
penny-wage havens.
It is clear that the President deployed the U.S. Navy to the Gulf and
the Atlantic to take over Venezuela’s
oil industry. Both China and Vladimir
Putin’s close relations with Venezuela
have been a regional concern, but we
don’t need to take over old, brokendown former platforms for oil to block
Putin. We just place further financial
sanctions on Russia, which could happen in this House Chamber with two
more Members signing discharge petition No. 8 at the Clerk’s desk in this
Chamber. We need only two more signatures to get it across the finish line
to put more sanctions on Russia. That
would make a big difference.
President John F. Kennedy, a Navy
man and the only President ever
awarded the Purple Heart, understood
exactly what to do when faced with the
Cuban Missile Crisis perpetrated by
Communist Russia one-half century
ago. He blockaded the region.
This country has the strongest defense ever known to humankind. We
can protect ourselves if we are smart

enough to do it, but we can’t do it
without investments in this country to
make our companies stronger.
The President of the United States
should not seek to run foreign countries’ oil companies.
What is morally troubling is that the
President sought $1 billion in campaign
donations from major oil and gas interests. He should reflect on our Nation
learning a hard, painful lesson from
our decades-long presence in long conflicts that dragged on. Tutoring other
governments to make them work is a
deep, dangerous, and expensive hole
that is being dug by this administration. The American people don’t want
to go down this path anymore.
Our primary job must be to defend
our country against all enemies, foreign and domestic. That means being
strong inside our own borders. It means
abiding by the rule of law and our Constitution. We had best focus on the future right here in the USA, abide by
our country and the rule of law, and
strengthen our ties with other proven
democracies of the world. That alliance
is our insurance in war. America must
not be sucked down into unstable situations.
The lingering challenge of our own
future energy security here at home is
real. The solution demands the brilliance of invention inside our own borders, and we must never tie our future
to imports or foreign crude.
The good news is that our citizens
and inventors have been busy inventing
our new energy future inside our borders right here at home.
Mr. President, if your staff allows
you to watch this speech, I personally
invite you to join me with members of
our American energy team. We will
show you the new energy future that is
developing right here inside our own
Nation. They have you captured down
there in Mar-a-Lago. There is a lot bigger country to see.
Our nuclear Navy is the best in the
world. Their work matters. They are
behind. We need your help. We are on
the horizon of advanced nuclear. We
need your help.
Our farmers, too, have figured out
how to grow a range of biofuels. Onehalf of their crop now goes into fuel.
Come. Meet them. Your tariffs limit
their global reach, even as their role in
new energy fuels is huge.
Our water and wastewater utilities
are beginning to capture vast amounts
of geo-power in a way prior generations
have never even imagined possible.
Building materials inventors are creating more energy-efficient windows,
better siding and materials for construction, better roofing, and better
batteries. So many power options like
green hydrogen await on the horizon.
Why would any wise leader handcuff
their nation to imported and dirty foreign crude dependency?
I have devoted a major share of my
career to helping America regain its
energy independence in perpetuity
across all sectors of energy. That keeps
it competitive.

H249

Our domestic deposits of oil and natural gas must be used judiciously. We
are now the largest exporter of oil in
the world. We will not be the last generation, however, to populate this
country, and we cannot live in the
past. We must live in the future.
In the last century, and even this
one, America often headed to war for
oil interests. Our soldiers fought
unending battles in godforsaken places
anchored to dirty crude. We even had
to pass legislation here in Congress
that began in my district to create the
toxic exposure fund, the Sergeant First
Class Heath Robinson Honoring our
Promise to Address Comprehensive
Toxics Act, to allow treatment for the
toxins our vets who fought in the Middle East and Vietnam endured as their
health failed. No member of our military should ever die for dirty crude.
Folks, what a pity it would be if the
Trump Presidency went down in history as taking American progress
backward on energy independence.
That hangs in the balance.
Just in my lifetime, here is a summary of U.S. military personnel who
died in foreign conflicts where crude
oil interests underpinned the surface
warfare. I say no more.
World War II, in the 1940s, during
World War II, our Uncle Tony was deployed by the Office of Strategic Services, or OSS, to the China-Burma-India
theater. He served as an Army parachutist and truck driver—he was so
brave—under command of General Vinegar Joe Stilwell. Fighting off Japanese regulars in bitter combat, our
uncle was part of an elite unit building
the Burma Road. His dangerous mission helped stop the flow of oil to
Japan from the surrounding oil-rich
East Asian deep-sea crude oil deposits.
Again, control of oil was central to
warfare. Today, the former Burma
Road that he helped build is a major
corridor for China’s Belt and Road Initiative. Pay attention, folks, to oil.
In the Korean war, 1950 to 1953, we
lost 36,000 U.S. troops, 36,000 U.S. war
dead. It was the second most deadly
war of the Cold War, which was
undeclared by a gutless Congress involved in the North Korean People’s
Army that invaded South Korea in an
attack along the 38th parallel, the dividing line between Communist North
Korea and the Democratic Republic of
South Korea. Again, the war occurred
along the Korean Peninsula, which still
remains divided but which accesses oil
from multiple fields along the eastern
rims of both nations. Today, South
Korea does not produce oil, but it has
the fifth largest refining capacity in
the world after the U.S., China, Russia,
and India.
In Vietnam, over 58,280 conscripted
U.S. troops died near the Chinese border in an undeclared war by another
gutless Congress. More than 60,000
more Vietnam veterans died when they
returned home by their own hand.
Mr. Speaker, they were and are America’s
patriots, drafted and sent to that horrible war

H250

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

by Democratic President Lyndon Johnson
from the oil rich State of Texas. Thousands of
conscripted U.S. soldiers were unloaded off
ships to fight in that undeclared conflict. Many
deboarded vessels, as they viewed and reported huge oil derricks operating in the South
China Sea ringing the coasts of Vietnam, and
adjacent countries. Many came home from
that confusing deployment wondering what
they had fought for and against. Records indicate oil drilling in the South China waters continues until today. Oil and gas companies in
Vietnam made huge profits in 2025.
Kuwait Gulf War—1991—147 U.S. War
Dead:
About a decade later came the Gulf War.
U.S. troops were deployed to save the Royal
Kingdom’s dirty crude oil for the monarchy of
Kuwait. Republican President George Herbert
Walker Bush of Texas was buddies with the
Saudi Family and its lobbyists and the Kuwaiti
and Saudi royalty. Together they mobilized the
U.S. military and other nations to push neighboring Iraqi despot Saddam Hussein back into
Kuwait’s border. Hussein’s objective was to
steal from Kuwait’s crude oil fields which extended across the adjoining borders of Kuwait
and Iraq. The Coalition of the Willing Forces
rolled back Saddam’s forces inside his own
borders. When I landed in Kuwait during the
Iraq War that came two decades later, I entered the headquarters complex of the U.S.
military command. It was huge. It looked like
a massive Mission Control for a U.S. space
launch. Video screens, hundreds of employees, and a full color, smiling portrait of former
President and oil man George Bush Senior—
probably 5 feet by 6 feet plastered on the wall
of the secure entryway. So, another U.S.

President also from Texas supported another
crude, dirty oil kingdom war in the complex
Middle East political array of undemocratic
states.
2001—Iraq War—U.S. War dead—3,481:
Saudi religious dissidents snuck into the
U.S. under the tutelage of Saudi religious
zealot Osama bin Laden—they highjacked
four airplanes and flew those planes into New
York City’s tallest buildings—the World Trade
Towers—the first foreign attack on U.S. soil in
American history. Another plane hit the Pentagon and a fourth headed for Washington,
DC crashed near Johnstown, Pennsylvania.
In New York City, the demise of the World
Trade Center occurred with the first plane
crashing into its North tower above the 80th
floor. That impact brought down the Cantor
Fitzgerald trading company whose President is
Howard Lutnick (who today serves as the U.S.
Secretary of Commerce). That firm handled
Wall Street’s major oil trader called e-bond’s
from the Middle East through its New York
World Trade Center offices by denominating
them in dollars. It also ran a London Office.
Had the London office not existed on 9–11, it
is likely the U.S. financial bond markets would
have collapsed that day. Chaos would have
reigned across our entire financial markets.
By way of history, Ronald Reagan who had
served as President from 1981 through
1989—importantly with oil man George Bush
Senior of Texas as his Vice President—had
negotiated an agreement during his Presidency with the Saudis to dollar denominate all
its oil revenue trades, bringing enormous financial benefit to the U.S. financial markets.
Moreover, it is important to follow the footsteps of Richard ‘‘Dick’’ Cheney, then Sec-

January 8, 2026

retary of Defense, and late Vice President during the George Bush II Presidency from 2001
to 2009. When he left his position as U.S.
Secretary of Defense for George Bush I, he
worked for Haliburton company whose purpose is earning money off drilling, and refining
dirty crude oil from everywhere in the world.
Oil is not liberty. But its presence has impacted liberty throughout modern history.
Osama bin Laden was intelligent. He understood the finances of Middle East oil interests.
I believe he knew exactly how Cantor Fitzgerald and U.S. bond markets were directly
tied to the Middle East kingdoms’ stability, and
U.S. markets.
History demonstrates our nation has rewarded tens of thousands of American lives
for dirty crude oil interests. We should not be
sending our sons and daughters to die in Venezuelan jungles so oil companies can squeeze
wealth out of that sovereign nation to pad their
profit margins, and fill the pockets and bank
accounts of the influential president’s billionaire buddies, or presidents and financial interests whose top priority is not the American
people, nor liberty.
To remain strong and energy independent in
perpetuity, the United States of America must
continue its steady progress in building competitive modern energy systems forward here
in our homeland. May God bless America.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to direct their remarks to the Chair.

NOTICE
Incomplete record of House proceedings except for concluding business that follows.
The Explanatory Statement regarding H.R. 6938 will be continued in Book II.

ADJOURNMENT
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I move
that the House do now adjourn.
The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 8 o’clock and 47 minutes
p.m.), the House adjourned until tomorrow, Friday, January 9, 2026, at 9
a.m.
f

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS,
ETC.
Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive
communications were taken from the
Speaker’s table and referred as follows:
EC–2603. A letter from the Senior Counsel,
Legal Division, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, transmitting the Bureau’s final
rule — Home Mortgage Disclosure (Regulation C) Adjustment to Asset-Size Exemption
Threshold [Billing Code: 4810-AM-P] received
January 6, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Financial
Services.
EC–2604. A letter from the Senior Counsel,
Legal Division, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, transmitting the Bureau’s final
rule — Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z)
Adjustment to Asset-Size Exemption Threshold [Billing Code: 4810-AM-P] received January 6, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);

Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Financial Services.
EC–2605. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel, Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, transmitting the Corporation’s
final rule — Allocation of Assets in SingleEmployer Plans; Valuation of Benefits and
Assets; Expected Retirement Age; Missing
Participants Mortality Assumption, received
January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Education
and Workforce.
EC–2606. A letter from the Supervisory,
Program Analyst, Office of Economic and
Analytics/Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, Federal Communications Commission,
transmitting the Commission’s final rule —
Auction of Advanced Wireless Services
(AWS-3) Licenses Notice and Filing Requirements, Minimum Opening Bids, Upfront Payments, and Other Procedures for Auction 113,
Bidding Scheduled to Begin June 2, 2026 [AU
Docket No.: 25-117] received January 7, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2607. A letter from the Acting Chief, Office of Engineering and Technology, Federal
Communications Commission, transmitting
the Commission’s final rule — Delete, Delete, Delete [ET Docket No.: 25-133] received
January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110

Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2608. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Office of Policy, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule
— Air Plan Approval; Ohio; 2015 Ozone Moderate Reasonably Available Control Technology [EPA-R05-OAR-2022-0352; EPA-R05OAR-2023-0093; FRL-9995-02-R5] received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2609. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Office of Policy, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule
— Extension of the State Implementation
Plan Due Date for the Regional Haze Third
Implementation Period [EPA-HQ-OAR-20230262; FRL-12160-02-OAR] (RIN: 2060-AW41) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2610. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Office of Policy, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule
— Air Plan Approval; Michigan and Minnesota; Revision to Taconite Federal Implementation
Plan
[EPA-R05-OAR-2024-0215;
FRL-12351-02-R5] received January 5, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2611. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Office of Policy, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule
— Air Plan Revision; California; Placer
County Air Pollution Control District; New
Source
Review
[EPA-R09-OAR-2024-0620;
FRL-12530-03-R9] received January 5, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2612. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Office of Policy, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule
— Air Plan Approval; California; San Joaquin Valley Unified Air Pollution Control
District [EPA-R09-OAR-2025-0300; FRL-1283202-R9] received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2613. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Office of Policy, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule
— Utah; Northern Wasatch Front; 2015 8Hour Ozone Nonattainment Area Boundary
Expansion and Applicability of Certain Clean
Air Act Requirements [EPA-R08-OAR-20250001; FRL-12971-02-R8] received January 5,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2614. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Office of Policy, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule
— Air Plan Approval; Michigan; Infrastructure SIP Requirements for the 2015 Ozone
NAAQS; Michigan State Board Requirements; Withdrawal of Direct Final Rule
[EPA-R05-OAR-2019-0215; FRL-13010-03-R5] received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2615. A letter from the Supervisory,
Program Analyst, Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau, Federal Communications Commission, transmitting the Commission’s final rule — Wireless Emergency
Alerts [PS Docket No.: 15-91] Amendments to
Part 11 of the Commission’s Rules Regarding
the Emergency Alert System [PS Docket
No.: 15-94] received January 5, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
EC–2616. A letter from the Supervisory,
Program Analyst, Wireline Competition Bureau, Federal Communications Commission,
transmitting the Commission’s final rule —
Numbering Policies for Modern Communications [WC Docket No.: 13-97] Telephone Number Requirements for IP-Enabled Service
Providers [WC Docket No.: 07-243] Implementation of TRACED Act Section 6(a) ——
Knowledge of Customers by Entities with
Access to Numbering Resources [WC Docket
No.: 20-67] received January 5, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
EC–2617. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting the Department’s final rule — International Traffic in
Arms Regulations: Exemption for Defense
Trade and Cooperation Among Australia, the
United Kingdom, and the United States
[Public Notice: 12799] (RIN: 1400-AF84) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES ON
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XIII, reports of
committees were delivered to the Clerk
for printing and reference to the proper
calendar, as follows:
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 178. A bill to require the Secretary of Agriculture to carry out activities
to suppress wildfires, and for other purposes,
with an amendment (Rept. 119–429, Pt. 1). Ordered to be printed.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 179. A bill to direct the Secretary concerned to coordinate with impacted parties when conducting a forest
management activity, and for other purposes, with an amendment (Rept. 119–430, Pt.
1). Ordered to be printed.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 2250. A bill to reauthorize
the National Landslide Preparedness Act,
and for other purposes, with an amendment
(Rept. 119–431, Pt. 1). Ordered to be printed.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 435. A bill to amend title 5,
United States Code, to provide direct hire
authority to appoint individuals to Federal
wildland firefighting and firefighting support
positions in the Forest Service or the Department of the Interior, and for other purposes (Rept. 119–432, Pt. 1). Ordered to be
printed.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 1110. A bill to require the
Secretary of Agriculture to develop and implement a strategy to increase opportunities
to utilize livestock grazing as a means of
wildfire risk reduction, with amendments
(Rept. 119–433, Pt. 1). Ordered to be printed.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 2405. A bill to direct the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of
the Interior to carry out activities to provide for white oak restoration, and for other
purposes, with an amendment (Rept. 119–434,
Pt. 1). Ordered to be printed.
Mr. WESTERMAN: Committee on Natural
Resources. H.R. 839. A bill to prohibit the
implementation of a Land Protection Plan
for Muleshoe National Wildlife Refuge, with
an amendment (Rept. 119–435). Referred to
the Committee of the Whole House on the
state of the Union.
f

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following
titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:
By Mr. ARRINGTON:
H.R. 6974. A bill to amend title XVIII of the
Social Security to permit additional accrediting organizations to approve specialized
MA plans for special needs individuals; to
the Committee on Ways and Means, and in
addition to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce, for a period to be subsequently
determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. CARTER of Georgia (for himself, Mr. WIED, and Mr. KELLY of
Pennsylvania):
H.R. 6975. A bill to subject aliens convicted
of fraud to deportation and to bestow concurrent jurisdiction to revoke the citizenship
of any naturalized United States citizen convicted of fraud on any court that enters such
a conviction; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. CISNEROS (for himself, Mr.
BERGMAN, Mr. LIEU, and Mr. GRAVES):

H251

H.R. 6976. A bill to amend laws relating to
duty performed by members of the reserve
components of the Armed Forces, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Armed
Services, and in addition to the Committees
on Transportation and Infrastructure, Oversight and Government Reform, Agriculture,
Small Business, Financial Services, the Judiciary, Education and Workforce, Veterans’
Affairs, Ways and Means, Homeland Security, and House Administration, for a period
to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Ms. DEXTER (for herself and Mr.
LAWLER):
H.R. 6977. A bill to provide for the periodic
issuance of up-to-date clinical guidance on
addressing the health effects of per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce.
By Mr. FINSTAD:
H.R. 6978. A bill to direct the Director of
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
to conduct a review of certain approved immigration benefit requests, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. GOTTHEIMER (for himself and
Mr. LAWLER):
H.R. 6979. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide for youth sports,
to establish a grant program for recreational
youth sports, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition to the Committees on Education and
Workforce, and Energy and Commerce, for a
period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI (for himself and Mr. CASTRO of Texas):
H.R. 6980. A bill to prohibit the availability
of Federal funds for certain United States assertions with respect to Venezuela, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Foreign
Affairs, and in addition to the Committee on
Armed Services, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Ms. LEE of Nevada (for herself, Mr.
CISCOMANI, Mr. TONKO, and Mr.
LAWLER):
H.R. 6981. A bill to require the Secretary of
Energy to further develop and support the
adoption of a voluntary streamlined permitting and inspection process for authorities
having jurisdiction over the permitting of
qualifying distributed energy systems, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Ms. MACE (for herself and Mr.
FINE):
H.R. 6982. A bill to amend the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to
provide for reporting requirements for certain grantees for grants to combat violence
against women; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MENENDEZ (for himself and
Mr. CASAR):
H.R. 6983. A bill to require data centers to
generate electricity, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. MENENDEZ (for himself and
Mr. CASAR):
H.R. 6984. A bill to require reports on the
effects of data centers on air quality and
water quality, and on electricity consumption by data centers; to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. MILLER of Ohio (for himself
and Mr. HORSFORD):

H252

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

H.R. 6985. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to reinstate the rules for
wagering losses; to the Committee on Ways
and Means.
By Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin (for herself, Ms. CHU, Ms. BALINT, Ms.
BROWNLEY, Mr. POCAN, Ms. NORTON,
and Mr. SCOTT of Virginia):
H.R. 6986. A bill to amend the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 to exclude from income,
for the purpose of determining eligibility
and benefits, increased income received from
cost of living adjustments made under titles
II and XVI of the Social Security Act, section 3(a)(1) of the Railroad Retirement Act of
1974 (45 U.S.C. 231b(a)(1)), or section 5312 of
title 38 of the United States Code, and income received from supplementary payments
received under section 1616 of the Social Security Act; to the Committee on Agriculture.
By Mr. NEHLS (for himself, Mr. MOORE
of Alabama, Mr. WEBER of Texas, Mr.
GROTHMAN, Mr. ROY, Mr. GOSAR, Mr.
HARRIS of North Carolina, Mr. HUNT,
Mr. JACKSON of Texas, and Mr. GILL
of Texas):
H.R. 6987. A bill to amend the Immigration
and Nationality Act to clarify the definition
of ‘‘public charge’’ and ‘‘likely at any time
to become a public charge,’’ to establish requirements for affidavits of support and public charge bonds, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. PFLUGER:
H.R. 6988. A bill to require a strategy for
the expanded use of Trade Transparency
Units; to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Ms. STANSBURY (for herself and
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin):
H.R. 6989. A bill to amend the Public
Health Service Act to require the Secretary
of Health and Human Services to carry out
activities to establish, expand, and sustain a
public health nursing workforce, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce.
By Ms. STEVENS (for herself, Mrs.
DINGELL, Mr. FITZPATRICK, Ms. TLAIB,
Mr. LAWLER, Ms. SCHOLTEN, and Mrs.
KIGGANS of Virginia):
H.R. 6990. A bill to direct the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency to issue a final rule adding as a class
all perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances with at least one fully fluorinated
carbon atom to the list of hazardous air pollutants under section 112(b) of the Clean Air
Act (42 U.S.C. 7412(b)), and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Ms. VAN DUYNE:
H.R. 6991. A bill to impose additional duties on goods imported into the United
States; to the Committee on Ways and
Means.
By Mr. RUIZ:
H.J. Res. 138. A joint resolution expressing
support for the designation of the second
Saturday of January as ‘‘National Desert
Day’’; to the Committee on Natural Resources.
By Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ (for
Mr.
herself,
Mr.
FITZPATRICK,
JEFFRIES, Ms. CLARK of Massachusetts, Mr. AGUILAR, Mr. LIEU, Mr.
AMO, Ms. ANSARI, Mr. AUCHINCLOSS,
Ms. BALINT, Ms. BARRAGÁN, Mrs.
BEATTY, Mr. BELL, Mr. BERA, Mr.
BEYER, Mr. BISHOP, Ms. BONAMICI,
Mr. BOYLE of Pennsylvania, Ms.
Ms.
BROWNLEY,
Ms.
BROWN,
BUDZINSKI, Mr. CARBAJAL, Mr. CARSON, Mr. CARTER of Louisiana, Mr.
CASE, Mr. CASTEN, Ms. CASTOR of
Florida, Mr. CASTRO of Texas, Mrs.
CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK, Ms. CHU, Mr.
CISNEROS, Mr. CLEAVER, Mr. COHEN,

Mr. CONAWAY, Mr. CORREA, Mr.
COSTA, Mr. COURTNEY, Ms. CRAIG, Ms.
CROCKETT, Mr. CROW, Ms. DAVIDS of
Kansas, Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Ms.
DEAN of Pennsylvania, Ms. DEGETTE,
Ms. DELAURO, Ms. DELBENE, Mr.
DELUZIO, Ms. DEXTER, Mrs. DINGELL,
Mr. DOGGETT, Ms. ELFRETH, Ms.
ESCOBAR, Mr. ESPAILLAT, Mr. EVANS
of
Pennsylvania,
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ, Mr. FIELDS, Mr. FIGURES,
LETCHER
,
Mr.
F
OSTER
,
Mrs.
Mrs. F
FOUSHEE, Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida, Ms. FRIEDMAN, Mr. FROST, Mr.
GARAMENDI, Mr. GARCIA of California,
Ms. GARCIA of Texas, Mr. GARCÍA of
Illinois, Ms. GILLEN, Mr. GOLDMAN of
Ms.
New
York,
Mr.
GOMEZ,
GOODLANDER, Mr. GOTTHEIMER, Mr.
GREEN of Texas, Mrs. GRIJALVA, Mrs.
HAYES, Mr. HIMES, Ms. NORTON, Mr.
Ms.
HOULAHAN,
Mr.
HORSFORD,
HOYER, Mr. IVEY, Mr. JACKSON of Illinois, Ms. JACOBS, Mr. JOHNSON of
Georgia, Ms. JOHNSON of Texas, Ms.
KAMLAGER-DOVE, Ms. KAPTUR, Mr.
KEATING, Ms. KELLY of Illinois, Mr.
KENNEDY of New York, Mr. KHANNA,
Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mr. LANDSMAN,
Mr. LARSEN of Washington, Mr. LARSON of Connecticut, Ms. LEE of Nevada, Mr. LEVIN, Mr. LYNCH, Mr.
Ms.
MATSUI,
Mrs.
MAGAZINER,
MCBATH, Ms. MCBRIDE, Mrs. MCCLAIN
Ms.
MCCLELLAN,
Ms.
DELANEY,
MCCOLLUM, Ms. MCDONALD RIVET,
Mr. MCGARVEY, Mr. MCGOVERN, Mrs.
MCIVER, Mr. MEEKS, Mr. MENENDEZ,
Ms. MENG, Mr. MIN, Ms. MOORE of
Wisconsin, Mr. MORELLE, Ms. MORRISON, Mr. MOSKOWITZ, Mr. MOULTON,
Mr. MRVAN, Mr. MULLIN, Mr. NADLER,
Mr. NEAL, Mr. NORCROSS, Mr.
OLSZEWSKI, Mr. PALLONE, Ms. PELOSI,
Mr. PETERS, Ms. PETTERSEN, Ms. PINGREE, Ms. PLASKETT, Mr. POCAN, Ms.
POU, Mr. QUIGLEY, Ms. RANDALL, Mr.
RASKIN, Ms. RIVAS, Ms. ROSS, Ms. SALINAS, Ms. SÁNCHEZ, Ms. SCANLON,
Ms. SCHAKOWSKY, Mr. SCHNEIDER, Ms.
SCHOLTEN, Ms. SCHRIER, Mr. DAVID
SCOTT of Georgia, Mr. SCOTT of Virginia, Ms. SEWELL, Mr. SHERMAN, Ms.
SIMON, Mr. SORENSEN, Mr. SOTO, Ms.
STANSBURY, Mr. STANTON, Ms. STEVENS, Mr. SUBRAMANYAM, Mr. SUOZZI,
Mr. SWALWELL, Mr. TAKANO, Mr.
THANEDAR, Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi, Mr. THOMPSON of California,
Ms. TLAIB, Ms. TOKUDA, Mr. TONKO,
Mrs. TRAHAN, Mr. TRAN, Mr. VARGAS,
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ, Mr. VINDMAN, Mr.
WALKINSHAW, Ms. WATERS, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN, Mr. WHITESIDES, Ms.
WILLIAMS of Georgia, Ms. WILSON of
Florida, Mr. SMITH of Washington,
Mr. RUIZ, Mr. RYAN, Mr. TORRES of
Mr.
New
York,
Mr.
VEASEY,
DESAULNIER, Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ
of Texas, Mr. GRAY, Mr. HERNÁNDEZ,
Ms. JAYAPAL, Mr. LATIMER, Ms. LOFGREN, Mr. MFUME, Mrs. RAMIREZ, Ms.
TITUS, Mrs. TORRES of California, Ms.
Mr.
CUELLAR,
Mr.
UNDERWOOD,
PAPPAS, Mr. RILEY of New York, Mr.
LICCARDO, Mr. NEGUSE, Ms. STRICKLAND, Mr. PANETTA, and Mr. CLYBURN):
H. Con. Res. 69. Concurrent resolution recognizing the 15th Anniversary of the January
8, 2011, Tucson, Arizona, shooting and honoring the survivors, victims, and former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords, a gun violence
survivor, and one of the Nation’s most influential voices of courage in the fight to end
gun violence; to the Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform.

January 8, 2026

By Mr. MORELLE:
H. Res. 982. A resolution providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 6039) to advance
commonsense priorities; to the Committee
on Rules.
By Mrs. WAGNER (for herself and Mr.
LIEU):
H. Res. 983. A resolution recognizing the
30th anniversary of the first flight of the F/
A-18 E1 Super Hornet from Lambert Field in
St. Louis, Missouri, and the 30 years of service of the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet to the
United States Navy and to allies of the
United States; to the Committee on Armed
Services.
f

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers
granted to Congress in the Constitution to enact the accompanying bill or
joint resolutions.
By Mr. ARRINGTON:
H.R. 6974.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 , Section 8
By Mr. CARTER of Georgia:
H.R. 6975.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution
By Mr. CISNEROS:
H.R. 6976.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. DEXTER:
H.R. 6977.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. FINSTAD:
H.R. 6978.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. GOTTHEIMER:
H.R. 6979.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI:
H.R. 6980.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution
By Ms. LEE of Nevada:
H.R. 6981.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 1 provides Congress with the power to ‘‘lay and collect
Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises’’ in order
to ‘‘provide for the . . . general Welfare of
the United States.’’
By Ms. MACE:
H.R. 6982.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution.
By Mr. MENENDEZ:
H.R. 6983.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 , Clause 8
By Mr. MENENDEZ:
H.R. 6984.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Clause 8

January 8, 2026

H253

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

By Mr. MILLER of Ohio:
H.R. 6985.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Congress has the power to enact this legislation persuant to Article I, Section 8,
Clause 1.
By Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin:
H.R. 6986.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution
By Mr. NEHLS:
H.R. 6987.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following: U.S. Constitution Article I, Section 8, Clause 18.
By Mr. PFLUGER:
H.R. 6988.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
By Ms. STANSBURY:
H.R. 6989.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Ms. STEVENS:
H.R. 6990.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
This bill is enacted pursuant to the power
granted to Congress under Article I, Section
8, Clause 18 of the United States Constitution.
By Ms. VAN DUYNE:
H.R. 6991.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Art. 1 Sec. 8
By Mr. RUIZ:
H.J. Res. 138.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, section 8, Clauses 1 and 18 of the
United States Constitution, to provide for
the general welfare and make all laws necessary and proper to carry out the powers of
Congress.
f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H.R. 18: Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 262: Mr. BERGMAN.
H.R. 491: Mrs. TRAHAN.
H.R. 500: Mr. THOMPSON of California.
H.R. 507: Ms. MALOY.
H.R. 722: Mr. CARTER of Georgia.
H.R. 743: Ms. BONAMICI.
H.R. 759: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 923: Ms. TLAIB.
H.R. 926: Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 1065: Mr. WALKINSHAW.
H.R. 1076: Mr. FIGURES.
H.R. 1254: Mr. THOMPSON of California.
H.R. 1330: Mr. DOGGETT and Ms. SÁNCHEZ.
H.R. 1421: Mr. VAN DREW.
H.R. 1465: Mr. MESSMER.
H.R. 1494: Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia.
H.R. 1551: Ms. FEDORCHAK.
H.R. 1564: Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE.
H.R. 1616: Mrs. DINGELL.
H.R. 1659: Mr. BRESNAHAN.
H.R. 1661: Ms. DELAURO.
H.R. 1988: Ms. TOKUDA.
H.R. 1992: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 2120: Mr. CRENSHAW and Mr. BILIRAKIS.
H.R. 2231: Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia.
H.R. 2368: Ms. SIMON, Mr. MANNION, and Ms.
MORRISON.

H.R. 2477: Mr. FEENSTRA.
H.R. 2487: Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE and Ms.
MATSUI.
H.R. 2668: Ms. JOHNSON OF TEXAS.
H.R. 2680: Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN and Mrs.
HAYES.
H.R. 2711: Ms. TITUS.
H.R. 2741: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 2818: Mrs. HAYES.
H.R. 2837: Mr. BELL.
H.R. 2853: Mr. RILEY of New York.
H.R. 2859: Mrs. HAYES.
H.R. 2948: Ms. SIMON and Ms. PLASKETT.
H.R. 3115: Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 3220: Mr. NUNN of Iowa.
H.R. 3277: Ms. STEVENS and Mrs. MCBATH.
H.R. 3436: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 3497: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 3532: Ms. RANDALL.
H.R. 3543: Mrs. HAYES.
H.R. 3562: Ms. TENNEY and Ms. CROCKETT.
H.R. 3569: Ms. MATSUI and Ms. KAMLAGERDOVE.
H.R. 3656: Ms. BONAMICI.
H.R. 3694: Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia.
H.R. 3723: Mr. SESSIONS.
H.R. 3757: Ms. BONAMICI and Mr. GARCÍA of
Illinois.
H.R. 3810: Mr. GOODEN.
H.R. 3821: Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 3988: Mr. MIN.
H.R. 4206: Ms. GARCIA of Texas.
H.R. 4299: Mr. KELLY of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 4304: Mr. COLE.
H.R. 4307: Mr. MOYLAN.
H.R. 4317: Mr. VAN DREW.
H.R. 4456: Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.R. 4487: Mrs. HAYES.
H.R. 4516: Mr. BELL.
H.R. 4606: Ms. TOKUDA, Ms. DELAURO, and
Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas.
H.R. 4662: Mr. CARBAJAL.
H.R. 4669: Mr. WILSON of South Carolina.
H.R. 4710: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 4755: Ms. MALLIOTAKIS and Mr.
LAWLER.
H.R. 4979: Mr. MANNION.
H.R. 4980: Mr. MANNION.
H.R. 4981: Mr. MANNION.
H.R. 5031: Mr. FEENSTRA and Mr. MCGUIRE.
H.R. 5122: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5162: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5221: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 5282: Mr. MANNION, Mr. LAWLER, and
Ms. KAPTUR.
H.R. 5366: Ms. TOKUDA.
H.R. 5412: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5434: Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois and Ms.
RIVAS.
H.R. 5438: Mr. SMITH of Washington, Mr.
BARR, Mr. SUBRAMANYAM, and Mr. BURCHETT.
H.R. 5461: Mr. OWENS.
H.R. 5490: Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE.
H.R. 5514: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5575: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5653: Mrs. BEATTY, Mr. MOULTON, Ms.
NORTON, Ms. ELFRETH, Mrs. FOUSHEE, Mr.
LIEU, Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Mr. CASTEN, and
Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 5867: Mr. CARSON and Mrs. WATSON
COLEMAN.
H.R. 5945: Mr. BACON.
H.R. 5960: Mr. CASE and Mr. BACON.
H.R. 5967: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5973: Mr. GARAMENDI, Ms. MOORE of
Wisconsin, Mrs. MCIVER, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania, Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois, Mrs.
TRAHAN, Ms. MCCLELLAN, and Ms. PINGREE.
H.R. 6053: Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 6123: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6164: Mr. TRAN, Mr. LEVIN, and Mr.
BERA.
H.R. 6179: Mr. OLSZEWSKI.
H.R. 6255: Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas and Ms.
STEVENS.
H.R. 6275: Mr. TRAN.
H.R. 6349: Mr. CARBAJAL.
H.R. 6356: Mr. MFUME and Mrs. HAYES.

H.R. 6359: Mr. MCGUIRE.
H.R. 6385: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6391: Mr. CISNEROS, Mr. CASE, and Ms.
HOYLE of Oregon.
H.R. 6426: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6440: Mr. MCGOVERN.
H.R. 6448: Mr. BACON and Mr. BEGICH.
H.R. 6454: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6520: Mr. ALFORD.
H.R. 6528: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6529: Mrs. HAYES and Mrs. WATSON
COLEMAN.
H.R. 6532: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6574: Mr. DAVID SCOTT of Georgia.
H.R. 6582: Mr. MCGUIRE.
H.R. 6601: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6621: Ms. TOKUDA.
H.R. 6624: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 6660: Ms. WATERS.
H.R. 6722: Mr. DAVIS of Illinois and Ms.
SÁNCHEZ.
H.R. 6731: Mr. THANEDAR, Mr. NORCROSS,
and Ms. TITUS.
H.R. 6766: Mr. LAWLER and Mr. COSTA.
H.R. 6769: Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 6789: Mr. GOLDMAN of New York.
H.R. 6810: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6839: Mr. BISHOP and Ms. RANDALL.
H.R. 6840: Mr. LATIMER.
H.R. 6857: Mr. FITZPATRICK and Ms.
WASSERMAN SCHULTZ.
H.R. 6875: Mr. DAVIDSON and Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 6876: Mr. ROSE.
H.R. 6881: Mr. BABIN and Mr. CARTER of
Georgia.
H.R. 6887: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6890: Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois.
H.R. 6900: Mr. COSTA, Ms. ADAMS, and Mr.
RILEY of New York.
H.R. 6972: Mr. MCGUIRE.
H. Con. Res. 68: Mr. CASTRO of Texas, Mr.
RYAN, Ms. HOULAHAN, Mr. MOULTON, Mr. PANETTA, Ms. GOODLANDER, Mr. CROW, Mr.
MEEKS, Mr. SMITH of Washington, Mr. HIMES,
Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi, Ms. LEGER
FERNANDEZ, Ms. STANSBURY, Ms. OMAR, Ms.
ANSARI, Mrs. FOUSHEE, Mr. LARSON of Connecticut, Mr. CARTER of Louisiana, Mr.
AUCHINCLOSS, Mr. KHANNA, Ms. MOORE of
Wisconsin, Ms. VELÁZQUEZ, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY,
Ms.
SCHOLTEN,
Mr.
Mr.
POCAN,
SUBRAMANYAM, Ms. KAPTUR, Mr. NADLER, Mr.
MIN, Ms. BALINT, Ms. NORTON, Mr. CONAWAY,
Ms. JACOBS, Mrs. RAMIREZ, Mr. AMO, Ms.
MCCLELLAN, Mr. VARGAS, Mr. COURTNEY, Mr.
TONKO, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania, Mr. FOSTER,
Mr. DOGGETT, Mrs. BEATTY, Mr.
CISNEROS, Mr. BELL, Mrs. TRAHAN, Ms.
SIMON, Ms. DEXTER, Mr. VINDMAN, Mr. IVEY,
Ms. PINGREE, Mr. CORREA, Mr. WALKINSHAW,
Mr. GARAMENDI, Mrs. HAYES, Ms. RANDALL,
and Ms. HOYLE of Oregon.
H. Res. 116: Ms. TOKUDA.
H. Res. 168: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas, Mr.
SOTO, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania, Mrs.
TRAHAN, Ms. SALINAS, and Mr. JOHNSON of
Georgia.
H. Res. 578: Ms. CLARKE of New York.
H. Res. 929: Mr. GOLDMAN of New York.
H. Res. 934: Mr. MAST and Mr. BUCHANAN.
H. Res. 956: Mr. MOSKOWITZ and Mr. BELL.
H. Res. 967: Mr. SELF.
H. Res. 973: Mr. PALLONE.
f

DELETIONS OF SPONSORS FROM
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were deleted from public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H.R. 6646: Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas.

UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, JANUARY 8, 2026

No. 5

Senate
(Legislative day of Wednesday, January 7, 2026)
The Senate met at 10 a.m., on the expiration of recess, and was called to
order by the President pro tempore
(Mr. GRASSLEY).
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
Eternal Father, You are the source
and strength of our lives. Great is Your
faithfulness. We thank You today for
our lawmakers who embraced the calling to serve You by serving our Nation
and world. Bless them with divine insights as they grapple with complexities that require difficult choices. May
they make it their ultimate goal to
serve You by striving to do what is best
for the building of Your Kingdom in a
chaotic world. Lord, guide us all, for
we are pilgrims in this land. We are
weak, but You are mighty. Guide us
with Your powerful hands.
We pray in Your merciful Name.
Amen.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The President pro tempore led the
Pledge of Allegiance, as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MORENO). Under the previous order, the
leadership time is reserved.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

MORNING BUSINESS
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate will be
in a period of morning business, with
Senators permitted to speak therein
for up to 10 minutes each.

The Senator from Iowa.
f

NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
APPRECIATION DAY
Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, tomorrow, January 9, is National Law
Enforcement Appreciation Day. For 365
days a year, but especially tomorrow,
we offer our gratitude to our country’s
men and women. When you meet one of
them, you should say: Thank you for
your work. Thank you for keeping the
peace.
With President Trump’s support, law
enforcement nationwide is making
America safer. This year, violent crime
is down 12 percent and murders across
our major cities are down 20 percent.
Record amounts of dangerous drugs
like fentanyl, meth, cocaine, and heroin have been seized and, thankfully,
are off our streets due to the hard work
of law enforcement’s very courageous
work. I am proud to back the blue. I
am also grateful for their work to
maintain the peace.
As chairman of the Senate Judiciary
Committee this year, I have continued
my work to support law enforcement in
Iowa but also nationwide. In that role,
I worked with Senate Republicans and
the White House as part of the Working
Families Tax Cut law signed by the
President on July 4, securing historic
support for the Byrne JAG and COPS
Programs for local police as well as efforts to combat drug trafficking.
Additionally, four bipartisan bills the
Judiciary Committee passed during Police Week in May became law with the
passage of the National Defense Authorization Act. These new laws will
expand access to Federal support for
law enforcement and their families and
help State and local law enforcement
combat online child exploitation.
The National Defense Authorization
Act also expanded counterdrone authorities for State and local law en-

forcement agencies using language
that was based on legislation that I
worked on in a bipartisan way with the
senior Senator from Michigan.
We should all look forward, but I
want you to know that I look forward
to working further with my colleagues
this year to support police in a bipartisan way. We are very fortunate that
this type of legislation is mostly bipartisan in the Congress.
To all those who have selflessly answered the call to keep our communities safe, I say thank you. May God
bless you and may God protect you as
you go about your work of protecting
the American people.
I yield the floor.
f

RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY
LEADER
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority leader is recognized.
f

APPROPRIATIONS
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, at the
start of this week, I said that the Senate would be focusing on government
funding this month. We have a January
30 deadline to get the job done and
avoid another government shutdown.
We have already passed one package of
three appropriations bills that was
signed into law in November. Now we
need to finish our work.
Later today, the House is expected to
consider another package of three bills:
Commerce, Justice, and Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environmental appropriations.
These three bills were crafted with
bipartisan input from both the House
and the Senate. The Trump administration supports this package. I expect
we will see robust bipartisan support
for these bills in today’s House vote.
This three-bill package advances
some important priorities. It funds programs that support law enforcement,

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S95

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A08JA6.000

S08JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S96

promotes public safety in communities
across America, invests in critical infrastructure projects, and it supports
efforts to unleash American energy to
provide affordable energy supply to the
American people.
There is one more thing about this
package that is significant. It spends
less money than a continuing resolution. That is right. This bill spends less
taxpayer money than if we passed another CR or continuing resolution to
fund these Agencies. That is not an accident. That is what we can accomplish
when we make appropriations a priority, when we put in the work, make
tough choices, and put it up for a vote.
Appropriations is one of our core responsibilities, but it hasn’t always
been treated like the priority that it is.
In too many cases in the past, massive
omnibus bills were being written behind closed doors. That is not how I
want to do things. When I became majority leader, I made it clear that I
wanted appropriations to get the attention that it deserves, and we made
some solid progress on this front in
this Congress. We considered appropriations bills through regular order
and passed three Senate appropriations
bills before the August work period,
something that hadn’t been done going
back to 2018.
We should be considering bills
through regular order, a process that
allows all Senators an opportunity to
make their voice and the voices of
their constituents heard. It is not just
a better process; it creates a better
product too.
When we receive this next package
from the House, there is no reason that
we can’t take it up and pass it quickly
here in the Senate. As I said, this bill
was written with input from both parties in both the House and the Senate.
It has the backing of the Trump administration. It advances a number of important priorities, and it actually
spends less than if we just expended
Biden-era spending levels for these
same Agencies.
Once we finish this package, we have
more work to do. Appropriators are
working to finish the remaining bills
for fiscal year 2026. One of those is the
Defense appropriations bill—which is
an especially important priority—to
ensure that our military has the funding and certainty it needs to maintain
and modernize its capability, support
Americans serving in uniform, and protect our national security.
We don’t have time to waste. It will
require cooperation to ensure we can
keep making progress as the end of the
month approaches. I want to be clear
that January 30 means January 30. We
can’t afford another extension. As soon
as we finish, work will begin on the
next appropriations cycle, starting
with the President’s budget request for
fiscal year 2027.
We have done a lot of good work on
appropriations this past year. I want to
thank our colleagues on the Appropriations Committee, especially Chair COL-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

LINS,

for their hard work throughout
the year. This work isn’t easy, but it is
important, and it is a responsibility we
need to take seriously. I know they all
do. Let’s get fiscal year 2026 funding
done and keep up the progress as we
begin the process for fiscal year 2027.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant executive clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Rhode Island.
Mr. REED. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the
quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

VENEZUELA
Mr. REED. Mr. President, for 4
months, my Democratic colleagues and
I have come to the floor to warn
against President Trump’s military operations in South and Central America.
We pointed out that his boat-strike
campaign was strategically incoherent,
legally questionable, and, ultimately,
not about narcotrafficking at all. We
have argued that the administration’s
shifting legal justifications, refusal to
give Congress straight answers, and, in
particular, the failure of the Department of Defense to provide information
to Congress, which is required by law—
all of these things—together with a
massive military buildup, pointed toward something larger than narcotrafficking. Indeed, we warned that these
actions were always directed at the
government and economy of Venezuela.
That campaign has now culminated
in a military raid on Caracas, the capture of Nicolas Maduro and his wife,
and President Trump’s extraordinary
declaration that the United States will
‘‘run’’ Venezuela and seize control of
its oil reserves.
Let me be very clear about something, at the outset: Nicolas Maduro is
a brutal dictator who has destroyed
Venezuela’s economy, crushed democratic opposition, and fostered widespread corruption. He will not be
missed. But this operation was not designed to restore peace in Venezuela or
protect America from the ravages of
drugs. Indeed, this operation is not
about democracy. It is not about the
suffering of the Venezuelan people. It is
not even about narcotrafficking, despite the administration’s killing more
than 100 people in its strikes on alleged
drug boats. In the President’s own
words, this campaign is simply about
seizing Venezuela’s oil and profiting
from it.
The people of Venezuela have suffered extraordinary hardship under the
Maduro regime. They have voted in
multiple elections for new leadership
and have been denied their choice
through fraud and repression. After everything they have endured, the people
of Venezuela deserve to choose what

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

happens next in their country. They do
not deserve to have their future dictated by President Trump, Secretary
Rubio, or anyone else in Washington.
Yet that is precisely what this administration plans to do. The plan presented by the White House is to simply
force the remnants of the Maduro regime to grant the United States exclusive access to Venezuelan oil or face
the consequences of a blockade. That is
it. That is the plan.
Not in the plan: positive change for
the people of Venezuela. There is no
framework for elections or democratic
transition, no serious assessment of
the rival political factions inside Venezuela—factions that have been waiting for precisely this moment to seize
power.
I have seen no contingency plan for
what happens when China, Russia,
Iran, or Cuba—nations with deep economic interests in Venezuela—decide
to block or back proxy groups in a
country we have just destabilized, nor
have I heard any proposal for the next
steps for countering narcotrafficking.
The administration’s goals are aspirational at best, and aspirations are
not enough when the stakes involve
war and the future of millions of people.
One of the first lessons I learned as
an Army officer is that hope is not a
plan. Over my career, both in uniform
and in the Congress, I have seen the
United States hope that its military
interventions abroad would succeed. I
have seen regime changes, nationbuilding efforts, and elaborate reconstruction schemes launched with confident predictions of success, only to
have them collapse when encountered
with the reality on the ground.
And the reality is this: When we rely
on the U.S. military as our primary
tool of foreign engagement, we generally set ourselves up for failure. We
have persistently misunderstood and
misjudged the cultures, histories, and
politics of the nations in which we
have intervened because we assume
military might is enough. We imagine
outcomes that align with our military
and economic objectives but are surprised when those outcomes fail. We
consistently fail to plan for the ‘‘day
after.’’
Unless the Trump administration
gets serious, Venezuela will be no exception.
This isn’t about our military capabilities. We have the most formidable
fighting force the world has ever seen,
and I am proud and, frankly, not surprised that all elements of our military
worked together to successfully execute such a dangerous and difficult
mission in Caracas. The skill, professionalism, and courage are beyond
question of these men and women.
But military capability is not the
same as strategic wisdom. The ability
to achieve tactical objectives does not
guarantee beneficial long-term outcomes, and executing a successful raid
does not constitute a plan for governing a nation of 28 million people.

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.002

S08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

Congress exists to provide oversight
and scrutiny of the executive branch,
not to cheer from the sidelines. I commend our servicemen for their performance last weekend, but I am deeply
concerned about the Trump administration’s lack of serious planning for
the next phase. That is why this War
Powers Resolution is necessary.
The Constitution vests the power to
authorize war in Congress, not the
President.
President
Trump
has
claimed this was just a law enforcement mission. That is absurd. No matter how he describes it, the President
waged war on a foreign nation without
authorization, without notification to
Congress, and without any explanation
to the American people about what
this operation will cost or what success
will look like. This is a profound constitutional failure, and it must be corrected.
I hope I am wrong about these dangers ahead. I hope this administration
is right, and the transition in Venezuela proceeds smoothly. I hope that
the Venezuelan people embrace this
outcome and see their lives improve
quickly. I hope the violent factions in
Venezuela choose peace over conflict. I
hope the economic recovery for the
people of Venezuela justifies this enormous gamble. But as I said before, hope
is not enough, and history suggests we
should prepare for a far more difficult
reality.
The question before us is whether
Congress will fulfill its constitutional
duty or whether we will abdicate our
responsibility and allow this President
to commit American military resources, credibility, and, potentially,
American lives to an open-ended entanglement without authorization or accountability.
I urge my colleagues to support this
resolution.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from California.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

VENEZUELA
Mr. SCHIFF. Mr. President, for
months, the Trump administration
claimed that its campaign of blowing
up boats in the Caribbean was about
stopping drugs like deadly fentanyl
coming to the United States—never
mind that fentanyl doesn’t really come
from Venezuela; it comes from precursors made in China and is predominantly smuggled in through Mexico;
never mind that there are well-established, well-practiced operations for
interdicting the drugs and apprehending alleged drug traffickers, not
killing them; never mind that we don’t
even have clarity on what was on these
boats or who was on these boats and
where they were headed. No. Even as
the U.S. military amassed unprecedented military firepower off the coast
of Caracas that included multiple warships, thousands of troops, and the
largest aircraft carrier ever put to sea,
the administration still claimed this
was about drug boats.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S97

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

You heard the administration say
that time and time again to the public
and to Congress until last weekend
when the objective became clear: This
was about Venezuela’s oil, and if we
could have that, we would leave the
drug-running regime in place, albeit
with its No. 2 corrupt leader instead of
its No. 1, Nicolas Maduro.
The rightful leadership of Venezuela,
Maria Corina Machado and her election
surrogate Edmundo Gonzalez—the ones
who won the last election there—would
have no place, no role in the new government because this was no more
about democracy than it was about
drugs. It was about oil.
Just yesterday, the Secretary of Energy said that the United States intended to maintain significant control
over Venezuela’s oil industry, including by overseeing the sale of the country’s production indefinitely—indefinitely—and Donald Trump has promised to use the revenue from these oil
sales to create a fund that he would
control. He is literally meeting with oil
executives on Friday to try to divide
up the spoils of this military campaign.
Now, some of my colleagues may believe that using the U.S. military to
depose Nicolas Maduro and seize Venezuela’s oil is well worth the risk to
our troops and the danger of our becoming mired down in that country. I
disagree, but if that were the case, let
them seek an authorization from Congress to do so.
We have so many urgent problems
that need addressing here at home with
life being barely affordable for millions
of Americans and the cost of living rising—with people struggling to cover
the rent, with families barely able to
afford the cost of groceries, to say
nothing of the skyrocketing healthcare
costs. But now, instead of putting
Americans first, we are stepping into a
foreign nation and promising to run it
for the foreseeable future. An administration that had promised to end foreign wars has begun a new one. A
President who had decried the use of
force for regime change or to engage in
nation building has just committed our
country to both.
No doubt Russia and China see opportunity in this American about-face,
with Russia to indict Ukrainian leaders
and to seize them and with China to do
the same in Taiwan. We are not only at
risk of reestablishing the idea that
might makes right and military conquest is acceptable in your sphere of
influence, but there is the very real
prospect of destabilizing a world order
post-World War II that has made us
safer and more prosperous.
Now, when it comes to Congress’s
role in checking this President, in asserting its war powers given to us by
our Founders and the Framers of our
Constitution, if we do not assert this
power, we will lose it and not just to
constrain this President but any President and for all time. The American
people have said clearly and repeatedly
they do not want us dragged into new

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

foreign wars, especially wars of our
own making, and we have the power to
make good on that instruction. We are
a coequal branch of government and
the only branch endowed with the
power of the purse and the power to declare war or to refuse to do so.
But if we do not assert these powers,
if we don’t stand up not just for our
branch of government but for the
American people, there is no telling
and no stopping what comes next because the administration has made it
clear that Venezuela is the opening
salvo. Will it be Cuba next or Colombia
or Mexico or Greenland, for crying out
loud?
This is the moment when we need to
stand up and exercise our powers as
part of the government that is closest
to the people to make it clear that no
President can commit our military
forces absent an attack on our country
or imminent threat of an invasion
without the approval of Congress and
certainly not to help industry chase
new profits or revenue in oil or minerals around the globe. We have a duty
to our constituents, to our Constitution, and to posterity. Let us uphold it.
Vote yes on the resolution.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant executive clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

VENEZUELA
Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, fellow
Senators, we are about to vote on a
War Powers Resolution, which is becoming common around here—and way
too common, as a matter a fact.
But I think the first thing we ought
to talk about is what we are actually
doing here, from a 30,000-foot standpoint, as far as what the resolution actually says. As usual, there is a lot of
setup in here, but there are 21⁄2 lines
that say what we are trying to do
here—not we, but what the other side
is trying to do here.
It says:
Congress hereby directs the President to
terminate the use of the United States
Armed Forces for hostilities within or
against Venezuela.

Let me say that again: We are directing ‘‘the President to terminate the
use of . . . Armed Forces for hostilities
within or against Venezuela.’’
There isn’t anybody that has any information that the President is using
Armed Forces against Venezuela. He
did for about 47 minutes this last weekend, but he is not in the process of
doing this. And the resolution says
that he should stop it. He is not doing
it.
Now, if the resolution were drawn to
say, ‘‘Mr. President, you can’t do this

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.003

S08JAPT1

S98

anymore,’’ that would actually have
some effect or attempt to have some
effect. It would be unconstitutional,
unenforceable. But to tell him not to
do something or to stop doing something he is not doing is nonsense.
The effect of this is to slap the President of the United States in the face.
That is the only effect that this vote
can have. It can have no practical effect because it is trying to stop something that isn’t going on.
So we are again here considering this
War Powers Resolution to remove the
troops from a foreign country where
they do not exist. The War Powers Act
was created as a way to address the
continuing deployment of U.S. forces
into hostilities—or in hostilities.
There is no continuing deployment of
U.S. troop forces in hostilities. The
War Powers Act was never designed to
remove the President’s article II right
to defend the United States, its interests, or its citizens; nor, indeed, could
the War Powers Act do that because
the Constitution absolutely directs the
President of the United States to use
the military might of the United
States to protect it.
Indeed, the constitutional power was
given to the President. We cannot
change that. It is the power that he
has. This vote and similar votes before
it are an abuse of the War Powers Act.
There are no U.S. military forces in
Venezuela.
The United States conducted a limited operation to remove an indicted
narcoterrorist, Nicolas Maduro, from
Venezuela and brought him to the
United States to face justice for his
crimes.
Now, was this a good thing to do?
Well, of course, it was a good thing to
do. Indeed, Democrats themselves have
said that it was a good thing to do.
I want to read from three different
Democrats who told us that this was a
good thing to do. I am not going to
name them. They can step up and take
credit if they want to. These are three
different Democrats.
The first one said:
Obviously, we know Maduro and his cronies do not want to go quietly into the night,
but the United States needs to work with its
partners and allies in the region to ratchet
up pressure.

This was a Senator on August 2, 2024.
The same Senator says, after Maduro
was removed:
It is an illegal act of war to replace
Maduro.

Another Senator said—and this was
back in 2019:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

If Trump cared about consistency, he
would make the realist case for intervention
in Venezuela (getting rid of Maduro is good
for the United States).

This Senator called for intervention
in Venezuela. Do you know what he
says now, after the invasion?
The invasion of Venezuela has nothing to
do with American security. Venezuela is not
a security threat to the U.S.

That is what he says today.
Now, one of my favorites, this Senator said—and this was on February 5,
2020:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

And the President brags about his Venezuela policy. Give us a break. He hasn’t
brought an end to the Maduro regime. The
Maduro regime is more powerful today and
more entrenched today than it was when the
President began.

Well, the President changed that. He
removed Maduro. Do you know what
that same Senator says today?
This is reckless. And the American people
are just, this morning, in fear of what’s
going to happen here.

That was January 4, 2026.
This is the height of hypocrisy. The
purpose of this resolution is to slap the
President in the face. It will do nothing
that it purports to do because it can’t
stop something that isn’t going on
right now.
In addition, the President’s actions
in Venezuela are consistent with other
Presidents’ efforts to protect the
American people from threats in our
own backyard.
President George H. W. Bush authorized limited military operations to arrest Panama’s Manuel Noriega and
bring him to the United States to
stand trial for drug-related charges,
just as President Trump has done with
Maduro. In that case, President Bush
deployed more than 9,000 troops, and
they fought for 2 weeks on the ground
in Panama before they got their hands
on Noriega. At that time, both Republican and Democrat leaders of the Senate praised this move.
Compare that to what happened here.
There were only about 200 troops involved, and they were engaged for 47
minutes. And yet, all of a sudden, this
is a horrendous problem.
When you are in the business of flying drugs into the United States—
drugs that kill our children and hurt
our country and destabilize our hemisphere—in violation of U.S. law, and
when you invite Russia, China, and
Iran to set up shop right in our backyard and do the things that they are
doing, there is going to be a price to
pay. Maduro is paying that price today.
But unlike the former President,
President Trump demonstrated he is a
man of action. He was decisive and did
what he promised the American people
he would do, and that is to keep them
safe.
Now, Democrats are reversing their
position on Maduro’s removal to criticize the President.
The President’s decision was the
right call. Let’s acknowledge that fact.
Let’s celebrate that fact. Let’s resolve
that the President of the United States
is to be commended for what he did.
My fellow Senators, vote no on this
resolution. This is nothing more than a
slap in the face to the President of the
United States. It cannot accomplish
something that does not exist.
I yield the floor.
f

VENEZUELA
Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, I
would like to make just a few brief observations ahead of the vote on Senator KAINE’s War Powers Resolution.

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

The War Powers Act is not the law I
would have written, and there are reasonable questions about its constitutionality. But it has been the law now
for over 50 years. And it is important
to remember what it was designed to
prevent—and, even more importantly,
what it wasn’t.
Back in 1973, the goal was preventing
another Vietnam. The idea was to impose guardrails against the large-scale,
indefinite commitment of U.S. troops
abroad. And in shutting that door, the
law very intentionally reaffirmed our
Founders’ decision to leave another
door open.
The law grants presidents clear authority for the limited use of military
force. And of the many occasions over
the years when colleagues on both
sides of the aisle have invoked the War
Powers Act to condemn such limited
use of military force—by Presidents of
both parties—I can’t recall a single one
in which Congress managed to change
the facts and artificially constrain the
Commander in Chief’s authority.
This time is no different. The President was well within this authority in
his decision to bring Nicolas Maduro to
justice. How do we know? A number of
ways:
First, plain statute: Notification of
Congress within 48? Check. Withdrawal
within 60 days? Try 60 minutes.
What is more, recent history provides
clear precedent from Presidents of both
parties. What authority did this operation exceed that President Obama or
President Reagan did not exceed in operations in Libya? Or President Clinton
in Kosovo? What makes this time different than President Biden’s strikes in
Syria or Yemen? Certainly, there is little daylight between the legality of
this operation and the one President
H.W. Bush undertook to apprehend
Manuel Noriega in Panama.
You don’t have to agree with a President’s approach to national security
policy to acknowledge his compliance
with the law and his constitutional authority for the use of force, which
makes the invocation of the War Powers Act such a tired and blunt instrument. For my part, I have consistently
opposed resolutions like these aimed at
constraining Presidents’ constitutional
authority. And I have done it on behalf
of Presidents of both parties.
I am old enough to remember when,
during President Obama’s feckless
dealings with Iran, no less than the future Democratic leader insisted that,
‘‘We should never take the military option off the table’’.
But every one of our colleagues remembers last summer when the frequent fliers of the War Powers Resolution reached yet again for their favorite tool after the President’s decision
to degrade Iran’s nuclear program
without putting a single American
boot on the ground.
Of course, there are serious questions
at hand to which the Senate and the
American people should expect serious
answers from the Commander in Chief.

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.005

S08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

The President’s authorities to conduct
military operations may be wide and
well-established, but they incur a responsibility to situate decisive actions
in broader, longer-term strategy.
Maduro is an authoritarian thug. He
reduced a once-prosperous neighbor of
America to an impoverished vassal of
Cuba, Russia, Iran, and China. He profited from the flow of lethal drugs to
America. He spat in the face of Venezuelan voters. And, until very recently, he slept in peace while they
starved.
A Western Hemisphere without him
or his ilk in power serves America’s interests. But clearly, Venezuela and the
hemisphere have a ways to go.
To the extent that our colleagues are
concerned about the mechanisms and
timeline of a transition to democratically elected Venezuelan leaders, I
share their curiosity. If they want to
know more about the President’s
longer-term strategy to stabilize Venezuela and the Western Hemisphere, so
do I.
Suffice it to say that whatever the
objective, whatever the strategy,
America is well-served when its Presidents secure enduring bipartisan support for their foreign policies. President Obama ignored Congress in pursuing a reckless and bad nuclear deal
with Iran. Unsurprisingly, that deal did
not endure.
Successfully returning Venezuela to
its role of stable, prosperous, democratic neighbor is a noble goal, but an
ambitious one. It doesn’t come without
risk. And it is worth making the clear
case to the country.
I appreciate the administration’s
willingness to brief Senators on the
sensitive details of a tactical victory.
But they owe it to the American people—and, frankly, the long-suffering
people of Venezuela—to lay out the
path to strategic success in much
greater detail.
If the aim is to reestablish American
primacy in its near abroad, great. If
the idea is to evict enemies who hate
America from a valuable foothold in
our region, onward.
A stable Venezuela, led by duly elected Venezuelans, will leave Americans
safer and more secure. The administration should explain how that end goal
will be achieved.
In the meantime, I will oppose the
Kaine resolution and would urge my
colleagues to do the same.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

VENEZUELA
Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I rise
today in support of the War Powers
Resolution before the Senate regarding
recent U.S. actions related to Venezuela. This is a serious and consequential matter that goes to the heart of
Congress’ constitutional responsibility
to authorize sustained military engagements, define the limits of executive
authority, and protect the long-term
interests of both the United States and
the Venezuelan people.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S99

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Nicolas Maduro is a narcoterrorist
and international drug trafficker
whose actions led to the addiction and
deaths of many Americans. He was an
illegitimate dictator who held power
through stolen elections and horrific
violence against the people of Venezuela. The Biden administration imposed a $25 million bounty for his arrest and extradition to the United
States. He was indicted twice in Federal court and should stand trial in the
United States.
With Maduro rightfully captured, the
circumstances have now changed.
While I support the operation to seize
Nicolas Maduro, which was extraordinary in its precision and complexity,
I do not support committing additional
U.S. forces or entering into any longterm military involvement in Venezuela or Greenland without specific
congressional authorization.
The resolution I have supported
today does not include any language
related to the removal operation. Rather, it reaffirms Congress’ ability to authorize or limit any future sustained
military activity in Venezuela, while
preserving the President’s inherent article II authority to defend the United
States from an armed attack or imminent threat. I believe invoking the War
Powers Act at this moment is necessary, given the President’s comments
about the possibility of ‘‘boots on the
ground’’ and a sustained engagement
‘‘running’’ Venezuela, with which I do
not agree.
What happens now matters greatly,
both in terms of accountability for
Maduro and the future of the Venezuelan people. The long-term success
of this operation will depend on Venezuelans having the opportunity to run
Venezuela, with the support of international and private sector partners.
RECOGNITION OF THE MINORITY
LEADER
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
Democratic leader is recognized.
f

VENEZUELA
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, first, I
want to thank Senator KAINE for his
great leadership on this issue, Senator
SCHIFF, and Senator PAUL for working
with me on this resolution.
If there was ever a moment for the
Senate to find its voice, it is now. The
Senate must act to stop Donald
Trump’s folly.
Today, the Senate must assert the
authority given to it in the Constitution on matters of war and peace. We
must send Donald Trump a clear message on behalf of the American people:
No more endless wars.
If any of my colleagues—if any of the
American people—doubted what Trump
was up to, here is what he said last
night to the New York Times.
They asked him: How long are we
going to stay in Venezuela—a month, 6
months, a year?

Frm 00005

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Donald Trump is ready for an endless
war in Venezuela and Lord knows
where else. The American people are
not. The American people want us to
focus on the No. 1 issue they face: rising costs. They can’t afford the things
they need—the affordability crisis.
And, instead, Donald Trump and too
many of our Republican colleagues are
saying: Let us spend our treasure and
maybe even American lives on Venezuela and other areas far afield.
How can the American people watch
this and not just groan and grimace
and ache and fear? When America has
tried to do this kind of nation building,
these kinds of regime replacements in
the past, it has led to the American
people paying the price in treasure and
in blood.
So now we have the opportunity to
stop. We are very close. We urge our
Republican colleagues to join us. Tell
the American people you want to focus
on what they care about: the cost of
groceries, the cost of healthcare, the
cost of electricity and other goods.
The contrast between what is happening in the House and Senate today
is glaring. In the House, there will be,
from what I am told, a good number of
Republicans who will join in saying:
Extend the tax credits for 3 years.
Leader THUNE has even refused to put
that on the floor.
But what is happening here? The
ability, the strength, the constitutional authority of the Congress to say:
No. No endless wars. No sending all our
money down to Venezuela and Lord
knows what other countries.
Again, just look at this, my Republican colleagues. Here is what Trump
said on oversight of Venezuela.
They asked him:
A year? Longer?

f

PO 00000

Donald Trump said:
I would say much longer.

He says:
I would say much longer.

How many of you want to see us
bogged down in Venezuela for a whole
bunch of years? If you don’t want to
see that, if you want to see us focused
on the costs the American people are
facing and reduce them, vote with us.
Vote yes on this very important resolution.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Virginia.
f

VENEZUELA
Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, I have
spoken before; so I am going to be very
brief. And then I am going to call up
the business of the Senate, this War
Powers Resolution.
Two points. In the aftermath of the
briefing yesterday, I have had good
conversations with colleagues, and
many of them have asked me about the
distinction between the execution of a
valid arrest warrant and a larger military operation.
I want to state very clearly that I do
not challenge, nor does this resolution

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.006

S08JAPT1

S100

challenge, the execution of a valid arrest warrant against Nicolas Maduro.
That valid arrest warrant bringing him
to justice in the United States will be
good for America and good for Venezuela. We do not challenge that.
In fact, under the War Powers Resolution, I am not even sure that the execution of an arrest warrant, even if accompanied by a military escort, would
rise to the level of hostilities that
would allow such a challenge, and I
certainly wouldn’t be calling it up for a
vote on the floor.
But this is obviously bigger than the
initiation of an arrest warrant.
From the beginning, on September 2,
the striking of Venezuelan boats in
open waters, the amassing of naval assets around Venezuela, the President’s
authorization of covert activities, the
seizure of ships, the coordinated attack
of 150 aircraft that not only extracted
President Maduro and his wife but also
bombed sites around the country—this
is bigger than an arrest warrant.
More than 200 enemies have been
killed. U.S. troops have been injured.
Two are still hospitalized. And now we
understand, after the hearing yesterday and what has been made public,
that this will go on for a long period of
time. The seizure of oil, the dictation
of terms about elections and the politics of Venezuela will go on for years.
This is not an attack on the arrest
warrant, but it is merely a statement
that, going forward, U.S. troops should
not be used in hostilities in Venezuela
without a vote of Congress, as the Constitution requires.
The second point I will make is this:
We are all humans in this place, and
one of the things we try to do is minimize votes that we might regret. It is
impossible to eliminate those.
We are humans, and we cast thousands of votes even in a single term in
the Senate. There will be some we
might look back on and feel like: Oh,
maybe we should have done this differently.
The most likely vote where regret
would be most painful is a vote on matters of war.
And I just want to assure my colleagues: Here is something I can guarantee you. No one has ever regretted—
no one has ever regretted—a vote that
just says: Mr. President, before you
send our sons and daughters to war,
come to Congress. That is a vote that
no one has ever regretted, and no one
will ever regret.
f

LEGISLATIVE SESSION

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

DIRECTING
THE
REMOVAL
OF
UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES
FROM HOSTILITIES WITHIN OR
AGAINST
VENEZUELA
THAT
HAVE NOT BEEN AUTHORIZED
BY CONGRESS—Motion to Discharge
Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, pursuant
to section 601(b) of the International

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

Security Assistance and Arms Control
Act of 1976, I move to discharge the
Committee on Foreign Relations from
further consideration of S.J. Res. 98, to
direct the removal of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
Motion to discharge from the Committee
on Foreign Relations, S.J. Res. 98, a joint
resolution to direct the removal of United
States Armed Forces from hostilities within
or against Venezuela that have not been authorized by Congress.
VOTE ON MOTION TO DISCHARGE

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
question is on agreeing to the motion
to discharge S.J. Res. 98.
Mr. WICKER. I ask for the yeas and
nays.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
called the roll.
Mr. BARRASSO. The following Senator is necessarily absent: the Senator
from Montana (Mr. DAINES).
The result was announced—yeas 52,
nays 47, as follows:
[Rollcall Vote No. 5 Leg.]
YEAS—52
Alsobrooks
Baldwin
Bennet
Blumenthal
Blunt Rochester
Booker
Cantwell
Collins
Coons
Cortez Masto
Duckworth
Durbin
Fetterman
Gallego
Gillibrand
Hassan
Hawley
Heinrich

Hickenlooper
Hirono
Kaine
Kelly
Kim
King
Klobuchar
Luján
Markey
Merkley
Murkowski
Murphy
Murray
Ossoff
Padilla
Paul
Peters
Reed

Banks
Barrasso
Blackburn
Boozman
Britt
Budd
Capito
Cassidy
Cornyn
Cotton
Cramer
Crapo
Cruz
Curtis
Ernst
Fischer

Graham
Grassley
Hagerty
Hoeven
Husted
Hyde-Smith
Johnson
Justice
Kennedy
Lankford
Lee
Lummis
Marshall
McConnell
McCormick
Moody

Rosen
Sanders
Schatz
Schiff
Schumer
Shaheen
Slotkin
Smith
Van Hollen
Warner
Warnock
Warren
Welch
Whitehouse
Wyden
Young

NAYS—47
Moran
Moreno
Mullin
Ricketts
Risch
Rounds
Schmitt
Scott (FL)
Scott (SC)
Sheehy
Sullivan
Thune
Tillis
Tuberville
Wicker

NOT VOTING—1
Daines

The motion was agreed to.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SHEEHY). The joint resolution will be
placed on the calendar.

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

EXECUTIVE SESSION
EXECUTIVE CALENDAR
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate will proceed to executive session to resume
consideration of the following nomination, which the clerk will report.
The legislative clerk read the nomination of Alexander C. Van Hook, of
Louisiana, to be United States District
Judge for the Western District of Louisiana.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Louisiana.
MINNESOTA

Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, with
me today is Mr. Nick Ayers, a colleague from my office.
I want to talk about a serious subject. I want to talk about welfare
fraud, taxpayer money.
Now, I want to make it clear that I
love Minnesota—I love Minnesota—but
I do not like people, whether they live
in Minnesota or elsewhere, who steal
money from the poor. There ought to
be a special place in Hell for them. By
now, unless you are still living in your
parents’
basement,
playing
video
games, you know that there has been
massive welfare fraud in Minnesota. It
is staggering. It is stunning. It is astounding. It may rise to the level of $9
billion of taxpayer money meant for
the poor—$9 billion.
It is an uncomfortable truth that, at
this juncture, most of that fraud appears to be centered in the community
of Minneapolis among people of Somali
ancestry. Some have said and suggested that it is racist to say that.
Facts are not racist. What I just said is
just a fact. So far, there have been 90
people charged, most of whom are of
Somali descent. That is just a fact.
There are over 100,000 people of Somali
ancestry in Minnesota—most of them
in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area—and
the vast majority of them vote in a
bloc, as is their right, and the vast majority of them vote in a bloc for Democratic candidates, as is their right.
Some will say Kennedy is being a racist for pointing that out. Let me say it
again: Facts are not racist. They are
facts. It has already come out at some
of the trials, and not all of the folks
being charged are of Somali ancestry—
I want to make that very clear—but
most of them are. Again, it is just a
fact.
I apologize for my voice.
Let me explain what this thievery—
this industrial-scale fraud—was just
about. It was centered around Medicaid.
As the Presiding Officer knows, Medicaid is a Federal program administered by the States—we put up most of
the money—to provide health coverage
for poor people, for pregnant women,
for children, and for disabled people.
President Obama, through ObamaCare,
extended Medicaid to some of the folks
in the middle class, but, still, the main
purpose of Medicaid is to help poor

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.007

S08JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 8, 2026

folks and disabled folks because, in
America, we help our friends.
You know, I was looking at a number
the other day. In the last 50 years, the
American economy has grown 142 percent over the last 50 years. The American economy has grown 142 percent
over the last 50 years. It is a pretty extraordinary number. Welfare spending
in America has grown 765 percent. So I
get a little upset when some people
say: Well, you know, the American people are selfish. We spend over $1 trillion
a year helping our neighbors who are
less fortunate than us, mostly the
poor. In our country—I have said this
before—if you are hungry, we will feed
you. If you are homeless, we will house
you. If you are too poor to be sick, we
will pay for your doctor. Other countries let their fellow citizens die in a
ditch. We don’t do that in America.
The American people have stepped up
to the plate.
So, when people steal this money—
this $1 trillion-plus a year that we
spend in helping our neighbors—when
people steal that money, it offends me.
When they steal from the poor and
they steal from the American taxpayer, it offends me equally.
As for the folks in Minnesota and
elsewhere who stole this money, who
took a giant whiz—a giant Great Dane
whiz—down the leg of every taxpayer
and poor person in America, every one
of them ought to go to jail. It looks
like, so far, there are four probes.
Let me just say the Federal Government puts up most of the money for
Medicaid, not all of it. In some cases,
the Federal Government puts up as little as 50 percent. In some cases, 90 percent of the money being spent on Medicaid comes from Federal taxpayers.
We designed the rules at the Federal
level. We put up most of the money,
but the States are supposed to implement the program, and they are supposed to combat fraud, but many of
them don’t. The GAO says, of that $1
trillion I talked about that the American people spend on welfare, as much
as a quarter of a trillion, maybe more—
$250 billion or more—is stolen, and it
has got to stop.
I am going to talk about a solution
in a moment, but let me tell you what
was happening in Minnesota.
One of the things Medicaid does,
along with the Food Stamp Program, is
to feed people, particularly children.
So what these thieves in Minnesota
were doing is they were setting up
these fictitious corporations and applying to Gov. Tim Walz’ Medicaid office
for money to distribute to the poor.
Gov. Tim Walz’ welfare office would
give them hundreds of millions of dollars. Of course, the thieves running
these fictitious corporations sucked it
up like a Hoover Deluxe.
Then these fictitious corporations
would go to restaurants in the community—many of them in the Somali
community—and say: Here is the deal.
I want you to fill out a report saying
you fed all of these poor people. Of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S101

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

course, you are not feeding anybody.
Just lie and give me the report and I
will give you a percentage of the
money that I am stealing from the
American taxpayers and the people of
Minnesota.
That is what they did, but they
didn’t just limit it to food. It was industrial-scale fraud.
Next, they moved to healthcare.
Some formed fictitious corporations,
companies, saying: We are going to deliver—I said healthcare; I meant
childcare—to poor people, homeless
people.
So the fictitious companies run by
these thieves would go to Governor
Walz’ agencies and say: Give us a
bunch of money. We are going to house
homeless people.
Governor Walz would give them the
money, and these thieves sucked it up
like a Hoover Deluxe.
Then they went to a bunch of folks in
the community and said: Henceforth,
you are in the housing business, and
you need to fill out a report. It is a lie.
Fill out a report saying you are providing housing for a bunch of people—
of course, they weren’t—and then we,
the thieves who got the money from
Governor Walz, will kick you back a
little bit of the money.
Did they stop there? No.
They moved into—I just described
housing. Then they moved into
childcare. Under Medicaid, you can use
money to provide childcare.
So the thieves formed a bunch of new
fictitious companies and went to Governor Walz and his agencies and said:
Give us a bunch of welfare money, Medicaid money, to give childcare to folks
who are poor.
Then the thieves running the fictitious company went to families—many
of them in the Somali community—and
said: Do you have a child who is autistic? If so, we want to sign him up.
But if some of the families said: No,
we don’t have a child who is autistic,
the thieves said: Don’t worry about it.
Lie. Tell us you have a child who is autistic. Whether your child is autistic or
not, we are not going to provide any
services for your children, but we will
kick you back some of the money.
It is disgusting. So it was in
childcare, housing, autism, food—$9
billion and climbing.
Now, Governor Walz—in fact, I probably shouldn’t repeat this, but I read
something on the internet the other
day. Somebody made an observation,
and I don’t want to paint too broad a
brush because there are some fine
childcare services in Minnesota as
there are elsewhere, but the person on
social media asked a question: How do
you know if you have discovered one of
these fictitious childcare services?
Well, you go there, and no one is inside, but the owner pulls up in a
Lamborghini.
And that is what happened.
The people who were stealing the
money directly from Governor Walz
and then giving it to the folks who

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

were helping them—the restaurants
that were creating fictitious lists of
people they fed and autistic children
they were helping who weren’t autistic—they took the money, too, and all
of them had a big old party. They
bought cars. They bought jewelry.
They took expensive vacations. They
sent money back to Somalia.
There is an investigation going on
right now—I am not saying it is true—
that some of the money might have
gone to terrorist organizations in Somalia. This is American taxpayer
money these people were taking out of
the mouths of poor people.
Governor Walz—I know nothing
about this man; it is news to me—said:
In fact, I am taking some bold steps.
He said: First, I am not going to run
for a third term.
I guess he needs more time—I hope
he uses the time to prepare his defense
because he has got a lot to defend here.
He knew what was going on. In fact,
one of the lawyers representing one of
the thieves in this case said that many
of the people—this was their excuse. He
said that many of the people involved
in the stealing thought that the State
was OK with it. That is what he said.
Here is his quote:
No one was doing anything about the red
flags.

Red flags were everywhere. Nobody
in State government, he said, was
doing anything about the red flags.
It was like someone was stealing
money from the cookie jar and they
kept refilling it.
The State knew.
(Mr. HAGERTY assumed the Chair.)
And at one point, Governor Walz and
some of his agencies said: Whoa, you
know, maybe we ought to put a stop to
this.
And they backed off. They said: No
more money for a while.
Well, fresh hell broke loose. Do you
know what happened? The largest,
most powerful, fictitious company, run
mostly by people of Somali ancestry,
sent an email to the Minnesota State
government, and they said that the
State agency that was failing to
promptly approve new applications and
give us new money from ‘‘minorityowned businesses’’—it was going to result in a lawsuit featuring accusations
of racism that would be sprawled
across the news.
If you don’t give us our money, we
are going to call you a racist.
They did it. It has all come out in
evidence at trial. In fact, someone by
the name of Kayseh Magan—he is one
of the good guys. He is a Somali American who used to work as a fraud investigator in the attorney general’s office,
who, by the way, was just as involved
as Governor Walz in turning a blind
eye to all this. He says—and he said it
in the newspaper—that elected officials, and particularly those who are
part of the State’s Democratic-led administration, were reluctant to take
more assertive action in response to
the allegations.

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.010

S08JAPT1

S102
Why? Here is the quote.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

There is a perception that forcefully tackling this issue might cause political backlash among the Somali community, which is
a core voting bloc [for Democrats].

And he is among the few among
many prominent figures in the Somali
community who is speaking out
against the fraud.
In fact, at one point, a bunch of State
employees—I don’t remember how
many, but they posted a letter publicly
on social media saying: Governor Walz
and the attorney general knew about
this all the time, and we told them. We
warned them early on.
And you know what they did? They
just stood there sucking on their teeth.
They did nothing.
So you know what the State employees did? They went to the U.S. attorney. They went to the U.S. attorney,
and the U.S. attorney jumped all over
this and said: This is obvious fraud.
And that is how all this got started.
Now, what do we do about it? Well,
first, I don’t think that the only place
this is happening is Minnesota, and,
certainly, there are people involved in
welfare fraud besides the few Somali
Americans in Minnesota. And I mentioned the Somali Americans because
it is just a fact. I mean, it is a fact in
the trial of these disputes, the politics
of it and everything else, in the litigation. I think it is happening in various
degrees all over America.
Let me say it again. We are spending
a trillion dollars a year of American
taxpayer money to help poor people,
provide welfare, and the GAO estimates
that at least $250 billion is being stolen
every year.
We took some baby steps in the One
Big Beautiful Bill, as the Presiding Officer knows. We tightened up eligibility requirements. We are requiring
States to check twice a year to make
sure people don’t lie when they sign up
for Medicaid or for food stamps or for
housing assistance. We have implemented a work requirement.
But we need to do more. We need to
do more. And that is why we need to do
another reconciliation bill.
Now, I hope I am wrong when I say
this. I hope I am wrong. I invite my
Democratic colleagues in the Senate—
I love them all—to come forward and
help us. But I just know politics, and
the Presiding Officer does too. A lot of
them are going to be reluctant.
But we don’t need their assistance.
We can pass a welfare security bill with
all Republican votes. If I could do it on
my own, I would introduce the bill tomorrow. I would go and look at every
single State and every single country
and look for the best practices on presenting welfare fraud. I would cross-access a list of people who sign up for
welfare to their tax records, if they
have any. Sometimes, people lie. In
Louisiana, we have caught people making a quarter of a million dollars a year
getting Medicaid. But you have to
check. Apparently, nobody was checking in Minnesota, and I don’t think
they are alone.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

If it were up to me, I am drafting
that bill now. I will look at every
State, every country, and adopt the
best practices. And my bill can be
ready in 2 weeks, but I can’t do a thing
about getting it passed because I don’t
have the authority to bring it to the
floor of the Senate. I don’t. Only the
majority leader can agree to bring a
bill to be considered by the Senate.
Those are the rules. If I were King for
a day, I would change it in a nanosecond. I think every Senator ought to
be able to bring his bills to the floor.
And that is not a criticism of my good
friend JOHN THUNE or my good friend
MITCH MCCONNELL or my friend CHUCK
SCHUMER. They are just following the
rules. I would change them.
But we need to do another reconciliation bill to fix the welfare system and
stop the stealing—stop the stealing.
And we can do it with all Republican
votes.
So, please, Senator THUNE—pretty
please, as I have said before. I am saying this. I will beg. I will get down on
my knees. JOHN, please bring another
reconciliation bill. We can do so much,
but we can start with fixing welfare
fraud. Please, JOHN. Please let us do
the bill.
I don’t want to end on a negative
note. I might have hurt my back going
down. I don’t want to end on a negative
note. I love this country. I just think
America is the greatest country in all
of human history; I do.
And the whole world knows it. Everybody wants to come here. When is the
last time you heard of somebody trying
to sneak into China? No, they want to
come to America. And I believe, as
much as I am standing here, that the
future of this country can be better
than the present or our past. It can be.
I have always believed that we are only
as good as our dreams; we are only as
valuable as our children.
But I am not going to bubble-wrap it.
We have $30-plus trillion worth of debt,
and we have people stealing from poor
people and laughing about it—and politicians participating in it. And Washington has to do its part to fix this.
But the water is not going to clear up
for America—the water is not going to
clear up for America until we get the
pigs out of the creek. Let’s go get the
pigs out of the creek.
Please, Senator THUNE, please, let us
do another reconciliation bill. Please,
lead with welfare reform. We can do it.
You can do it. I know you can.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
SENATE ACCOMPLISHMENTS

Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, Republicans ran this past election year to
make America safer and more pros-

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

perous. Now, we are a year into this,
and people are seeing that the comprehensive economic plan that the Republicans have put into place is working for them.
This year, going forward, Americans
are going to see even more money in
their pockets, and that is thanks to the
Working Families Tax Cut law. The average American taxpayer will see a significant cut this year in their taxes,
which is a direct effect of the law.
Families in every single State in the
Nation are feeling relief.
Now, key parts of this tax law went
into effect just on January 1, and they
are going to make life much more affordable for American families. Republicans increased the child tax credit to
$2,200 per child, and they made it permanent. And it is per child every year.
That means for a couple in Cody, WY,
with two children: $4,400 a year. That is
money to help buy groceries, to help
with education, and it helps with that
child’s activities.
Republicans also raised the limit in
the dependent care flexible spending
accounts. We raised it to $7,500 from
$5,000. So a working mother in Casper,
WY, can now set aside $7,500, pretax,
for childcare. Senator KATIE BRITT of
Alabama championed that, really
pushed it through, and worked very
hard.
Additionally, Republicans are doing
things Congress has never done before.
We have now created a guaranteed savings account for every American child.
Every child born between 2025 and 2028
will receive a $1,000 investment account. So a child born in Sheridan, WY,
will now start life with $1,000 already
invested in their future. Senator TED
CRUZ had this innovative idea.
Additionally, the Working Families
Tax Cut law protects family farms,
ranchers, and small business owners.
This is vital to my home State of Wyoming and for other rural States. For
years, farmers and ranchers told me
the same thing: The death tax makes it
nearly impossible to pass their family
operations on to the next generation.
Republicans delivered permanent death
tax relief for family farmers, for ranchers, and for small business owners.
Now, ranchers in Wheatland, WY, or
Worland or Torrington or Gillette can
now pass their land on—and their livelihood—to that next generation and
avoid these crushing death taxes from
Washington, DC.
Every Democrat in the Senate voted
against the bill—every single one of
them. They want the government to
come in and confiscate small businesses and farms and ranches. That is
not what Republicans stand for, and
that is not what we did. If Democrats
had their way, taxes would be going up
this year by $4 trillion. Democrats supported and probably continue to support the largest tax increase in American history because that is the way
they voted.
When Republicans proposed legislation to crack down on waste, fraud,

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.012

S08JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 8, 2026

abuse, and corruption in Medicaid and
food stamps and government social
programs, every Democrat in the Senate voted no. They must love the corruption—which brings us to Minnesota.
Yesterday, Congress exposed worrying new information about the vast
extent of the massive fraud and corruption in the State of Minnesota. Minnesota Governor Tim Walz, who was
the Democrat Vice Presidential nominee in 2024, and his attorney general,
Keith Ellison, who was the deputy
chair of the Democratic National Committee, are presiding over one of the
most outrageous fraud scandals in recent memory. Manipulative criminals
have stolen billions of dollars from
Federal programs—billions meant to
help vulnerable Americans.
Republicans voted to put more
money in people’s pockets. That is not
what the Democrats wanted. No. They
voted to raise taxes and voted to protect the kind of fraud being exposed in
Minnesota today, the kind of fraud
that Democrat-elected officials refuse
to see and refuse to stop.
The working families tax cuts are
part of the broader economic agenda
that is already working, and the numbers prove it. Today, the world’s most
successful companies are investing in
this country—$10 trillion in America.
Record investment is driving private
sector job growth. It is driving innovation. It is driving opportunity.
The proof is that the economy grew
4.3 percent in the third quarter. That is
the strongest economic growth in 2
years. Core inflation cooled in November to 2.6 percent. Gasoline is now less
than $3 per gallon in most of the country. In Casper, WY, it was $1.91. Forecasters predict prices are going to continue to fall. Real wages are on track
to grow over by $1,000 this year.
All of these successes happened because Republicans are committed to
American prosperity. We cut taxes. We
eliminated wasteful Washington spending. We rolled back burdensome regulations. We unleashed American energy.
This is a 180-degree turnaround from
the past 4 years under Joe Biden and
the Democrats. Under Joe Biden and
the Democrats, prices rose by over 20
percent in 4 years. Democrats will now
go down in history as the party of high
prices, high taxes, and open borders.
As Americans celebrate the 250th anniversary of our Nation, we can be confident—confident—that our country is
safer, is stronger, and more prosperous.
And with the Working Families Tax
Cuts, Republicans are making sure
that that prosperity continues into the
future.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Nevada.
UNANIMOUS CONSENT REQUEST—S. 3229

Ms. ROSEN. Mr. President, here is a
fact that Donald Trump seems to not
understand or care about: families in
Nevada and all across this country
being squeezed—being squeezed—by
high costs. Nevadans are struggling to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S103

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

afford even the most basic things from
groceries to rent to healthcare.
This isn’t just in Nevada. All across
the country, housing costs are up;
healthcare costs are up. Even the most
basic, unavoidable expenses like electricity have even gotten more expensive. But if you ask Donald Trump, he
says affordability—and I am going to
quote here—is a ‘‘hoax.’’ It is a ‘‘con
job by the Democrats.’’ He even said—
and I am going to quote again—‘‘prices
are coming down tremendously . . . inflation is stopped.’’
I am going to ask everybody here at
home today: Do you think affordability
is a hoax? Do you feel like prices are
going down? Don’t listen to Trump.
Just take one look at your grocery bill
this week. It is clear he isn’t paying attention to hard-working people because
the price of your groceries has done
nothing but skyrocket.
Donald Trump, he ran for President
on lowering prices. Since he got into
office nearly a year ago, Americans
have spent on average well over $1,000
more because of Trump’s cost-raising
tariffs. He was supposed to lower prices
on day one. Well, we are a lot further
than day one.
I want to be clear about what these
tariffs really are. They are an additional tax on hard-working families,
and they increase prices across the
board. Just look at housing. Due to
Trump’s tariff taxes, the price of construction materials, appliances, and
furniture have skyrocketed, gone
through the roof. When you raise the
cost of lumber, steel, and other materials builders rely on to build new
homes, you slow down construction.
And when supply can’t keep up with
demand, prices go up. That is not just
ideology; that is simple economics.
Similarly,
Trump’s
self-imposed
taxes have increased your costs at the
grocery store. You are paying more for
the essentials you rely on most: coffee,
produce, meat, so much more. Trump
and his billionaire buddies, who probably haven’t gone grocery shopping for
themselves in years, don’t care about
the price of groceries. Well, they might
not care about paying more, but seniors on fixed incomes do; parents trying to feed their kids do; workers
whose paychecks aren’t keeping up do.
They are the ones being hurt by these
reckless tariffs. So Donald Trump may
not care, but everyone else I know
cares—and it matters.
That is why I introduced my No Tariffs on Groceries Act. This bill, it is
simple—simple. It would exempt your
groceries from Trump’s tariffs, meaning the costs won’t be raised because of
the tariffs. So it is time that Congress
reasserts its authority over trade and
pushes back against Trump’s cost-raising tariffs.
I know a few things: Groceries are
not a luxury; food should never be a
bargaining chip; and working families
should not be collateral damage in
Trump’s reckless trade wars. This hits
everyone at the kitchen table. Every

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

person needs to eat. You shouldn’t be
collateral damage in Trump’s reckless
trade wars. Let’s prove this Chamber
can still act on the issues that are
most important to American families
at their kitchen table. If they care
about that and they want to lower
costs for everybody, let’s pass my bill
right now.
Mr. President, as if in legislative session, I ask unanimous consent that the
Committee on Finance be discharged
from further consideration of S. 3229
and that the Senate proceed to its immediate consideration; that the Rosen
substitute amendment, which is at the
desk, be considered and agreed to; that
the bill, as amended, be considered
read and passed; and that the motion
to reconsider be considered made and
laid upon the table.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there
objection?
The Senator from Idaho.
Mr. CRAPO. Mr. President, reserving
the right to object, I rise in opposition
to S. 3229, the No Tariffs on Groceries
Act of 2025.
The reason groceries are so expensive
is because during the last administration, inflation got totally out of control. We all know the grocery prices
went up then. That is when the inflation rates were in double digits. I think
at one point, they got over 20 percent.
Where is the inflation rate today? My
colleagues on the other side would like
to try to duck the fact that the reason
grocery prices are so high is because of
the inflation that was caused under
President Biden’s administration when
we blew the top off of growth and the
prices. Today, the inflation rate is at
2.7 percent, close to the Federal Reserve’s target for our economy. That is
just a fact that we have to recognize
and deal with.
Now, this bill seeks to exempt articles of food from the President’s
IEEPA tariffs. I agree with my colleagues that tariffs generally should be
targeted as much as possible to avoid
harm to Americans. We also should
consider more exemptions to harms
arising from potential unintended consequences, including exemptions for
unavailable natural resources.
The administration agrees. In November, the administration excluded a
number of food items from the reciprocal, India, and Brazil IEEPA tariffs.
By all accounts, the administration is
working to identify similar exemptions
in other active trade negotiations. I
strongly encourage the President to
pursue productive courses of engagement with U.S. stakeholders in doing
so, but voting for one-off exemptions
on the Senate floor in isolation of a
larger negotiating strategy and broader stakeholder concerns like this bill S.
3229 asks us to do now, does not facilitate a predictable process for our negotiators or for any broader segment of
stakeholder engagement.
Therefore, I object.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The objection is heard.

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.013

S08JAPT1

S104

The Senator from Nevada.
Ms. ROSEN. Mr. President, food
should never be a bargaining chip. People’s kitchen tables, their refrigerators
should never be a bargaining chip. This
is not a partisan issue, feeding people
in the United States. We should not be
mixing natural resources with the essential things that we need like food.
Are my Republican colleagues—if
they want to lower prices, they can
start—they can start—by this one
small act of letting this bill go
through. They can help me lower prices
right here, right now. I am very disappointed. This bill would lower prices
at the grocery store for hard-working
families all across America. And by
stopping it from passing, you and your
Republican colleagues—well, I am
afraid you are telling the American
people that their kitchen table isn’t
your priority and that Washington Republicans would rather bow to Trump
than pass legislation to lower at least
one section of grocery prices and make
food more affordable for their constituents.
Again, this isn’t partisan. People in
my State and yours are being crushed
by rising costs. Washington Republicans have the power to do a little
something about it, but they choose
not to. So if you really want to do what
is right by your constituents, if you
want to do right by kitchen tables
across this country, Republicans would
stand up to Trump, stand up against
these reckless tariffs on food, and support my legislation.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Florida.
MINNESOTA ICE SHOOTING

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Mrs. MOODY. Mr. President, tomorrow is Law Enforcement Appreciation
Day, and it was my intention to come
to the floor today and talk about some
great officers and celebrate the men
and women that put their lives on the
line to protect us every day. Indeed, I
encourage every American across this
great Nation to do just that, say thank
you for signing up courageously for an
often thankless job. But in light of recent events, I feel I must address a
more pressing issue.
The horrific situation that occurred
yesterday morning in Minnesota is
tragic. Radical protestors intending to
run over Federal immigration officers
with cars, that cannot happen. In fact,
protestors that show up with intent to
harass or obstruct or impede or aggressively approach or violently assault officers, it cannot happen.
When they are doing their jobs, it is
a precarious, often dangerous, situation. I can tell you that firsthand as
the wife of a law enforcement officer. I
beg anyone thinking about participating in this kind of behavior to think
twice for all involved.
They must be given space to focus. It
is a very dangerous situation in some
of these missions and law enforcement
activities. That is why I introduced the
Halo Act back in November because, as

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

I saw the threats of political violence,
of threats against our law enforcement
officers were rapidly increasing, I knew
that we had to do something. And so I
introduced the Halo Act so that one of
these events wouldn’t occur.
I don’t know how officers are able to
do their jobs with people impeding
them and getting in their faces as they
are trying to focus on executing their
duties.
It is deeply troubling to hear the
anti-law enforcement rhetoric being
used by so many when it comes to Federal officers simply trying to show up
and do the jobs that we, as a nation,
hired them to do.
And what happened yesterday in
terms of folks showing up with the intent to obstruct officers, that is not an
isolated incident. It is part of this
broader pattern of coordinated efforts,
encouraged by elected politicians who
keep increasing their rhetoric and almost encouraging—let me just take the
‘‘almost’’ out, encouraging people to
get in the way of law enforcement officers trying to do their job, knowing
how dangerous that is, not only dangerous for law enforcement officers but
for those who show up and try to impede their efforts.
Elected Democrat officials right now
are using radical rhetoric and encouraging people in their cities and their
States to harass and obstruct officers.
Many of them are even using taxpayer
funds to help speak out and coordinate.
According to the Department of Homeland Security, assaults on police are up
1,300 percent, death threats on police
up 8,000 percent.
This alarming trend threatens public
safety and the rule of law—the rule of
law—and the expectation that we
would support the men and women who
uphold it. That is what is attracting
people from around the United States
of America to my home State, the
great free State of Florida, because we
support them. We protect our officers.
In fact, we introduced legislation and
passed legislation to give them a safety
zone, a buffer zone to do their jobs and
do them safely.
The Halo Act, which I introduced 2
months ago, will ensure that Federal
officers can perform their duties without fear of intimidation, interference,
or violence. The legislation would
make it illegal for anyone, after being
asked, told to stand back, to knowingly come within 25 feet of an officer
who is doing their job if their intent is
to interfere with the officer’s work or
threaten them with physical harm.
It is modeled after a law in Florida,
and we know it will work. It will provide the necessary buffer zone to allow
officers to focus on the execution of
their duties, and that is what is safe for
everyone.
Essentially, the bill would institute
the zones and keep the officers safe. It
would also make sure that this buffer
zone or safety zone is there to protect
others.
I implore my colleagues to join in
this mission, in this proposed legisla-

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

tion, and cosponsor the Halo Act. It is
obvious we must act now to protect
these officers that protect us. And we
must send a message that targeted attacks, interference with the duties of
officers, threat, harm, violence against
law enforcement must end. We owe it
to our communities. We owe it to the
brave people that sign up for these jobs
to strengthen the protections around
them.
Ahead of Law Enforcement Appreciation Day, we have to acknowledge that
without the men and women that put
on that badge every day, this would not
be the country that we know. It is a
fragile line between order and chaos,
and the people that sign up to stand on
that line, come what may, need to be
protected, and this act would do just
that.
I urge my colleagues to join me and
support the Halo Act to have our officers’ back, to ensure our communities
are safe and that they can do their
jobs.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Iowa.
WHISTLEBLOWERS

Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, I believe whistleblowing in the Federal
Government should be protected and
encouraged. People in the executive
branch of government that work in
there every day want the Federal Government to enforce the laws the way
they are written and spend money according to that law.
And when they see something that is
not right in government, they have a
responsibility to blow the whistle and
tell somebody and, hopefully, they
work with the immediate superiors,
but a lot of times they don’t get any
respect for the shortcomings of government that they expose.
Eventually, they come to Congress
and at that point are covered by whistleblower protection legislation, and if
we want to continue the good work
that whistleblowers do to expose
wrongdoing in government, particularly fraud, waste, and abuse, we
should make sure that the whistleblower laws are faithfully followed.
One aspect of whistleblower protection is to make sure that everybody in
government knows about whistleblowers and the protection that they
can receive.
One aspect of that is what we call
anti-gag rules that need to be followed.
So I am here to speak about my efforts
to ensure that the Federal Government
complies with all whistleblower laws.
Unfortunately, the government has
made efforts to gag whistleblowers before they can make legally protected
disclosures, including to Congress.
The illegal conduct has happened no
matter which political party controls
the executive branch of government.
That is why I spearheaded successful
efforts to get what is called anti-gag
provisions enacted.
I worked for decades to make it the
law. And I have worked to ensure that

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.015

S08JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 8, 2026

both Republican and Democratic administrations comply with that law.
Congress has a constitutional responsibility to ensure the laws it passes are
followed. In eighth grade civics or high
school government classes, our students study about the checks and balances of government. Congress not
only has a responsibility to pass the
laws, they have a responsibility to
make sure that the executive branch
executes those laws as well.
We have not found that followed in
practice for these anti-gag provisions.
The anti-gag provision requires all
Federal Agency nondisclosure policies,
forms, or agreements to notify employees of their right to blow the whistle to
Congress, to an inspector general, or to
the Office of Special Counsel. Appropriations laws also prohibit Federal
funds from being used to enforce noncompliant agreements.
Nevertheless,
Federal
Agencies,
amazingly, still violate the anti-gag
provisions. That failure not only has a
chilling effect that discourages whistleblowers, it also happens to be illegal. I have conducted longstanding
oversight to ensure that Federal Agencies comply with this law, and I have
held them accountable when they
failed to do so.
For example, 2013, I asked 15 executive branch departments about the inclusion of the anti-gag provision in
their nondisclosure agreements.
At the time, only the Department of
Treasury, out of those 15 executive
branch Departments, was in full compliance. I forwarded my findings to the
Office of Special Counsel, and in 2018,
they issued updated guidance to all executive branch Departments about including anti-gag provisions in their
nondisclosure policies and agreements.
In March of 2024, I wrote to 74 inspectors general requesting they check on
their parent Agencies’ compliance with
the anti-gag provisions. To date, here
are my findings from what I wrote to
those 74 inspectors general: 45 inspectors general reported they completed
their review. Of those 45, 6 inspectors
general reported their parent Agency
was in full compliance. Of that 45, 22
inspectors general said their parent
Agency made updates to comply with
the law, and 6 said that those corrective actions are ongoing.
So positive changes have been made.
Whistleblowers are better off because
these Agencies are doing what they can
to comply with the nondisclosure gag
rules.
But there are outstanding responses,
and therefore more work must be done.
This Senator intends to ride herd on
the government about making sure
that whistleblowers are protected and
get rid of gag policies.
One example from my investigation,
10 inspectors general reported their
parent Agency agreed to make changes
but had yet to implement them. Another seven of the inspectors general
who conducted a review responded that
their parent Agency was noncompliant,
but they didn’t say if their Agency
agreed to update their policies. Another seven inspectors generals re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S105

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

sponded that they were taking the requests under consideration or planning
to conduct a future review.
It is a no-brainer that they ought to
take that review, and I am asking
them: What is the hesitation? So I have
a responsibility to follow up with
them.
Another eight inspectors general responded that the anti-gag law didn’t
apply to their Agency. So I am looking
into their position that they took in
response to my letter and ensure that
their point that they aren’t covered by
the anti-gag law is correct.
Fourteen inspectors general gave the
stiff arm to those of us in Congress, ignoring what we asked for them to do,
and, as a result, they failed to provide
a substantive response, which included
inspectors general for the Central Intelligence Agency and the Export-Import Bank.
That failure to respond is a disgrace.
Inspectors general ought to be the tip
of the spear when it comes to transparency in government. Transparency
and accountability are not a partisan
issue. Federal Agencies can’t conceal
their wrongdoing behind illegal nondisclosure policies and related actions.
Whistleblowers are critical to exposing waste, fraud, and abuse within government. Government officials at the
top don’t know everything that is
going on below them. That is why
whistleblowers ought to be listened to.
They benefit the government carrying
out its constitutional responsibilities,
and it surely benefits the taxpayers.
I encourage my Republican and Democrat colleagues to join in my efforts
to ensure all administrations, whether
Republican or Democrat, comply with
whistleblower laws.
Rest assured, my oversight will continue and so will my fight for whistleblowers.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Washington.

tary conflict in Venezuela or a dangerous and expansive occupation.
We have a President ignoring the
problems that he has caused in our own
country, all to start a war no one asked
for, with no legitimate justification, no
concern for the servicemembers who
are being put in harm’s way, and absolutely no long-term strategy.
Seriously, the only thing that was
clear after the briefing yesterday is
that Trump has no serious plan. First,
Trump was just bombing alleged drug
boats. Then Trump was just seizing oil
shipments. And the next thing you
know, this administration is sending
the military to abduct a foreign leader.
So I have to ask: What is next and
where is next? How far is this going to
go? Because it is clear that this is not
over, not when Trump keeps saying he
will run the country.
What is Trump’s plan to run Venezuela exactly? How long are we going
to be there? How many of our people is
he going to send? Who is even in
charge? And how are we paying for
this?
There are no serious answers. The
only thing we do know is why Trump is
doing this—for oil—because this clearly is not about ending tyranny and establishing a democracy since Trump
outright dismissed any possibility of
helping the opposition party to build a
true democracy. And it is clearly not
about drug trafficking. After all, not
even a month before this, President
Trump pardoned the former President
of Honduras who was convicted of the
same crime. But the real reason—it is
so painfully obvious—this was always
about the oil.
Why? Well, it is pretty simple.
Trump keeps saying it. He literally
said:

VENEZUELA

The difference between Iraq and this is
that Bush didn’t keep the oil. We’re going to
keep the oil.

Mrs. MURRAY. Mr. President, I am
beyond outraged that President Trump
would commit such a brazen act of war
as he has done in Venezuela with absolutely no notice, except to the oil companies and newspapers they leaked it
to. No consultation with Congress, no
legitimate justification for these unauthorized strikes, nor any kind of serious long-term strategy.
It is unquestionably an act of war to
invade a foreign nation, kidnap a foreign leader—even a dictator—and leave
dozens of bodies, including civilians,
behind.
Would my colleagues still nod their
heads and go along with it if a country
tried to do this to American leaders? Of
course not. So we should stop playing
dumb. Trump can’t just say magic
words and pretend this wasn’t a major
military operation.
This is the U.S. Congress, and we
have a constitutional role to be a
check on the President. Only Congress
can declare war, and Congress did not
authorize the use of force against Venezuela.
Now, I opposed the war in Iraq from
the outset. And the parallels to what
President Trump has kicked off in Venezuela are glaring. And I absolutely
will not support any large-scale mili-

That was the President. Is this
‘‘America First’’? Of course not. It is
‘‘Big Oil Barons First.’’ It is ‘‘Billionaires First.’’ It is ‘‘Trump First.’’ First
to rake in profits, mind you, not first
to put themselves in harm’s way.
And you can bet when Trump says he
is not worried about boots on the
ground, it is because he is not talking
about his boots. He is not talking
about his kids. He is talking about
yours.
Congress cannot stand by and shrug
our shoulders. We have a constitutional responsibility here. It is important that a majority of Senators voted
to rein in this President’s reckless actions. But if we want to put an end to
this warmongering, we need to keep
pressing until we have a veto-proof majority. Today’s vote is not the end of
the line. So I urge all my colleagues to
join us in asserting our authority and
continuing to send President Trump a
simple message: No American boots on
the ground. No trading blood for oil. No
war.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Kansas.

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.016

S08JAPT1

S106

Mr. MARSHALL. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent to use a prop
during my remarks.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
NUTRITIONAL GUIDELINES

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Mr. MARSHALL. Mr. President, I am
so excited to be here today. I am going
to talk about one of my favorite—favorite—topics, eating. But my mouth
is a little dry here, so I want to take a
moment and enjoy some whole milk.
You know, I am not the only one that
loves eating. America loves eating. If I
can share a story with my fellow Senators, I always thought that I was my
grandma’s favorite grandchild, and I
thought it was because I was always
the one that was the first to raise my
hands for seconds. Now, I don’t know if
I was her favorite, but certainly I was
one of her favorites.
The interesting thing was, we
couldn’t gain weight, though. Despite
eating seconds and an active lifestyle,
nobody gained weight. We were all in a
good weight area.
And what did we eat? We ate real
food. What did that real food look like?
Well, we had whole milk for breakfast
and for lunch and for supper. We had
bacon and eggs in the morning. For
lunch, we would have one of the other
proteins: turkey or chicken or ham—
but vegetables from our garden. That
was it. Fresh vegetables, and we had, I
think, four or five different fruit trees:
a pear tree, a peach tree, several others. So we would have fresh fruits as
well. And then for dinner—we called it
supper—beef was the main dish always,
but still with more fresh fruits, maybe
some potatoes, some new potatoes.
And, yes, we put bacon in the new potatoes, but all my grandparents lived a
long healthy life on those diets as well.
You know, on a Saturday night—I
don’t want to forget. Once or twice a
month, on a Saturday night, we would
finish work early, at 7 or 8 p.m., and we
would make homemade ice cream with
that cream that we had from our own
dairy herd.
And then the other piece that people
forget about is we had canned food—
not in a metal can, but they were in
bottles. And what that canned food did
is it was easier to digest. That fresh
taste was locked into it.
And, very simply, real food tastes
better. I would hardly recognize the
taste of some of the fruits and vegetables today. When I was growing up on
our family farm, the strawberries melted in your mouth. The green beans, potatoes all had a very fresh taste. The
cantaloupe,
the
watermelon—you
would have thought they were adding
sugar to it.
But today’s world, unfortunately, we
eat from a box. We eat from a sack, and
that is not real food. We did not have
any of these ultraprocessed foods in my
diet growing up.
Now, I would like to talk a little bit
more about eating, about eating real
food, and share the new nutritional
guidelines
released
yesterday
by

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

USDA, HHS, and FDA. Guess what
their advice is. Their advice is to eat
real food, the same food that I was
raised on.
Now, what I am excited about is—
look, America was so hungry, so hungry for a new food pyramid that we
flipped it. We flipped the food pyramid,
and we made a triangle out of it.
The big emphasis here is common
sense and eating real food. And the big
winner is going to be American families. It is going to be our youth, especially where we are seeing an epidemic.
And I just want to give a shoutout to
President Trump’s leadership, to Secretary Kennedy, to Secretary Rollins,
to FDA Director Dr. Makary, Dr. Oz at
CMS, and Dr. Jay Bhattacharya at NIH
for providing the real science—and all
the people that worked so hard to put
together these nutritional guidelines.
And for all you naysayers out here,
the science is never settled. I don’t absolutely agree with everything on this
pyramid as a physician, but these are
incredible guidelines and huge steps in
the right direction. And, again, use a
little common sense as you go forward.
For too long, we overcomplicated nutrition. We buried families in confusing
charts, changing rules, and special-interest science. And while all of this was
happening, America got sicker.
Ninety percent of American dollars—
healthcare dollars—are being spent on
chronic diseases. Seventy percent of
Americans have a chronic disease. A
third of our children are prediabetic or
diabetic. We simply can’t continue to
live in that direction.
We were being told the last 20, 30
years to eat food from factories rather
than foods from the farm. And these
ultraprocessed foods were marketed as
healthy. Well, people followed the advice in good faith, and they got sicker
rather than healthier.
Real food is food you recognize when
you see it. Most of the time, it is not
coming from a box. It is not in a bag.
Sometimes, it is in a can; sometimes,
it is not. You have to be careful. You
have to look at the can.
Did they add sugar to it? Did they
add salt to it? Then I would probably
turn away from it.
It is fresh or frozen. Real food—
healthy food—is fresh or frozen.
I am so glad that the SNAP program
is now going to require all the grocery
stores to double the amount of opportunities of choices that you are going
to have from this real food selection.
Real food is protein. It is whole
grains, and it is healthy fat. The previous pyramid probably required that
50 percent of your calories come from
carbohydrates. We know that was probably a big mistake. Instead, we are
going to push more proteins.
People say: What is the new guideline
talking about?
It is that same diet I was raised on
back at our farm. It is the same food
your grandparents and my parents—my
mom—made for us.
Look, long before we knew what
MAHA moms were, my grandmothers

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

were MAHA grandmothers, and my
mother was a MAHA mom. And my
wife was cooking MAHA food, as well.
They seldom opened a box. If you are
opening a box to cook, think twice
about it.
Another good option, as we discussed
what the new guidelines are, is putting
water back where it belongs. I would
argue water, whole milk—those are
your one-two drink alternatives, and
certainly not sugary sodas. We all
should be drinking more water. If you
want to drink something besides water,
I would suggest whole milk. A big
point about whole milk to me is it satisfies one’s appetite longer. You drink
a sugary soda, and you are hungry
again in 10 minutes. Your sugar is
bouncing up and down. But milk has
protein in it, and it is going to satisfy
your hunger for longer, not to mention
that it is full of protein, vitamins, and
minerals.
Let’s take a look at this graph, our
‘‘Eat Real Food’’ graph, the new dietary guidelines. I think it is interesting. The foods down here aren’t necessarily bad, but you should maybe eat
less of them and more of these. As you
go up the triangle, these are the more
healthy foods.
This is real simple. Down in the bottom of this, it looks like we have whole
grains. We have oatmeal and whole
grain wheat from Kansas to make
bread. Then I believe this is rice and
beans and nuts and bananas—more
nuts, seafood, butter. Butter is another
one of those full-fat foods derived from
whole milk.
Then we have a bunch of fruit. We
have more seafood and yogurt, another
milk product, as well.
And, of course, there are your vegetables grown in the garden. Here are
some frozen vegetables. Frozen vegetables are cheaper but really close to the
nutritional value of fresh out of the
garden.
It looks like chicken and turkey. You
probably have made those. The guidelines here are for a protein source. The
cheeses—cheese is a great healthy
source of food for you. And, of course,
there is the American hamburger.
Americans can’t get along without
hamburger.
This is my favorite one. This is absolutely my favorite one. I am going to
call this a T-bone steak. Most of you
know that a T-bone steak not only has
a bone in it, but on one side, of course,
is the KC strip. That is a Kansas City
strip. Some mistakenly call it a New
York strip, but this is actually a KC
strip, as well. And on this side, there is
a little bit more of a flavorless type of
meat. I like this KC strip here.
So, again, the whole concept is what?
It is to eat some of these, but more of
these and a lot of these—basically, substituting more protein for less carbohydrates.
We spend a lot of time here on the
floor talking about healthcare reform.
But this is the biggest day in
healthcare reform we are going to see

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.018

S08JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 8, 2026

in America. We are spending $5 trillion
a year—my friends across the aisle are
quick to point out that America is getting sicker and that we are spending
more and more money on healthcare.
Yes, we have all sorts of new toys and
new treatments available and new
drugs out there, but if you want me to
impact the true cost of healthcare—
whether you are getting your insurance through your workplace, whether
you are on ObamaCare, or if you are on
Medicaid or Medicare—if you want me
to save the Federal Government’s
budget, we need to fix the cost of
healthcare. Getting back on a truly
healthy, ‘‘eating real food’’ type of diet
will impact more than any type of legislation that will ever be done up here.
This nutrition needs to go back to
the center of our healthcare. Eating
healthy food should be at the center of
our healthcare reforms, not necessarily
all these policies that we are arguing
about.
Yes, we can keep throwing money at
it. Yes, we can start giving our youth
the latest GLP–1 drug. And rather than
giving them a healthy diet, we can
start treating them with a drug and
give them all some type of drug addiction.
This new nutritional guideline is a
win for our youth. I am especially excited to see what we are going to do in
the SNAP programs as well. When we
get food at our senior centers, I think
there are more healthy choices out
there.
We have to think of ways to make it
more affordable and things the Federal
Government can do to help make these
nutrients more affordable as well. I
just can’t emphasize enough that the
best medicine in the world is a healthy
diet. This is what making America
healthy again looks like. It is all going
to start with nutrition.
I can’t help but add that Americans
probably need to do a little bit more
walking and get outside a little bit
more as well.
Again, I will finish up and say I am
ecstatic that the Trump administration has taken this bold, decisive action and is breaking with decades of
failed thinking. We are finally putting
America on a realistic path to a
healthier living that puts eating real
food at the center. This is a huge win
for the American families and the
farmers who grow the best medicine in
the world.
Look, eating real food delivers real
results. Let’s make America healthy
again.
I have to do just one more thing.
Even ice cream is healthy when eaten
in small amounts. I want to add my favorite sweet out here and say it is OK
to have a little ice cream. We need to
have a lot more protein.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Colorado.
FINISH THE ARKANSAS VALLEY CONDUIT ACT

Mr. BENNET. Last week, President
Trump vetoed H.R. 131, the Finish the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S107

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Arkansas Valley Conduit Act, a bill
that passed both Chambers of Congress
unanimously with broad bipartisan
support. The President did not veto
this bill for any substantive objection.
He did so out of a desire to punish the
State that he believes didn’t support
him politically.
In my opinion, this is the last reason
any President should make a decision
about anything. An election is one
thing, but once we hold office, we have
a responsibility to represent every
American, regardless of their political
party, regardless of their politics.
The President’s veto will inflict real
harm on people in my State by denying
50,000 Coloradans living in tiny rural
towns across the Arkansas River Valley and southeastern Colorado access
to clean, affordable drinking water.
Those farmers and ranchers have been
forced to rely on unsafe, carcinogenic
water for generations, despite the Federal Government’s six-decade-old commitment to fix their water infrastructure.
The Arkansas Valley Conduit is the
final unfinished piece of a water delivery project that Congress authorized in
1962, 2 years before I was even born.
The conduit would wind its way for 130
miles, from Pueblo, CO, to the State
line, traversing farming communities
that had to rely on bottled water or
prohibitively expensive water treatment.
This area covers a quarter of the land
mass of Colorado. It is sprinkled with
small towns and populated with small
business owners and farmers and
ranchers who are dedicated to a rural
way of life, who have been fighting—
generation after generation after generation—to try to bring this clean
water to their valley but are living in
fear that they or their children are delivering poisonous water.
There are probably not a lot of Senators here who aren’t confident that
the water that is consumed by their
children or their grandchildren—the
water that is consumed in their neighborhoods or part of their State—isn’t
safe. That, I think, would be a reasonable expectation in the richest country
in the world.
Yet the inability of us to be able to
finish this project—this joint project—
has made it impossible for the hardworking people in southeastern Colorado to have the benefit—a benefit that
other people just take for granted because they live maybe closer to a city
or in a wealthier area than where the
people in the Arkansas Valley live.
For 64 years, Coloradans have been
relying on Washington to fulfill its
promise to build on their efforts—they
have been a big part of this in southeastern Colorado—to build on their efforts to deliver clean drinking water.
The effort to complete the conduit has
always been a partnership between the
Federal and local government, driven
by the leadership of the Southeastern
Colorado Water Conservancy District.
In the face of rising costs and materials and labor, once again, south-

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

eastern Coloradans, just as the generations before them have, came together
to put forward an inventive solution to
lower costs by changing the project’s
financing, with no increase at all to
the Federal obligation here.
The House passed the Arkansas Valley Conduit Act last July, and the Senate passed it just 3 weeks ago, with the
support of every single Member of Congress—every Member of the House,
every Member of the Senate. There is
almost nothing that ever gets through
with that kind of universal bipartisan
support.
Republicans and Democrats, under
the leadership of Representatives
LAUREN BOEBERT and JEFF HURD, my
colleagues from Colorado, and Senator
HICKENLOOPER, my colleague here in
the U.S. Senate, we all worked together to ensure that rural Colorado
would finally have access to clean
drinking water, something every American should reasonably expect. And the
folks in southeastern Colorado deserve
it just as much as anybody else does.
Instead, when it got to his desk,
President Trump used his first Presidential veto of his second term to deny
Coloradans what should be a fundamental right as an American.
Article I of the Constitution explicitly provides Congress with the power
to override a Presidential veto. Although overrides should only be used
when necessary, they are essential
when both Chambers of Congress have
spoken clearly and spoken unanimously. There are very few places in
the Constitution where the Founders
actually themselves wrote about having a supermajority vote in the Chambers of Congress, and this is one of
those things, because while they believed that a veto override should be
rare, they believed that it was an essential part of this branch of the Federal Government exercising its oversight when a President does something
like veto the Arkansas Valley Conduit,
which is wildly out of step with what
the people that we represent want all
across this country.
If Congress allows this veto to stand,
we set a troubling precedent. It would
mean that noncontroversial, bipartisan
bills that pass without objection can be
rejected for reasons wholly unrelated
to the substance and be weaponized politically.
It is no secret—and I am sorry to
come to this floor to have to say this—
that President Trump is, at the moment, engaged in a political vendetta
against the State of Colorado. I don’t
think any President should be engaged
in a vendetta against any State—obviously, least of all, the State that I represent. But what I worry about more
than anything is that this is going to
become a normal practice around here,
which it hasn’t been until now, where
Presidents reward the States that support them and punish the States that
haven’t politically.

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.022

S08JAPT1

S108

That is not how we should run this
democracy. That is not how the Founders of this country wrote the Constitution. They didn’t even think there
would be political parties. They felt
that it was very important for Congress to be able to be the backstop at
a moment when, for whatever reason, a
President made a decision that didn’t
serve the American people properly or
well.
If we can’t overcome this veto, I
think it would say that no bill is safe
and that the efforts of every single
elected Member of Congress would now
be at risk to one person’s view and one
person’s decision.
Later today, I am pleased to say the
House is considering whether to override the President’s veto. They are putting it on the floor of the House.
I congratulate the work of Congresswoman BOEBERT and Congressman
HURD and the rest of the Colorado
House delegation to work with the
Speaker to get this on the floor of the
House. It is absolutely critical for the
people of Colorado that Congress act,
that we support, once again, the Arkansas Valley Conduit, which we have
unanimously.
Next week, this bill will come over to
the Senate floor. I urge every single
Member of the Senate to do what you
did the last time, which is to support
with your vote the 50,000 farmers and
ranchers in southeastern Colorado who
need the benefit of this clean water.
They are not asking, by the way, for
a handout here. They have done their
part, generation, after generation,
after generation, to keep this project
alive. They have done their part to get
a unanimous vote in the House of Representatives and on the floor of this
Senate to be able to keep their faith
with their children and their grandchildren. The least we can do in this
Senate is to uphold the work that they
have done and also the Constitution of
the United States of America.
I hope every person in this room will
use this as an opportunity to stand
with the people in southeastern Colorado; to stand with our Constitution;
and to make sure that we all—all—
take seriously the legislative responsibility we have as an independent
branch of government.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Massachusetts.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

VENEZUELA

Mr. MARKEY. Mr. President, I rise
today because the United States, once
again, stands on the brink of a dangerous and unnecessary war, one that
neither the American people nor the
elected representatives whom they sent
here to Washington have authorized
and one that risks yet another endless
conflict that will drain our coffers and
cost American lives.
President Trump took military action against Venezuela without the express consent of Congress. The Constitution is clear: The power to declare
war belongs to the people through their

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

elected Representatives in Congress.
That authority is not optional; it is not
symbolic. It is actually a pillar of
democratic accountability when it
comes to matters of war and peace, to
life and death.
The Senate has now spoken with a
clear bipartisan voice: Trump must end
his dangerous and illegal military action in Venezuela now. This Senate
must speak with a bipartisan voice, especially if there is no prior congressional authorization. It must stop
today.
If the Trump administration believes
military force against Venezuela is
necessary, the Constitution provides a
clear and lawful path forward: go to
Congress and make the case to the
American people. If President Trump
cannot make that case, then he has no
business launching military strikes,
killing civilians, and putting American
servicemembers in harm’s way.
Even after yesterday’s classified
briefing from ‘‘Secretary of War
Crimes’’ Pete Hegseth, we all left with
far more questions than answers: What
will this unending occupation cost the
American people? Why did the administration, led by Secretary Rubio, lie
about regime change? Which is next:
Greenland? Cuba? Colombia? Mexico?
But one answer is perfectly clear: the
answer to the question of why Trump
and Rubio did this. It is obvious. This
is not a war for the Venezuelan people.
It is not a war for democracy. This is
an illegal war for oil. It is a coup for
crude on behalf of big oil companies in
our country. It is just like ‘‘The Godfather Part I.’’ Trump made Venezuela
an offer it couldn’t refuse. Capturing
Maduro is the head in the bed. We are
holding their country hostage for the
foreseeable future until Venezuela
gives up its resources. We are stealing
their oil at gunpoint.
Trump told Big Oil CEOs that he
would help them if they paid his campaign $1 billion just a year ago, and he
has already given them countless tax
breaks and nearly unlimited access to
our public lands and waters, killing
wind, killing solar, killing all-electric
vehicles, killing anything that gets in
the way of the agenda of the oil and
natural gas industry in our country,
and now—now—he is giving them Venezuela. We know he told oil execs before and after the invasion about his
plans for Venezuela, not Members of
Congress and not the American people.
He said to the oil companies: Get
ready. Something is going to happen.
So the oil companies knew, but the
American people did not. The President
would not brief the U.S. Senate before
the invasion. Secretary Rubio said that
you can’t trust the U.S. Senate, but
they trusted oil companies to know;
that they should get ready and that
something was going to happen. On top
of that, he is promising these very
same oil companies that stand to get
rich by selling the oil that they will
get reimbursed by the American taxpayers whom they already charge
through the nose for their products.

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

This war is not for the American people. It is for oil CEOs to profit off of instead of the American people. Chevron’s stock? It is up. Americans’ stock?
It is down. Their bill will be paid by everyday Americans during the days to
come as Trump tries to get us in a new
war without end.
The Trump administration must immediately halt further military strikes
in Venezuela, whether it is at sea or on
land, and come to Congress if it believes force is justified. If President
Trump cannot make his case to the
American people and our elected representatives, then he has no business
using military force and putting American servicemembers in harm’s way.
So it is absolutely imperative that
the Members of the U.S. Senate go on
record. We are going to uphold our constitutional obligation before we commit our military to further operations
in Venezuela. We must put them on
record before they commit our military in Greenland. We must put them
on record on the Republican side before
our troops—our military—are committed in Cuba or in Colombia or in
Mexico. This body must go on record.
We must reclaim our constitutional
prerogatives that are built into article
I of the U.S. Constitution. That is the
job which we must do, and that is what
the American people expect from us.
Mr. President, I want to thank Dan
Ohlstein for all of the great service
which he has given to our country.
With that, I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Virginia.
Mr. WARNER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the vote that
was scheduled for 1:45 be moved up to
1:30, right now.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
VOTE ON VAN HOOK NOMINATION

The question is, Will the Senate advise and consent to the Van Hook nomination?
Mr. WARNER. I ask for the yeas and
nays.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk called the roll.
Mr. BARRASSO. The following Senators are necessarily absent: the Senator from North Dakota (Mr. CRAMER),
the Senator from Montana (Mr.
DAINES), the Senator from Kansas (Mr.
MORAN), the Senator from Florida (Mr.
SCOTT), the Senator from South Carolina (Mr. SCOTT), the Senator from Alabama (Mr. TUBERVILLE), and the Senator from Mississippi (Mr. WICKER).
The result was announced—yeas 53,
nays 40, as follows:
[Rollcall Vote No. 6 Ex.]
YEAS—53
Banks
Barrasso
Blackburn
Boozman

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.024

S08JAPT1

Britt
Budd
Capito
Cassidy

Collins
Cornyn
Cotton
Crapo

January 8, 2026
Cruz
Curtis
Durbin
Ernst
Fischer
Graham
Grassley
Hagerty
Hassan
Hawley
Hoeven
Husted
Hyde-Smith
Johnson

Justice
Kaine
Kennedy
King
Klobuchar
Lankford
Lee
Lummis
Marshall
McConnell
McCormick
Moody
Moreno
Mullin

Alsobrooks
Baldwin
Bennet
Blumenthal
Blunt Rochester
Booker
Cantwell
Coons
Cortez Masto
Duckworth
Fetterman
Gallego
Gillibrand
Heinrich

Hickenlooper
Hirono
Kelly
Kim
Luján
Markey
Merkley
Murphy
Murray
Ossoff
Padilla
Peters
Reed
Rosen

NAYS—40
Sanders
Schatz
Schiff
Schumer
Slotkin
Smith
Van Hollen
Warner
Warnock
Warren
Whitehouse
Wyden

NOT VOTING—7
Cramer
Daines
Moran

Scott (FL)
Scott (SC)
Tuberville

Wicker

The nomination was confirmed.
(Mr. MORENO assumed the Chair.)
(Mr. SULLIVAN assumed the Chair.)
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MORENO). Under the previous order, the
motion to reconsider is considered
made and laid upon the table, and the
President will be immediately notified
of the Senate’s action.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Alaska.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

GREENLAND

Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, as
we are starting this new year, there is
certainly no shortage of issues to be
talking about. You and I have been engaged in fruitful discussions, I believe,
about how we address health coverage
for millions of Americans that are
looking at dramatically higher costs,
in many cases, and recognizing that
there is a pretty short window here in
front of us. In fact, for many, it feels
like that window is already closed. We
have work to do on that account.
We certainly have work to do on the
appropriations bills for fiscal year 2026.
We have got a looming deadline of January 30 that is fast approaching. And I
think it is good news that we will be
able to begin that process to advance
this next minibus, these three bills—
my Interior subcommittee appropriations as well as CJS, and Energy and
Water—be able to advance those.
But then we have to get moving on
the fiscal year 2027 cycle. We are already, technically, behind on that. So
we have got efforts there.
We obviously need to do more when
it comes to the situation around the
world.
We just had a vote on a motion to
discharge a War Powers Resolution as
it relates to Venezuela. We need to
strengthen sanctions on Russia, which
continues to prosecute this awful war
against Ukraine. We need to do more.
We need to work together to reach a
bipartisan agreement on permitting re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S109

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE
Murkowski
Paul
Ricketts
Risch
Rounds
Schmitt
Shaheen
Sheehy
Sullivan
Thune
Tillis
Welch
Young

Jkt 069060

form. We seem to make good forward
progress and then take a few steps
back. But we need that to build out the
infrastructure that this country needs.
We know we all need to tackle the affordability issues that impact all of us,
whether they relate to the costs of
goods or housing.
There is a lot that we have to do
here, but there is one thing that we
should not be doing, one thing that we
should not be spending our time doing,
and that is an effort—any effort—that
would seek to annex Greenland, whether it is taking it by force, taking it by
coercion, taking it by pressure or
threat, or, really, in fairness, any related method. It is not an issue that I
would have ever expected to raise here
on the floor of the Senate.
In my time here in the Senate, over
the past two decades, I have immersed
myself in all things Arctic. I have
strong relationships with friends across
the Arctic and in Greenland, specifically. I have been the cochair of the
Arctic Parliamentarians Conference
for years now, and my cochair is a
strong Greenlandic woman, who I just
spoke with this morning about the situation and the rhetoric that is coming
out of Washington, DC, directed toward
her country.
It is an issue that is not necessarily
new to Congress—the U.S. interest in
Greenland. In fairness, there have been
discussions prior to the first Trump administration. It was actually back in
1867. This was when the United States
bought Alaska from Russia and, apparently, at that time, Seward made some
inquiries. Seward was Secretary of the
Interior at the time. He made some inquiries about Greenland, but the Congress wasn’t interested in doing anything about it.
And then, in the Taft administration,
there was a land swap that was proposed. This was back in 1910. It was rejected by Denmark. And then, apparently, there was actually a formal offer
made back in 1946, at the outset of the
Cold War, in the Truman administration, where there was actually an outright offer—$100 million, as I understand it, in gold—to buy Denmark.
That is what it was reported as.
That was, again, rejected by Denmark.
But it was at this time where we
moved from the discussion about how
do we take or how do we buy or how do
we trade into one that was based on a
relationship and shared mutual interests and national security, and working with Greenland and the Kingdom of
Denmark to ensure that military assets could be based at Thule, at the
time—now called Pituffik—Air Base
Station.
Again, these are discussions that
have been had in the past—but in the
very, very distant past—until just recently, when, again, we have seen comments coming out of the administration and really stepped up in this past
week or so.
It is one thing to have a discussion.
It is one thing to have a conversation.

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

But, instead, what we are hearing is
some pretty aggressive rhetoric from
the Trump administration and some
members of Congress. There are statements that we are seeing that are suggesting that not only is a taking by
force or coercion or other related
method not only an option but perhaps
a priority. And that, as a priority for
the United States to take Greenland,
military action is an option. And that,
to me, is profoundly, profoundly troubling.
I think most of us want to be able to
just not only quiet that but make clear
that is not only not going to happen,
but it is an option that has been taken
off the table. I wish that I could say we
have received that kind of reassurance,
but to date, we haven’t. We haven’t had
that assurance.
To be fair, the Secretary of State has
recently stated that we are not talking
about military intervention, so much
as seeking to purchase. Again, in order
to purchase something, you have to
have a willing buyer and a willing seller. Greenland has made it very, very
clear and Denmark has made it very
clear that Greenland is not for sale.
As I speak with those whom I have
established relationships with across
the Arctic and, more specifically, in
Greenland, they are sharing with me
their concern, their deep anxiety about
what is going on. What is it that the
United States is asking for?
Think about the 57,000 people who reside in Greenland. That is the total
population of this massive, massive island—57,000 people. But those 57,000
people are their own autonomous country. They have been striving for independence and control of their own future for years. Greenland’s Prime Minister made a point very clearly recently. He said that ‘‘threats, pressures
and talk of annexation have no place
between friends’’ and that Greenland’s
future must be decided by its own people.
We need to take that message seriously. We need to respect the will and
the wishes of the people of Greenland.
Greenland’s future must be decided by
its own people.
It is also deeply unsettling if you live
in Denmark, which administers defense
and foreign policy for Greenland, as a
mostly autonomous territory. So those
who are not Greenlanders but who live
in Denmark are justifiably disturbed
and unsettled.
It is deeply unsettling, if you understand the immense value of NATO—of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization—and how one cofounding member
taking land from another shatters this
crucial alliance forever. We have seen
that in statements coming from our
NATO allies.
Frankly, this should be unsettling
for all of us because, bluntly, there is
no need to treat longstanding allies
with such a brutal lack of respect. And
that is what I believe it is, a lack of respect.
We are not talking to the people of
Greenland. We are talking over them.

E:\CR\FM\A08JA6.005

S08JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S110

We are talking about them. But we are
not talking to them. That is what you
do with your friends. That is what you
do with your allies.
The people of Greenland are watching
us, and the United States is not exactly winning them over by treating
them like serfs in a feudal estate. The
administration’s approach is not improving relationships. It is alienating
Greenland. It is alienating Denmark. It
is alienating many of our friends and
allies in Europe. And it sets the worst
possible example for Russia and China
and others.
This is coming into focus in the wake
of the arrest and extradition of Nicolas
Maduro. We get that. We get that. But
Greenland is not Venezuela. It is not
Venezuela. It is not a narcostate that
is run by an illegitimate dictator. It is
not an area where we have seen the
economy wrecked by a dictator.
Greenland’s Prime Minister has rejected any comparison to Venezuela
and has emphasized that Greenland is a
peaceful democracy. It is not a territory to be pressured, to be threatened.
There is no case, legally or otherwise, for U.S. military intervention in
Greenland. Greenland has been not
only a partner but a faithful partner.
They have been an ally and a friend to
the United States, dating back to
World War II. At that time, it played a
pivotal role in the Allied victory.
To this day, they continue to be that
staunch ally. As I mentioned, they
have been hosting the Pituffik Space
Base and allowing the United States to
have not only an important presence
there but an invaluable presence. Any
colleagues who have had the opportunity to visit the U.S. assets that we
have there at Pituffik understand that
strategic geography and the level of cooperation that we have seen now for
decades.
I was in Greenland just a couple of
months ago. I had an opportunity to
meet with the new Greenlandic President, and he wanted to know—he said:
What is it that the United States
wants? What are they seeking? There is
this talk about U.S. wanting Greenland. What does it mean? What do they
want? Is it critical minerals? Is it more
from a national security perspective?
Because if that is what you are seeking, we are not only willing to talk; we
are anxious to talk. We want to have
that discussion with our friend and our
ally. We don’t want to cut that off. We
encourage it.
We have seen how Greenland has encouraged that. The way that they have
provided the access, again, to our military for decades, we should be thankful
for that. We should appreciate it. We
should recognize what we have there
and, again, that Greenland and Denmark are willing to give more. They
have said as much. Denmark’s Prime
Minister has suggested that a larger
U.S. military presence in Greenland—if
that is what we are looking for, let’s
talk about it.
And we could pursue that as we pursue other areas of cooperation. Wheth-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

er it has to do with trade or tourism or
the other economic ties that bind, that
is what we should be doing, but we are
not doing it.
Instead, at least publicly, the Trump
administration is focused on acquisition, on ownership, even though every
one of our strategic goals can be accomplished with Greenland as our partner, rather than a possession.
I would hope that the Trump administration realizes that the United
States’ taking control of Greenland, especially by military force—which,
again, I can’t even wrap my head
around that one—what harm that
would bring to our national security
and our international relationships.
This is the 21st century. This is
where the United States is supposed to
set the example for the rules-based
global order, not be the exception to it.
And that includes respecting the sovereignty of others.
If we do the wrong thing in Greenland, we will not—we will not—end up
with a more secure Arctic. For those of
us who have been focused on the Arctic
for decades, that is what we have been
pushing for. It was this area of peace.
We used to call it a ‘‘zone of peace.’’
Then Russia fouled all that up. But it
still is an area where, again, we have
prioritized the security, and we have
done so in a way that is collaborative
and cooperative. If we lose the people
of Greenland, we will lose partners in
Denmark and across Europe. We will
destroy—we will destroy—our strongest international alliance, and that is
NATO, and that gives Russia and China
exactly—exactly—what they are looking for.
Now, there may be some new forms of
partnership. I am talking about dialogue and trade relationships, but
there may be other forms of partnerships that might make sense in 2026.
There has been some suggestion of a
joint Compact of Free Association that
accounts for both Greenland and Denmark’s interests. That is one proposal,
and I think it is worthy of consideration if folks are interested in that,
but we can’t force it on them. We need
to have both Greenland and Denmark
at the table. We would need to treat
them both with the respect that they
deserve, and it would have to be their
choice—their choice—to enter freely
into any such accord, and that type of
an accord, I might add, would require
congressional ratification. So we would
have involvement and engagement
with that as well.
It should go without saying, but how
we talk to our friends and allies matters a great deal, and our approach to
Greenland and then, by extension, to
Denmark is severely lacking right now.
In early 2024, Greenland released their
Arctic strategy to guide its foreign security and defense policy for the next
decade. The title of that document—
the title of their Arctic strategy—is
‘‘Greenland in the World—Nothing
about us without us.’’ I hear that
phrase ‘‘Nothing about us without us’’

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

all the time from my fellow Parliamentarian in Greenland. We would do well
to remember that—to remember that
real people live in Greenland; that real
people are watching the U.S.’s actions
and deciding whether or not they want
to have much of anything to do with us
going forward. We need to be making
sure that that is a firm yes instead of
a no.
Greenland is an amazing place. It is a
beautiful place. Again, I have had an
opportunity to visit it multiple times.
It reminds me of Alaska, my home
State. It is extraordinarily beautiful in
so many ways. It is also, like Alaska,
very geostrategic. It is a resource-rich
area just like my State of Alaska. We
have cultural connections thanks to
the Inuit people, who migrated from
Alaska to Greenland centuries ago. We
see that. We see that in the art, and we
hear that in the language, where there
are shared and common words.
But, unlike Alaska, Greenland is not
part of America, and we can’t simply
take it because we want to. To do so
would be a colossal mistake. It would
end NATO. It would be a gift to Russia
and China and all autocratic nations
that lust after new territory and want
it to justify their own provocations.
Again, it is not necessary. It is not necessary given the decades-long, stillstrong partnership that we have with
Greenland—again, a country that is
willing to work with us diplomatically,
militarily, and otherwise.
I am proud of the Alaskans who have
really worked to enhance the relationship between my State—the State that
causes the United States to be called
an arctic nation—and the country of
Greenland. We have been working to
forge relationships with the people. We
have been focused on shared economic
interests, whether it be tourism,
whether it be trade, whether it be sharing best practices regarding indigenous
governance structures or in the collaboration that we are seeing going on
with arts and cultures. It is just exactly what we should be doing, which is
building these relationships—building
these relationships instead of sending
out provocative messages that unsettle
and disarm everything.
Again, we have got a lot ahead of us
in 2026. Greenland—taking Greenland
or buying Greenland—should not be on
that list. It should not be an obsession
at the highest levels of this administration.
I urge—I urge—a reset in how we are
conducting these discussions. Let’s be
respectful of one another. Let’s have
dialogue. Let’s have cooperation. Let’s
have partnership. Let’s take a different
tack to secure this relationship with
Greenland, recognizing that they are
an ally and not an asset and not appropriate for any—any—sort of forced annexation or action.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon.

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.028

S08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

DIRECTING THE ARCHITECT OF
THE CAPITOL TO PROMINENTLY
DISPLAY, IN A PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE LOCATION IN THE SENATE
WING OF THE UNITED STATES
CAPITOL, A PLAQUE HONORING
THE MEMBERS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT
RESPONDING
ON
JANUARY 6, 2021, UNTIL THE
PLAQUE CAN BE PLACED IN ITS
PERMANENT LOCATION
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, 5
years and 2 days ago, the Capitol Police protected us as a team stormed the
Capitol. Many other forces came and
defended the Capitol as well. It was
more than just stopping folks headed
toward the Capitol to try to interrupt
the counting of votes; it was protecting
the peaceful transfer of power, which
goes to the heart of the Republic.
In 2022, we passed a law saying we
would put up this plaque to recognize
the valiant efforts of the police officers, but the plaque has not gone up
yet; so I am here to team up with my
colleague from North Carolina in order
to have a strategy to make sure that
we do get this plaque up until the
House and Senate can reach an agreement.
Therefore, Mr. President, as if in legislative session, I ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to the immediate consideration of S. Res. 580.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the resolution by
title.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

A resolution (S. Res. 580) directing the Architect of the Capitol to prominently display, in a publicly accessible location in the
Senate wing of the United States Capitol, a
plaque honoring the members of law enforcement responding on January 6, 2021, until the
plaque can be placed in its permanent location.

There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the resolution.
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the resolution
be agreed to; that the preamble be
agreed to; and that the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid
upon the table.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The resolution (S. Res. 580) was
agreed to.
The preamble was agreed to.
(The resolution, with its preamble, is
printed in today’s RECORD under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, I
yield to my colleague from North Carolina.
I will have some comments following
his comments. We also have the Democratic lead on the Rules Committee
here who would like to weigh in on the
importance of this action.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from North Carolina.
Mr. TILLIS. Mr. President, I came to
the floor on January 6 to make sure
that we conveyed our undying gratitude to everybody who played a role.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S111

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Senator MERKLEY and I were here in
the Chamber, and what we saw there
was a parliamentary staff being focused on the job, not worried about
themselves but worried about getting
the ballots that we were certifying into
safekeeping. We saw the Sergeant at
Arms’ staff do an extraordinary job of
marshaling people around and getting
them out of the building. We saw the
Capitol Police spirit us away from this
Chamber, over to the Hart Building,
and secure us—literally—without any
risk of any of us being harmed.
Having said that, we walked by several Capitol Police officers who were
injured. They had been hit. They had
been crushed in doors. You know all of
the reports. Yet they did their jobs
that day. So, when I heard that, apparently, the law that we passed to recognize them and to place this plaque had
a technical implementation problem, I
went about seeing how we could clarify
things, and I found out that my colleague from Oregon Senator MERKLEY
had a similar concern. So we are two
folks who came together to say: Let’s
provide some clarity here.
The one thing I will tell you is that
this is the plaque, but according to the
Capitol Architect, the technical problem that, apparently, the House identified, which I think they can cure fairly
quickly if they think it is a concern, is
that the plaque was to include a list of
all of the individual law enforcement
officers who came to the Capitol on
that day. This plaque actually has the
names of the various law enforcement
agencies, but the reality is, there is a
digital component to this, which I understand, once it is implemented, will
have a list of each and every person
who answered the call.
I think it is good that we actually
have all of the agencies here because
you will see how many people came
here—again, I will close on this—to be
a part of withstanding what I would
consider to be one of the most significant stress tests for this institution
since it was founded.
Just keep in mind that we came here.
We heard thousands of people storm
this Capitol. People died. Police officers were injured, hospitalized. One
died shortly after January 6. A lot of
people said that was a dark day for democracy. I would leave with you this:
It was a great day for democracy because of the law enforcement officers—
the people who kept us safe—because
do you know what we did when we were
confronted with thousands of thugs
storming this building? We took a brief
recess. We got ourselves together. The
Capitol was secured. Then, before we
left this compound, we came back and
completed our constitutional duty to
certify the election. If that is not a
good example of parliamentary staff,
cloakroom staff, the Sergeant at Arms,
and Capitol Police being a part of helping us withstand the greatest threat to
this great institution—we owe them
our eternal gratitude, and this Nation
is stronger because of it.

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon.
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, it was
an extraordinary moment to be sitting
here in this Chamber and seeing a
member of the staff’s team run down
the aisle to the podium, speak quietly
to the Vice President, have the Vice
President immediately gavel down the
session and depart through the side
door; then to see police officers from
the Capitol Police immediately engaged, working to lock the doors, protect this Chamber; and whole teams set
up to ensure the safety of the Members
of the Senate, with the same thing happening over on the House side.
Then, within a few hours, as my colleague from North Carolina has pointed
out, the Capitol was secured, but in the
process, 170 police officers in defending
the Capitol were injured, and as a consequence of the attack on that day, 5
died.
So it was no small movement. It was
not a peaceful protest outside but a
storming of the Capitol, with some brutal assaults on folks within, on the police officers within. It is so important
that we fulfill the vision of the 2022 law
and get this plaque up to honor those
police officers.
What this resolution is saying is that
we in the Senate will put it up here, in
a publicly available space, until a deal
can be reached with the House of Representatives to display it. Both Chambers have to agree on that, but this is
to put it up here in the Senate in a
place where the public can see it. That
we can do here on our own, and we intend to do it. That is the right thing to
do.
It was a shocking thing to me this
week because, simultaneous with discovering that this plaque had been
stashed away in a room—out of sight
somewhere—and that there wasn’t an
agreement to display it, I also saw the
White House’s posting, saying that it
was a fiction that the Capitol was assaulted and that it was just a peaceful
protest outside.
It is so important we be honest with
the American people about what happened. It is so important that we recognize those who defended our democratic Republic on that day. It is so important that people know that we came
back as Senators and House Members
and finished our work that day for the
peaceful transfer of power, which is essential to the future of our democratic
Republic, and that we succeed in that
every 4 years.
We have all taken an oath to the
Constitution, and that is one of the
most important functions to preserve
in the Constitution—the integrity of
the ballot box, which is the beating
heart of a democratic republic—and the
subsequent peaceful transfer of power.
Mr. TILLIS. Will the Senator yield?
Mr. MERKLEY. I will yield, yes.
Mr. TILLIS. Mr. President, the one
thing I would like to say to Senator
MERKLEY—and that is why I should
bring notes when I come down to the

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.029

S08JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S112

floor—is that I also want to thank the
Republican leader Senator THUNE because he has agreed that we will be
able to display this until the final location is in place, and I appreciate his
help in doing that.
Mr. MERKLEY. I am so glad my colleague mentioned that because, for us
to take action here, we have to have bipartisan work, including the leadership
on both sides of the aisle.
So while neither my colleague from
North Carolina nor I are in the leadership of our—at least I am not, but we
worked with our leadership to make
this happen. So this is an example of
bipartisan cooperation on a very important point.
So with that, unless my colleague
from North Carolina has more to share,
I am going to yield to my colleague
from California and thank him and his
leadership on the Rules Committee as
we worked to get to this point, with a
bipartisan partnership, to get this
plaque honoring the police officers
from many groups—most, of course,
the Capitol Police, but several other
groups—that came to defend the Capitol and make sure they know how
much we appreciate what their sacrifice was to defend democracy on that
day 5 years and 2 days ago.
I yield to my colleague from California.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
BUDD). The Senator from California.
Mr. PADILLA. Mr. President, I want
to thank Senators MERKLEY and TILLIS
for their bipartisan cooperation in honoring the law enforcement officers who
responded on January 6, 5 years ago. I
also want to thank them both for their
comments on Tuesday, 2 days ago, recognizing the fifth anniversary of the
attack on the Capitol.
As Senator MERKLEY mentioned, I
am the ranking member on the Rules
Committee, which has jurisdiction on
this issue, and I can attest, having
been here for the votes on the original
action, that there was bipartisan and
bicameral agreement on this plaque
and bipartisan, bicameral agreement
on its intended location following the
enactment of the law.
Now, for the last several years, many
people have been confused by the delay
in mounting it as planned and directed
by Congress. Many even believe that
the Speaker of the House never intended to follow the law and honor
these law enforcement officers who
bravely defended the Capitol and our
democracy that day.
I know that sounds a little cynical,
but as Senator MERKLEY mentioned,
you have to understand that part of the
context here is the White House’s new
website that says that the Capitol Police were the ones who deliberately escalated the situation on January 6, in
their attempt to rewrite the history of
that day. That dishonors the officers—
not just the members of the Capitol
Police but all the law enforcement
agencies—that responded on that
eventful day.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

09:57 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

So I am more than just personally
pleased to see this resolution move forward and that the Senate’s bipartisan
commitment to real history is strong.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
BANKS). The Senator from Alaska.
f

LEGISLATIVE SESSION
MORNING BUSINESS
Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the Senate resume legislative session and be in
a period of morning business, with Senators permitted to speak therein for up
to 10 minutes each.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

OPERATION MIDWAY BLITZ
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, on December 23, the Supreme Court issued
an order in Trump v. Illinois that
checks this President and his authoritarian tendencies.
The Court rejected the Trump administration’s request to stay a temporary
restraining order issued by U.S. District Judge April Perry, which had
blocked Trump’s unnecessary deployment of the National Guard in Chicago.
In that unsigned order, the majority
of the Supreme Court wrote, ‘‘The Government has failed to identify a source
of authority that would allow the military to execute the laws in Illinois.’’
This is good news, and we should recognize the significance of this moment:
Even the Supreme Court’s conservative
supermajority refused to greenlight the
President of the United States’ blatantly unlawful overreach.
Our government is supposed to help
Americans—not go to war with them.
The administration’s deployment of
the National Guard was dangerous political theater intended to sow fear and
escalate the President’s mass deportation campaign, not to reduce crime.
The President’s false rhetoric about
Chicago being ‘‘overrun’’ with chaos
was clearly a pretext to intimidate our
city and normalize the deployment of
soldiers on our streets.
To protect civil liberties and civilian
rule—pillars of democracy—our country has long upheld the norm that the
military does not police our cities.
The Supreme Court recognized that,
in this country, the circumstances
where the military may be used to execute the laws are exceptional and
thankfully acted as a check on this
President, at least at this preliminary
stage.
The cost of this National Guard operation has already been enormous. The
operations, maintenance, and personnel costs for federalizing the 500 National Guard soldiers for deployment in
Illinois reached an estimated $20 million in a 2-month span.
That comes out to more than $300,000
per day.

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

That bears repeating: $20 million and
500 Guard personnel away for weeks on
end from their families, their jobs,
their communities . . . not performing
any missions, but simply used by the
President to threaten a reign of terror
in the city of Chicago. It is unconscionable.
As of today, these troops are finally,
slowly demobilizing and getting ready
to head home. But unfortunately, the
presence of militarized immigration
operations is likely to continue in Chicago and around the country, along
with the egregious use of excessive
force by these Federal immigration
agents.
Just yesterday, an ICE agent shot
and killed a woman in Minneapolis.
The video of the shooting is horrific
and contradicts the self-defense narrative that DHS has attempted to spin.
Minnesota officials have rightfully
promised a full, fair, and expeditious
investigation. DHS Secretary Kristi
Noem has dodged testifying under oath
before the Senate Judiciary Committee
for months. What happened in Minneapolis yesterday was an unacceptable tragedy. She must testify before
the
Judiciary
Committee,
immediately.
Meanwhile, across the country, camouflaged and masked Federal immigration agents continue to deploy Black
Hawk helicopters, armored vehicles,
and a variety of chemical agents, including near schools, playgrounds,
apartment buildings, and churches.
And the Department of Homeland Security refuses to provide information
about the costs of these dangerous operations in Illinois. The Chicago Tribune estimated that these militarized
immigration operations cost at least
$40 million over a 10-week period.
In the wake of these operations, families are afraid to leave their homes,
parents are scared to walk their children to school, and workers and vendors fear being pulled from the streets
and detained simply for the way they
look or the language they speak.
The Trump administration has repeatedly justified these militarized
raids as necessary to target the ‘‘worst
of the worst.’’ But the facts tell a different story, one that I have laid out
repeatedly on this floor.
In one instance, on a list of 614 detainees submitted to a Federal court,
the administration identified criminal
histories for just 16 of the detainees.
That shakes out to less than 3 percent
of arrestees.
And people with no prior criminal
backgrounds, including legal residents
and U.S. citizens, were swept up.
As the President flirts with future
military deployments and continues
his militarized immigration raids, we
know his campaign of terror will not
stop at Chicago.
And while he failed in his attempt to
use Chicago as ‘‘training grounds’’ for
military forces, the scale and tactics of
Operation Midway Blitz have given him
a blueprint for similar operations

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.030

S08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

across the country, including in Minneapolis this week.
So I ask my Republican colleagues,
Will you denounce this President’s use
of troops in our communities before a
city you represent becomes the administration’s next ‘‘training grounds’’?
I will continue to speak out and conduct oversight of this President, and I
hope my Republican colleagues will
join me in that effort.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

REMEMBERING WILLIAM ‘‘BILL’’
HARRIS
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, politicians live in a world of advocates. The
rich and powerful engage effective people to represent them. Those less fortunate strive to keep up in the world of
politics. It was 1982 as I, first-time congressional candidate, received a questionnaire from the Children’s Defense
Fund. My first thought was: Is this for
real? Helping kids is the right thing to
do, but who would make the most vulnerable people in America their
‘‘cause’’? Enter Bill Harris.
Bill was born on March 11, 1940, in
Saint Paul, MN, to Irving and Rosetta
Harris. While they moved around frequently in his youth, his family eventually settled in the Chicago suburb of
Highland Park. Bill’s father Irving was
one of the most amazing people I have
ever met, and anyone who knew him
would understand how Bill developed a
passion for advancing the interests of
children. Across the United States, Irving invested in charities and institutions that supported childhood development. He helped create the Yale Child
Study Center at Yale University, the
University of Chicago’s Graduate
School of Public Policy Studies, which
bears his name, and the Erikson Institute for Advanced Studies in Child Development. He worked tirelessly for the
rights of all children and was so proud
that Bill ended up working for children
as well.
After graduating from Highland Park
High School, Bill left the North Shore
to attend Wesleyan University in Connecticut, where he graduated in 1961.
He went on to work at Janus Films in
New York, where his interest in childhood development programs blossomed.
In his position he had the opportunity
to work with Fordham University to
create novel media programs for underserved youth. In this position, he
founded a newsgathering team, a radio
station, and a newspaper all made for
and run by children. In bringing new
media to impoverished areas, Bill gave
children more than just a job, he gave
them a chance to advocate for themselves and their interests. Bill would
end up writing his doctoral thesis at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on his work, and it would continue to leave a deep impression on his
life.
And in his work, Bill received his
life’s greatest blessing. While organizing a film festival at the Lincoln
Center, Bill met his wife Robie. She

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S113

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

had submitted an entry to the festival
titled ‘‘Child’s Eye View,’’ which documented her work teaching underserved
children. The two felt an instant bond
over their passion for childhood development, and they soon married in 1969.
Their relationship flourished for 55
years, with both advocating for vulnerable children throughout their union.
After Bill completed his doctorate,
he reflected on his work with children
and how he could make more of an impact. At the time, nearly every large
corporation and labor union in America had an organization devoted to
fundraising and advancing its priorities
in government, except for children. Bill
set out to change this. He felt that
children were a public good, whose
needs were far greater than what private companies or philanthropy alone
could protect. Only the government
possessed the power and responsibility
to adequately address the best interests of children.
In 1981, Bill formed Kidspac to raise
money to back politicians who supported evidence-based policies for children and families. Since its inception,
Bill and Kidspac remained at the forefront of the major childhood welfare
reforms of the past 40 years. Bill’s efforts led to the creation of Early Head
Start under the Clinton administration; he pushed Congress to change the
Child Tax Credit to be fully refundable
so the poorest families would be able
receive its benefits; and he helped establish the National Child Traumatic
Stress Initiative to treat the mental
health impacts of childhood trauma. In
the years since, I have been honored to
help carry that torch and double the
funding for this critical program to improve our knowledge and expand services for children who are exposed to
trauma. Bill was relentless in pursuit
of his mission to push politicians to advance the best, most evidence-based
practices that would support children.
In his work, Bill was not content
with only assisting children at home.
He advocated for international HIV and
AIDS relief funding long before the establishment of the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief under the
Bush administration. I had the great
fortune of traveling with Bill to SubSaharan Africa to examine the effects
of international investment in the region, and one memory of our trip
stands out to me. Shortly after we arrived in Africa, I learned that the airline had lost my luggage. When I told
Bill, he did not hesitate to offer me access to his wardrobe. He was ready to
give me the shirt off his back. That
was the kind of person Bill was.
Bill never stopped advocating for
children, and he did so without an
ounce of vanity or desire for personal
recognition. His passion was born out
of a true sense of altruism that could
not be tainted or subdued. Although
Bill is no longer with us, his legacy
lives on through his children David and
Ben. David worked together with Bill
to support the expansion of the Child

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Tax Credit, and he serves as executive
director at the Children’s Research and
Education Institute, a nonprofit organization that Bill founded to educate
policymakers and the public about the
policies that best serve children. Ben
worked for many years as a clinical
professor at the Psychological Center
at the City College of New York, where
he provided therapeutic services in the
same neighborhoods that his father
made children’s news programs five
decades prior. Today, he continues to
work in clinical psychology. Loretta
and I send our deepest condolences to
David and Ben; their wives Emily and
Hilary; Bill’s sister Virginia Polsky;
and Bill’s grandchildren Ella, Rosie,
Sam, and Daisy.
Bill was an optimist. He believed
that there was no limit to what a child
could achieve if they received the right
support from their families and their
country. With no ego or agenda, Bill
gave his life to providing children with
that support. His work has left a permanent mark on America’s children,
families, and politics. He will be dearly
missed. Bill Harris was truly one of the
good guys.
f

ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS
TRIBUTE TO CAROLINE NILSSON
TROY
∑ Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, I rise
today to congratulate Caroline Nilsson
Troy on her well-deserved retirement
after more than 31 years of dedicated
service to the Gem State and the students, staff, faculty, and alumni at the
University of Idaho.
Caroline’s deep Idaho roots have
shaped her public service. A fifth-generation Idahoan, Caroline grew up in
Genesse, a community built on values
that define the Gem State: hard work,
tending the land, and Vandal pride.
After graduating from the University
of Idaho, she applied the lessons
learned on her family’s farm and ranch
to the U of I’s College of Agriculture
and Life Sciences. There, Caroline
helped develop and raise funding for
educational programs that set students
on the path to success.
In 2014, Caroline was elected to the
Idaho House of Representatives. Over
the course of four terms, she sponsored
more than 100 bills and resolutions
aimed at strengthening small businesses, timber, and agriculture and was
a key voice in the responsible use of
taxpayer dollars. Caroline remained a
tireless advocate for education and her
alma mater, opening doors to internships and jobs for Vandals interested in
public service.
Following her time in elected office,
Caroline returned home to the University of Idaho as the special assistant to
the president for State and governmental relations. In this role, Caroline
made a positive impact on countless
lives, especially for students and families across north Idaho. I am confident

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.021

S08JAPT1

S114

that her legacy of kindness and integrity will inspire generations to come.
It is with great pride that I recognize
Caroline Nilssan Troy for her outstanding contributions to the Gem
State. Thank you, Caroline, for your
many years of service and commitment
to making Idaho the best place to live,
work, and raise a family.∑
f

MESSAGES FROM THE PRESIDENT
Messages from the President of the
United States were communicated to
the Senate by Ms. Holstead, one of his
secretaries.
f

EXECUTIVE MESSAGES REFERRED
In executive session the Presiding Officer laid before the Senate messages
from the President of the United
States submitting sundry nominations
which were referred to the Committee
on Armed Services.
(The messages received today are
printed at the end of the Senate proceedings.)
f

MESSAGES FROM THE HOUSE
At 1:05 p.m., a message from the
House of Representatives, delivered by
Mrs. Alli, one of its reading clerks, announced that the House has agreed to
the following resolution:
H. Res. 978. Resolution relative to the
death of the Honorable Doug LaMalfa, a Representative from the State of California.

At 4:06 p.m., a message from the
House of Representatives, delivered by
Mrs. Cole, one of its reading clerks, announced that the House has passed the
following bill, in which it requests the
concurrence of the Senate:
H.R. 6938. An act making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
f

MEASURES DISCHARGED
The following joint resolution was
discharged from the Committee on
Foreign Relations, by motion, pursuant to 50 U.S.C. 1546a, and placed on
the calendar:
S.J. Res. 98. Joint resolution to direct the
removal of United States Armed Forces from
hostilities within or against Venezuela that
have not been authorized by Congress.
f

MEASURES READ THE FIRST TIME
January 8 (Legislative Day January 7), 2026

The following bill was read the first
time:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

H.R. 6938. An act making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
f

EXECUTIVE AND OTHER
COMMUNICATIONS
The following communications were
laid before the Senate, together with
accompanying papers, reports, and documents, and were referred as indicated:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

EC–2418. A communication from the President and Chairman, Export-Import Bank of
the United States, transmitting, pursuant to
law, a report relative to action on a nomination for a position covered by the Federal
Vacancies Reform Act of 1998 for the position
of First Vice President, Export-Import Bank
of the United States, received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Banking, Housing,
and Urban Affairs.
EC–2419. A communication from the Secretary of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to law, a six-month periodic report on
the national emergency that was declared in
Executive Order 13219 of June 26, 2001, with
respect to the Western Balkans; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2420. A communication from the Management Analyst, Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Public Land Order for Withdrawal of
Federal Lands; Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis
Counties, Minnesota’’ (PLO7917) received in
the Office of the President of the Senate on
January 7, 2026; to the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources.
EC–2421. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Approval;
Ohio; 2015 Ozone Reasonably Available Control Technology’’ (FRL No. 9995–02–R5) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 5, 2026; to the Committee
on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2422. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Extension of the
State Implementation Plan Due Date for the
Regional Haze Third Implementation Period’’ ((RIN2060–AW41) (FRL No. 12160–02–
OAR)) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 5, 2026; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2423. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Approval;
Michigan and Minnesota; Revision to Taconite Federal Implementation Plan’’ (FRL
No. 12351–02–R5)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 5, 2026;
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2424. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Revision;
California; Placer County Air Pollution Control District; New Source Review’’ (FRL No.
12530–03–R9) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 5, 2026;
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2425. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Approval;
California; San Joaquin Valley Unified Air
Pollution Control District’’ (FRL No. 12832–
02–R9) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 5, 2026; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2426. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Utah; Northern
Wastch Front; 2015 8-Hour Ozone Nonattain-

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ment Area Boundary Expansion and Applicability of Certain Clean Air Act Requirements’’ (FRL No. 12971–02–R8) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 5, 2026; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2427. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Approval;
Michigan; Infrastructure SIP Requirements
for the 2015 Ozone NAAQS; Michigan State
Board Requirements; Withdrawal of Direct
Final Rule’’ (FRL No. 13010–03–R5) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 5, 2026; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2428. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Effluent Limitations Guidelines and Standards for the
Steam Electric Power Generating Point
Source
Category-Deadline
Extensions’’
((RIN2040–AG54) (FRL No. 8794.3–04–OW)) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 5, 2026; to the Committee
on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2429. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘National Emission
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants; Delegation of Authority to Oklahoma’’ (FRL
No. 12761–02–R6) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 5, 2026;
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2430. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Approval;
Colorado; Revisions to Colorado Procedural
Rules and Common Provisions Regulation’’
(FRL No. 13050–02–R8) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 5,
2026; to the Committee on Environment and
Public Works.
EC–2431. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘New Source Performance Standards; Delegation of Authority to Oklahoma’’ (FRL No. 12826–02–R6) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on December 18, 2025; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2432. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘New Source Performance Standards and National Emission
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants; Delegation of Authority to Louisiana’’ (FRL No.
12688–02–R6) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on December 18, 2025;
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–2433. A communication from the Acting
Branch Supervisor of the Regulatory Management Division, Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Approval:
Arizona: Infrastructure Requirements for the
2012 Fine Particulate Matter National Ambient Air Quality Standard’’ (FRL No. 11747–
02–R9) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on December 18, 2025; to the
Committee on Environment and Public
Works.

E:\CR\FM\G08JA6.020

S08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND
JOINT RESOLUTIONS
The following bills and joint resolutions were introduced, read the first
and second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated:
By Ms. HASSAN (for herself and Mr.
YOUNG):
S. 3596. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to modify the earned income threshold for the refundable child tax
credit; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. YOUNG (for himself, Ms. CANTWELL, Mr. DAINES, Mr. DURBIN, Mrs.
BLACKBURN, Mr. LUJÁN, Mr. BUDD,
Ms. BALDWIN, Mr. ROUNDS, and Mr.
SCHUMER):
S. 3597. A bill to reauthorize the National
Quantum Initiative Act, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
By Mrs. SHAHEEN (for herself and Ms.
COLLINS):
S. 3598. A bill to provide for the periodic
issuance of up-to-date clinical guidance on
addressing the health effects of per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Health,
Education, Labor, and Pensions.
By Mr. WHITEHOUSE (for himself and
Ms. SLOTKIN):
S. 3599. A bill to amend the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act to establish a
public health insurance option, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
By Ms. SLOTKIN:
S. 3600. A bill to require the President to
declare a national housing emergency and
invoke the Defense Production Act to
incentivize residential housing production,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Mr. SCHMITT:
S. 3601. A bill to authorize a grant program
to support institutions of higher education
in hiring veterans as campus security, to
prohibit Federal funding for Equity Assistance Centers, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions.
By Mr. MARSHALL (for himself and
Mr. SCOTT of Florida):
S. 3602. A bill to amend the Immigration
and Nationality Act to clarify the definitions of ‘‘public charge’’ and ‘‘likely at any
time to become a public charge,’’ to establish requirements for affidavits of support
and public charge bonds, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. WELCH (for himself, Mr. SANDERS, Mr. MARKEY, Mr. PADILLA, Mr.
HEINRICH, Mr. WYDEN, and Mr.
SCHIFF):
S. 3603. A bill to amend the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 to improve the cost of living adjustment exclusion from income under
the supplemental nutrition assistance program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.
By Mr. MARKEY (for himself, Ms.
DUCKWORTH, and Mr. WYDEN):
S. 3604. A bill to amend the Public Health
Service Act to require the Secretary of
Health and Human Services to carry out activities to establish, expand, and sustain a
public health nursing workforce, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Health,
Education, Labor, and Pensions.
By Mr. GRAHAM (for himself and Ms.
CANTWELL):
S. 3605. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow a portion of general business credit carryforwards to be
transferred by certain taxpayers affected by

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S115

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

federally declared disasters and other incidents; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mrs. BLACKBURN (for herself, Mr.
CORNYN, Mr. COTTON, Mr. BUDD, Mr.
CRAMER, Mr. GRAHAM, and Mr.
HAGERTY):
S. 3606. A bill to subject aliens convicted of
fraud to deportation and to bestow concurrent jurisdiction to revoke the citizenship of
any naturalized United States citizen convicted of fraud on any court that enters such
a conviction; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. BARRASSO (for himself, Mr.
WELCH, Mrs. CAPITO, and Ms. ROSEN):
S. 3607. A bill to amend title XVIII of the
Social Security Act to provide for expanded
coverage of services furnished by genetic
counselors under part B of the Medicare program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. SHEEHY:
S. 3608. A bill to require a strategy for the
expanded use of Trade Transparency Units;
to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. PADILLA (for himself and Mr.
SHEEHY):
S. 3609. A bill to establish a community
protection and wildfire resilience grant program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mr. BANKS:
S. 3610. A bill to prohibit the provision of
United States financial assistance to any entity that is controlled by an agent of a covered foreign principal; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
f

SUBMISSION OF CONCURRENT AND
SENATE RESOLUTIONS
The following concurrent resolutions
and Senate resolutions were read, and
referred (or acted upon), as indicated:
By Mr. SCOTT of Florida (for himself,
Mr.
BUDD,
Mr.
Mr.
COTTON,
Mr.
CURTIS,
Mr.
TUBERVILLE,
SCHMITT, Mrs. BRITT, Mr. ROUNDS,
Ms. LUMMIS, Mr. CRAMER, Mrs.
BLACKBURN, Mr. MULLIN, and Mr.
CRUZ):
S. Res. 576. A resolution commending the
United States military action in Venezuela;
to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
By Mr. SCHIFF (for himself and Mr.
PADILLA):
S. Res. 577. A resolution observing the 1year anniversary of the 2025 Southern California wildfires; considered and agreed to.
By Ms. CANTWELL (for herself and
Mrs. MURRAY):
S. Res. 578. A resolution congratulating the
University of Washington men’s soccer team
on winning the 2025 National Collegiate Athletic Association Division 1 Men’s Soccer National Championship; considered and agreed
to.
By Mr. CASSIDY (for himself, Mr.
KAINE, Mr. KING, Mr. CURTIS, Mr.
GRASSLEY, and Mr. DURBIN):
S. Res. 579. A resolution affirming the importance of the Social Security program to
the people of the United States and expressing the sense of the Senate that Social Security must be preserved, protected, and
strengthened for current and future generations; considered and agreed to.
By Mr. MERKLEY (for himself and Mr.
TILLIS):
S. Res. 580. A resolution directing the Architect of the Capitol to prominently display, in a publicly accessible location in the
Senate wing of the United States Capitol, a
plaque honoring the members of law enforcement responding on January 6, 2021, until the

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

plaque can be placed in its permanent location; considered and agreed to.
By Mrs. GILLIBRAND (for herself, Ms.
ALSOBROOKS, Mr. KELLY, Mr. MURPHY, Ms. HIRONO, Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
Mr. SCHUMER, Mr. VAN HOLLEN, Mr.
Mrs.
SHAHEEN,
Ms.
GALLEGO,
DUCKWORTH, Mr. KIM, Mr. WHITEHOUSE, Mr. KAINE, Mr. REED, Mr.
LUJÁN, Ms. SLOTKIN, Mr. PETERS, Mr.
COONS, Mr. FETTERMAN, Mrs. MURRAY, Mr. MERKLEY, Ms. ROSEN, Mr.
HEINRICH, Mr. WYDEN, Mr. BENNET,
Mr. BOOKER, Ms. CANTWELL, Ms. KLOBUCHAR, Ms. HASSAN, Mr. SCHATZ, Ms.
CORTEZ MASTO, Mr. WELCH, Mr.
SCHIFF, Mr. SANDERS, Mr. WARNER,
and Mr. MARKEY):
S. Con. Res. 25. A concurrent resolution
recognizing the 15th anniversary of the January 8, 2011, Tucson, Arizona, shooting and
honoring the survivors and victims, including former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords, a
gun violence survivor and one of the most influential voices of courage in the United
States in the fight to end gun violence; to
the Committee on the Judiciary.
f

ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS
S. 121

At the request of Mr. LANKFORD, the
names of the Senator from New Hampshire (Mrs. SHAHEEN) and the Senator
from Minnesota (Ms. KLOBUCHAR) were
added as cosponsors of S. 121, a bill to
extend the statute of limitations for
violations relating to pandemic-era
programs to be 10 years.
S. 128

At the request of Mr. LEE, the name
of the Senator from Oklahoma (Mr.
MULLIN) was added as a cosponsor of S.
128, a bill to amend the National Voter
Registration Act of 1993 to require
proof of United States citizenship to
register an individual to vote in elections for Federal office, and for other
purposes.
S. 276

At the request of Mr. CRUZ, the name
of the Senator from Florida (Mrs.
MOODY) was added as a cosponsor of S.
276, a bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to expand and improve health savings accounts, and for
other purposes.
S. 405

At the request of Mr. TUBERVILLE,
the name of the Senator from West
Virginia (Mr. JUSTICE) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 405, a bill to modify eligibility requirements for amateur
sports governing organizations.
S. 749

At the request of Ms. MURKOWSKI, the
name of the Senator from New Jersey
(Mr. BOOKER) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 749, a bill to amend title 38,
United States Code, to extend increased dependency and indemnity
compensation paid to surviving spouses
of veterans who die from amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, regardless of how long
the veterans had such disease prior to
death, and for other purposes.
S. 1021

At the request of Ms. KLOBUCHAR, the
names of the Senator from Michigan
(Ms. SLOTKIN) and the Senator from

E:\CR\FM\A08JA6.012

S08JAPT1

S116

New Mexico (Mr. LUJÁN) were added as
cosponsors of S. 1021, a bill to amend
the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 to
establish a dairy nutrition incentive
program, and for other purposes.
S. 1124

At the request of Mr. CRUZ, the name
of the Senator from Ohio (Mr. HUSTED)
was added as a cosponsor of S. 1124, a
bill to amend the Federal Reserve Act
to prohibit the Federal reserve banks
from offering certain products or services directly to an individual, to prohibit the use of central bank currency
for monetary policy, and for other purposes.
S. 1157

At the request of Ms. SMITH, the
names of the Senator from Hawaii (Ms.
HIRONO) and the Senator from Maine
(Ms. COLLINS) were added as cosponsors
of S. 1157, a bill to direct the Secretary
of Health and Human Services to conduct a review to evaluate the status of
research on lung cancer in women and
underserved populations, and for other
purposes.
S. 1748

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the name of the Senator from Delaware
(Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 1748, a bill to protect
the safety of children on the internet.
S. 1763

At the request of Mr. YOUNG, the
names of the Senator from New York
(Mrs. GILLIBRAND) and the Senator
from Michigan (Ms. SLOTKIN) were
added as cosponsors of S. 1763, a bill to
amend the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 to make permanent the 7-year recovery period for motorsports entertainment complexes.
S. 2061

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the name of the Senator from New Jersey (Mr. BOOKER) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2061, a bill to require the
Interagency Working Group on Toxic
Exposure to conduct research on the
diagnosis and treatment of health conditions of descendants of individuals
exposed to toxic substances while serving as members of the Armed Forces,
and for other purposes.
S. 2378

At the request of Mr. MORAN, the
name of the Senator from Idaho (Mr.
RISCH) was added as a cosponsor of S.
2378, a bill to amend title 49, United
States Code, to establish funds for investments in aviation security checkpoint technology, and for other purposes.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S. 2827

At the request of Mr. KAINE, the
name of the Senator from Illinois (Ms.
DUCKWORTH) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2827, a bill to amend the Fair
Housing Act to prohibit discrimination
based on source of income, veteran status, or military status.
S. 2949

At the request of Mr. BOOKER, the
name of the Senator from Maryland
(Ms. ALSOBROOKS) was added as a co-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

sponsor of S. 2949, a bill to amend title
XVIII of the Social Security Act to
eliminate the coinsurance requirement
for certain colorectal cancer screening
tests furnished under the Medicare program.

cation Act of 1965 to provide students
with disabilities and their families
with access to critical information
needed to select the right college and
succeed once enrolled.

S. 2994

At the request of Mr. KAINE, the
names of the Senator from Delaware
(Mr. COONS), the Senator from Washington (Mrs. MURRAY), the Senator
from Michigan (Mr. PETERS), the Senator from California (Mr. PADILLA) and
the Senator from Washington (Ms.
CANTWELL) were added as cosponsors of
S.J. Res. 98, a joint resolution to direct
the removal of United States Armed
Forces from hostilities within or
against Venezuela that have not been
authorized by Congress.

At the request of Mr. PADILLA, the
name of the Senator from Colorado
(Mr. BENNET) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2994, a bill to amend the National
Voter Registration Act of 1993 to clarify that a State may not use an individual’s failure to vote as the basis for
initiating the procedures provided
under such Act for the removal of the
individual from the official list of registered voters in the State on the
grounds that the individual has
changed residence, and for other purposes.
S. 3023

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the name of the Senator from Utah
(Mr. LEE) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 3023, a bill to limit liability for certain entities storing child sexual abuse
material for law enforcement agencies,
and for other purposes.
S. 3292

At the request of Mr. COONS, the
name of the Senator from Pennsylvania (Mr. MCCORMICK) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 3292, a bill to support
research about the impact of digital
communication platforms on society
by providing privacy-protected, secure
pathways for independent research on
data held by large internet companies.

S.J. RES. 98

S. RES. 61

At the request of Mr. MARKEY, the
name of the Senator from New York
(Mrs. GILLIBRAND) was added as a cosponsor of S. Res. 61, a resolution expressing support for the continued
value of arms control agreements and
negotiated constraints on Russian and
Chinese strategic nuclear forces.
AMENDMENT NO. 4056

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the names of the Senator from Minnesota (Ms. KLOBUCHAR) and the Senator from Minnesota (Ms. SMITH) were
added as cosponsors of amendment No.
4056 intended to be proposed to H.R.
4016, a bill making appropriations for
the Department of Defense for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes.

S. 3410

f

At the request of Mr. KIM, the name
of the Senator from Ohio (Mr. HUSTED)
was added as a cosponsor of S. 3410, a
bill to establish Federal agency technology and artificial intelligence talent teams to improve competitive service hiring practices, and for other purposes.

STATEMENTS ON INTRODUCED
BILLS AND JOINT RESOLUTIONS
By Mr. BARRASSO (for himself,
Mr. WELCH, Mrs. CAPITO, and
Ms. ROSEN):
S. 3607. A bill to amend title XVIII of
the Social Security Act to provide for
expanded coverage of services furnished by genetic counselors under
part B of the Medicare program, and
for other purposes; to the Committee
on Finance.

S. 3492

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the names of the Senator from North
Dakota (Mr. CRAMER) and the Senator
from Rhode Island (Mr. REED) were
added as cosponsors of S. 3492, a bill to
amend titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act to require skilled
nursing facilities, nursing facilities, intermediate care facilities for the intellectually disabled, and inpatient rehabilitation facilities to permit essential
caregivers access during any period in
which regular visitation is restricted.
S. 3583

At the request of Mr. HUSTED, the
name of the Senator from Montana
(Mr. SHEEHY) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 3583, a bill to establish a pilot program in which States may use consolidated funds, through Upward Mobility
Grants, for antipoverty programs, and
for other purposes.
S. 3589

At the request of Ms. HASSAN, the
name of the Senator from Arizona (Mr.
KELLY) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3589, a bill to amend the Higher Edu-

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

S. 3607
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Access to
Genetic Counselor Services Act of 2026’’.
SEC.

2.

MEDICARE COVERAGE OF GENETIC
COUNSELING SERVICES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1861 of the Social

Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended—
(1) in subsection (s)(2)—
(A) by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end of subparagraph (II);
(B) by adding ‘‘and’’ at the end of subparagraph (JJ); and
(C) by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
‘‘(KK) covered genetic counseling services
(as defined in subsection (nnn)(1));’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
‘‘Covered Genetic Counseling Services
‘‘(nnn)(1) The term ‘covered genetic counseling services’ means genetic counseling
services furnished on or after January 1, 2027,

E:\CR\FM\A08JA6.014

S08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

by a genetic counselor (as defined in paragraph (2)) and such services and supplies furnished as an incident to the provision of such
services which the genetic counselor is legally authorized to perform under State law
(or the State regulatory mechanism provided
by State law) as would otherwise be covered
if furnished by a physician (or as incident to
a physician’s service).
‘‘(2) The term ‘genetic counselor’ means an
individual who—
‘‘(A) is licensed as a genetic counselor by
the State in which the individual furnishes
genetic counseling services; or
‘‘(B) in the case of an individual practicing
in a State that does not license genetic counselors, is certified by the American Board of
Genetic Counseling and meets such other criteria as the Secretary establishes.’’.
BILLING.—Section
(b)
BALANCE
1842(b)(18)(C) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395u(b)(18)(C)) is amended by adding
at the end the following new clause:
‘‘(ix) A genetic counselor (as defined in section 1861(nnn)(2)).’’.
(c) PAYMENT.—Section 1833(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)) is
amended—
(1) by striking ‘‘and (HH)’’ and inserting
‘‘(HH)’’; and
(2) by inserting before the semicolon at the
end the following: ‘‘, and (II) with respect to
covered genetic counseling services (as defined in section 1861(nnn)(1)), the amount
paid shall be equal to 80 percent of the lesser
of (i) the actual charge for the services or (ii)
85 percent of the fee schedule amount provided under section 1848 that would have applied had the genetic counseling services
been furnished by a physician’’.
AMENDMENT.—Section
(d)
CONFORMING
1862(a)(14) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395(y)(a)(14)) is amended by inserting
‘‘covered genetic counseling services,’’ after
‘‘qualified psychologist services,’’.
(e) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—The amendments made by this section shall not be construed as preventing physicians and health
care providers other than genetic counselors
from billing for genetic counseling services
under the Medicare program which are otherwise covered under such program.
(f) IMPLEMENTATION.—Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, the Secretary of
Health and Human Services may implement
the amendments made by this section by interim final rule with comment period.

By Mr. PADILLA (for himself and
Mr. SHEEHY):
S. 3609. A bill to establish a community protection and wildfire resilience
grant program, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
Mr. PADILLA. Mr. President, I rise
today to introduce the bipartisan Community Protection and Wildfire Resilience Act. This crucial piece of legislation would help local communities defend themselves from the growing and
pressing danger of wildfires.
This bill would empower communities to implement science-based
methods for mitigating wildfire damage and provide funding to design and
implement new Community Protection
and Wildfire Resilience Plans with
community members, first responders,
and relevant State agencies.
Today, is the 1-year anniversary of
the devastating Eaton and Palisades
fires in Los Angeles that taught us all
that not all wildfires are forest fires
and as such Federal preparedness ef-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S117

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

forts need to be improved and streamlined to ensure that we better prepared
when the next natural disaster strikes.
We increasingly see wildfires in the
wildland urban interface, and we must
do more to prepare and harden our
communities. As the countless fires in
my State and across the West have
shown us, we need to increase Federal
support for communities to mitigate
the risk of catastrophic wildfires.
The Community Protection and Wildfire Resilience Act would work towards
this goal by establishing guidelines for
communities to conceptualize new
Community Protection and Wildfire
Resilience Plans, CPWRP, that are developed in coordination with community members, first responders, and relevant State agencies.
This bill will achieve this through
improving early detection technology,
public outreach and education, alerts
and warnings, evacuation planning,
evacuation execution, and access for
first responders; addressing vulnerable
populations, including the elderly and
those with disabilities; hardening critical infrastructure and homes; applying
community-scale
defensible
space
across contiguous areas; building local
capacity to implement and oversee the
plan; deploying distributed energy resources; implementing strategic land
use planning; educating community
members; and coordinating with existing wildfire plans like a Community
Wildfire Protection Plan. Aside from
this, the bill will provide grants for atrisk communities, complete a report
on existing programs to protect communities from wildfires, and it will
allow for structure hardening that will
help build more fire resilient communities.
I would like to thank my colleague
Senator SHEEHY for being a great partner here in the Senate to advance and
put forth commonsense wildfire legislation that will help Western States
and
the
country
become
better
equipped to respond to increasing
wildfires. I also want to express my appreciation to Representatives HUFFMAN
and OBERNOLTE for leading this effort
on the House side.
I look forward to working with my
colleagues to advance this bill this
Congress to ensure that communities
are better equipped to meet the growing threat of fires.
f

SUBMITTED RESOLUTIONS
SENATE
RESOLUTION
576—COMMENDING THE UNITED STATES
MILITARY
ACTION
IN
VENEZUELA
Mr. SCOTT of Florida (for himself,
Mr.
COTTON,
Mr.
BUDD,
Mr.
TUBERVILLE, Mr. CURTIS, Mr. SCHMITT,
Mrs. BRITT, Mr. ROUNDS, Ms. LUMMIS,
Mr. CRAMER, Mrs. BLACKBURN, Mr.
MULLIN, and Mr. CRUZ) submitted the
following resolution; which was referred to the Committee on Foreign
Relations:

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

S. RES. 576
Whereas, on January 3, 2026, the United
States military executed a flawless, largescale operation across Caracas, Venezuela,
resulting in the successful capture of narcoterrorist Nicolás Maduro and his wife, Cilia
Flores;
Whereas that operation, codenamed Operation Absolute Resolve, was the culmination
of months of planning, intelligence gathering, and joint military cooperation, demonstrating exceptional strategic execution
and timing;
Whereas the raid effectively removed indicted cartel leader Nicolás Maduro from
power without prolonged occupation, allowing United States forces to withdraw after
achieving the objective with no American
lives lost;
Whereas Maduro and Flores were transported to the United States to face longstanding Federal charges, including narcoterrorism conspiracy, cocaine importation
conspiracy, and possession of machine guns
and destructive devices;
Whereas the people of Venezuela, because
of the bold and strong action of the United
States administration, now have a path to
liberty and prosperity first laid out by the
brave Venezuelan opposition led by Edmundo
Gonzalez, the duly elected President of Venezuela, and Marı́a Corina Machado; and
Whereas President Trump, his administration, and the United States military are to
be commended for their bold leadership,
strategic vision, and unwavering commitment to justice and protecting the American
people by executing the operation: Now,
therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) commends Operation Absolute Resolve
for its precision, efficiency, and role in addressing longstanding regional instability in
Latin America; and
(2) emphasizes that this bold action will
pave the way for democratic transitions in
Venezuela and promote regional stability in
the Western Hemisphere.
f

SENATE RESOLUTION 577—OBSERVING THE 1-YEAR ANNIVERSARY
OF THE 2025 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA WILDFIRES
Mr. SCHIFF (for himself and Mr.
PADILLA) submitted the following resolution; which was considered and
agreed to:
S. RES. 577
Whereas a series of wildfires, exacerbated
by extreme Santa Ana winds and dry conditions, broke out in Los Angeles County and
its adjacent counties on January 7, 2025;
Whereas the wildfires burned nearly 60,000
acres across the region, killed 31 people, destroyed over 16,000 structures, and displaced
over 200,000 Southern Californians;
Whereas the 2 largest fires, the Palisades
Fire in the Pacific Palisades and the Eaton
Fire in Altadena, burned a combined 37,000
acres and destroyed over 16,000 structures;
Whereas the wildfires devastated homes,
schools, businesses, places of worship, and
entire neighborhoods;
Whereas the wildfires caused losses that
make it one of the costliest natural disasters
in the history of the United States;
Whereas more than 7,500 firefighting emergency personnel were deployed to fight the
unprecedented fires;
Whereas firefighters and first responders
from across California, from the United
States Navy and the United States Forest
Service, from departments in Oregon, Washington, Utah, New Mexico, Arizona, Montana, Texas, Canada, Mexico, and from 12

E:\CR\FM\A08JA6.017

S08JAPT1

S118

Tribal nations mobilized to respond to the
fires;
Whereas the firefighters and first responders risked life and limb to preserve and protect lives and property;
Whereas hundreds of volunteers worked
tirelessly to tend to those who had lost their
homes or loved ones;
Whereas individuals across the United
States and around the world expressed their
support and sorrow for those affected by the
fires;
Whereas, 1 year later, the rebuilding process in the Pacific Palisades, Altadena, and
other communities across Southern California continues; and
Whereas continued coordination between
Federal, State, and local authorities is required to ensure that those affected by the
fires obtain the relief and support they need:
Now, therefore be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) honors and remembers those who lost
their lives in the wildfires;
(2) recognizes and commends the bravery
and selflessness of the first responders who
risked their lives to respond and extinguish
the wildfires; and
(3) affirms its commitment to helping
Southern California communities continue
to rebuild.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SENATE
RESOLUTION
578—CONGRATULATING THE UNIVERSITY
OF WASHINGTON MEN’S SOCCER
TEAM ON WINNING THE 2025 NATIONAL COLLEGIATE ATHLETIC
ASSOCIATION DIVISION 1 MEN’S
SOCCER NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP
Ms. CANTWELL (for herself and Mrs.
MURRAY) submitted the following resolution; which was considered and
agreed to:
S. RES. 578
Whereas, on December 15, 2025, the University of Washington Huskies men’s soccer
team (the ‘‘Washington Huskies’’) secured a
3–2 overtime win against No. 15 seed North
Carolina State to win the national championship before an estimated 10,000 fans;
Whereas this win marks the first national
title in program history;
Whereas, during the 2025 playoffs, the
Washington Huskies defeated the Oregon
State Beavers, the Southern Methodist University Mustangs, the Stanford Cardinal, the
Maryland Terrapins, and the Furman
Paladins, before defeating the North Carolina State Wolfpack in the championship
game to win the College Cup;
Whereas Zach Ramsey and Joe Dale scored
the 2 goals during regulation time and Harrison ‘‘Harry’’ Bertos scored the winning
goal for the Washington Huskies during
overtime in the championship game;
Whereas every member of the Washington
Huskies men’s soccer team contributed to
the successful 2025 National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I National
Championship season and the championship
match;
Whereas the coaches and staff of the Washington Huskies men’s soccer team played a
vital role in the success of the Washington
Huskies during the 2025 season;
Whereas the Washington Huskies overcame
a 3-game losing streak at the end of the regular season to win all 6 of their NCAA tournament games away from home, becoming
the first team to win 6 road matches in the
tournament; and
Whereas the Washington Huskies showed
immense strength, resilience, and teamwork

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

to win the national championship: Now,
therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) congratulates the University of Washington men’s soccer team for an incredible
season and for winning the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division 1 Men’s
Soccer National Championship;
(2) recognizes the achievements of all players, coaches, and staff who contributed to
the team’s success; and
(3) respectfully requests that the Secretary
of the Senate transmit an enrolled copy of
this resolution to—
(A) Jamie Clark, head coach;
(B) Patrick Chun, athletic director; and
(C) Dr. Robert J. Jones, president of the
University of Washington.
f

SENATE RESOLUTION 579—AFFIRMING THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM TO
THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED
STATES AND EXPRESSING THE
SENSE OF THE SENATE THAT
SOCIAL SECURITY MUST BE PRESERVED,
PROTECTED,
AND
STRENGTHENED FOR CURRENT
AND FUTURE GENERATIONS
Mr. CASSIDY (for himself, Mr.
KAINE, Mr. KING, Mr. CURTIS, Mr.
GRASSLEY, and Mr. DURBIN) submitted
the following resolution; which was
considered and agreed to:
S. RES. 579
Whereas, on August 14, 1935, President
Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) into law, establishing a foundational commitment by
the United States to provide economic security for its senior citizens;
Whereas the Social Security program has
served as the cornerstone of retirement security for generations of individuals in the
United States, providing vital retirement,
disability, and survivor benefits to millions;
Whereas the Social Security program has
successfully paid scheduled benefits throughout its 90-year history, delivering on the
promise earned by workers in the United
States and their families through a lifetime
of contributions;
Whereas the Social Security program remains the primary source of income for millions of seniors, individuals with disabilities,
and surviving family members, and its continued strength is vital to the economic
well-being of the United States;
Whereas the Social Security program faces
significant long-term financial challenges
that require thoughtful and responsible action to ensure its continued stability and effectiveness;
Whereas preserving and strengthening the
Social Security program is a bipartisan responsibility that requires cooperation and
leadership from policymakers; and
Whereas increased public awareness, education, and dialogue are essential to ensure
that the Social Security program remains
strong and solvent for current and future
generations: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) reaffirms its bipartisan commitment to
preserving and protecting the Social Security program for current and future generations;
(2) affirms that an automatic, across-theboard cut in benefits would disrupt the retirement security of tens of millions of people in the United States and must be avoided; and
(3) calls upon Members of Congress to work
in a bipartisan manner to develop and enact

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

legislation that ensures the long-term solvency of the Social Security program and
protects seniors, individuals with disabilities, and families in the United States for
generations to come.
f

SENATE RESOLUTION 580—DIRECTING THE ARCHITECT OF THE
CAPITOL TO PROMINENTLY DISPLAY, IN A PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE LOCATION IN THE SENATE
WING OF THE UNITED STATES
CAPITOL, A PLAQUE HONORING
THE MEMBERS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT
RESPONDING
ON
JANUARY 6, 2021, UNTIL THE
PLAQUE CAN BE PLACED IN ITS
PERMANENT LOCATION
Mr. MERKLEY (for himself and Mr.
TILLIS) submitted the following resolution; which was considered and agreed
to:
S. RES. 580
Whereas the United States owes its deepest
gratitude to those officers of the United
States Capitol Police and the Metropolitan
Police Department of the District of Columbia, as well as officers from other Federal,
State, and local law enforcement agencies
and protective entities, who valiantly protected the United States Capitol, Members of
Congress, and staff on January 6, 2021;
Whereas section 214 of division I of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2022 (2
U.S.C. 2131 note prec.; 136 Stat. 527) directed
that a plaque be placed on the western front
of the United States Capitol to honor the extraordinary individuals who bravely protected and defended this symbol of democracy on January 6, 2021; and
Whereas their heroism should never be forgotten: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Architect of the Capitol
shall prominently display the plaque produced pursuant to section 214 of division I of
the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2022 (2
U.S.C. 2131 note prec.; 136 Stat. 527) in a publicly accessible location in the Senate wing
of the United States Capitol until such time
as the plaque can be placed at a permanent
location on the western front of the United
States Capitol.
f

SENATE
CONCURRENT
RESOLUTION 25—RECOGNIZING THE 15TH
ANNIVERSARY OF THE JANUARY
8,
2011,
TUCSON,
ARIZONA,
SHOOTING AND HONORING THE
SURVIVORS AND VICTIMS, INCLUDING
FORMER
CONGRESSWOMAN GABBY GIFFORDS, A
GUN VIOLENCE SURVIVOR AND
ONE OF THE MOST INFLUENTIAL
VOICES OF COURAGE IN THE
UNITED STATES IN THE FIGHT
TO END GUN VIOLENCE
Mrs. GILLIBRAND (for herself, Ms.
ALSOBROOKS, Mr. KELLY, Mr. MURPHY,
Ms. HIRONO, Mr. BLUMENTHAL, Mr.
SCHUMER, Mr. VAN HOLLEN, Mr.
GALLEGO,
Mrs.
SHAHEEN,
Ms.
DUCKWORTH, Mr. KIM, Mr. WHITEHOUSE,
Mr. KAINE, Mr. REED, Mr. LUJÁN, Ms.
SLOTKIN, Mr. PETERS, Mr. COONS, Mr.
FETTERMAN,
Mrs.
MURRAY,
Mr.
MERKLEY, Ms. ROSEN, Mr. HEINRICH,
Mr. WYDEN, Mr. BENNET, Mr. BOOKER,
Ms. CANTWELL, Ms. KLOBUCHAR, Ms.
HASSAN, Mr. SCHATZ, Ms. CORTEZ

E:\CR\FM\A08JA6.021

S08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

MASTO, Mr. WELCH, Mr. SCHIFF, Mr.
SANDERS, Mr. WARNER, and Mr. MARKEY) submitted the following concurrent resolution; which was referred to
the Committee on the Judiciary:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S. CON. RES. 25
Whereas, on January 8, 2011, a tragic act of
gun violence occurred in Tucson, Arizona,
during a ‘‘Congress on Your Corner’’ event
hosted by Congresswoman Gabby Giffords,
resulting in the deaths of 6 individuals and
the injury of 13 others, including Congresswoman Giffords;
Whereas among those killed were Chief
Judge for the U.S. District Court for the District of Arizona John Roll, Gabriel ‘‘Gabe’’
Zimmerman (a congressional staff member
to Congresswoman Gabby Giffords and the
first known congressional staffer killed
while serving), Dorothy ‘‘Dot’’ Morris, Phyllis Schneck, Dorwan Stoddard, and 9-yearold Christina-Taylor Green;
Whereas Ron Barber, who was serving as
District Director to Congresswoman Gabby
Giffords at the time of the attack and later
became a Member of the House of Representatives, was critically injured while performing his public duties, and has since demonstrated extraordinary resilience and continued commitment to public service;
Whereas Pamela Simon, a congressional
staff member dedicated to supporting the
work of Congresswoman Gabby Giffords and
the constituents of the 8th district of Arizona, was also injured in the attack and continues to exemplify perseverance as a survivor and advocate;
Whereas the attack shocked the United
States, underscoring the dangers of political
violence and the importance of civility, empathy, and respect in American democracy;
Whereas the people of Tucson and the
State of Arizona came together with resilience, compassion, and unity after the attack, inspiring the nation with their
strength in the face of tragedy;
Whereas former Congresswoman Gabby
Giffords has, in the years since the attack,
become a champion of courage and perseverance, dedicating her recovery and her voice
to preventing gun violence and promoting civility in public life; and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:06 Jan 09, 2026

S119

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Whereas countless people of the United
States, community organizations, law enforcement officers, and first responders have
worked in the years since the attack to
honor the victims through acts of service,
advocacy, and civic engagement: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved by the Senate (the House of Representatives concurring), That Congress—
(1) honors the memory of the 6 individuals
whose lives were lost on January 8, 2011, and
expresses continued support for all survivors
and families affected by the tragedy;
(2) recognizes the courage and leadership of
former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords and
her ongoing work to promote civility, bipartisanship, and solutions to prevent gun violence;
(3) commends the people of Tucson and
first responders for their strength, compassion, and heroism in responding to the attack; and
(4) reaffirms its dedication to promoting a
respectful dialogue, condemning political violence and hate, and maintaining the core
principles of peaceful self-governance.
f

PRIVILEGES OF THE FLOOR
Mr. MARKEY. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous
consent
that
Daniel
Ohlstein, a fellow in my office, be
granted floor privileges for the rest of
this month.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

RESOLUTIONS SUBMITTED TODAY
Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the Senate now proceed to the en bloc consideration of the following resolutions,
which are at the desk: S. Res. 577, S.
Res. 578, and S. Res. 579.
There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the resolutions
en bloc.
Ms. MURKOWSKI. I ask unanimous
consent that the resolutions be agreed
to; the preambles be agreed to; and

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

that the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid upon the table,
all en bloc.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The resolutions (S. Res. 577, S. Res.
578, and S. Res. 579) were agreed to.
The preambles were agreed to.
(The resolutions, with their preambles, are printed in today’s RECORD
under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
f

MEASURE READ THE FIRST
TIME—H.R. 6938
Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, I
understand that there is a bill at the
desk, and I ask for its first reading.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will read the bill by title for the
first time.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
A bill (H.R. 6938) making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.

Ms. MURKOWSKI. I now ask for a
second reading, and in order to place
the bill on the calendar under the provisions of rule XIV, I object to my own
request.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Objection is heard.
The bill will be read for the second
time on the next legislative day.
f

MOTION TO ADJOURN
Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, I
move to adjourn until 4:27 p.m. today.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
question is on agreeing to the motion.
The motion was agreed to.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 4:26 p.m.,
adjourned until Thursday, January 8,
2026, at 4:27 p.m.

E:\CR\FM\A08JA6.024

S08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

E13

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS
RECOGNIZING COLORADO STATE
REPRESENTATIVE SHANNON BIRD

HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN
OF COLORADO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize Colorado State Representative
Shannon Bird for her public service.
Throughout her time in the legislature, Representative Bird has worked tirelessly to fight
for all individuals. She served on the Joint
Budget Committee for 6 years, serving as vice
chair and later chairwoman, ensuring that corporate loopholes were closed while still protecting small businesses. Representative Bird
has been a champion for affordable housing,
passing legislation to lower the cost of housing
and offer more Coloradans the ability to own
a home.
Though Representative Bird and I held different positions during my time in the State
Legislature, we collaborated to cut through the
red tape surrounding professional licensing
and keep Colorado one of the best places to
work. She is my colleague, my friend, a mother, and a steadfast advocate for her community.
Representative Bird has been serving the
Westminster community for decades, starting
as a city council member, serving as board
chair of the Five Star Education Foundation,
and as citizen chair for a school district’s bond
campaign. Representative Bird spent countless hours volunteering in students’ classrooms, which led to her co-founding the
Adams 12 Community Action Network, dedicated to empowering students by providing
equal learning opportunities at local schools.
On behalf of the people of Colorado’s 7th
Congressional District, it is my honor to thank
Representative Bird for her dedication to serving her community. I wish Shannon and her
family all the best on their next endeavor.
f

RECOGNIZING
SOLANCO
HIGH
SCHOOL STUDENTS FOR THEIR
PERFORMANCE AT THE 2025 STUDENT DRONE CHALLENGE

HON. LLOYD SMUCKER
OF PENNSYLVANIA

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. SMUCKER. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased
to recognize and congratulate Solanco High
School students Robert Baxter, Lucas Vilk,
and Caleb Reed on their success in the 2025
Student Drone Challenge.
The Student Drone Challenge is hosted by
the Interaction of Ionizing Radiation with Matter University Research Alliance (IIRM–URA),
which is a collaborative partnership between
universities, laboratories, and industrial companies. Funded by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency, the IIRM–URA’s primary concern

is to mitigate threats against weapons of mass
destruction. The competition is an opportunity
for students to learn and engage in the fields
that IIRM–URA supports.
The 2025 challenge involved a virtual drone
simulation where students conducted reconnaissance to identify radiological threats in a
building captured by friendly forces. Pitting
over 800 competitors including those from university, high school, and middle school—the
Solanco High School students took the top
spots on the podium. Robert Baxter placed 1st
overall, Lucas Vilk placed 2nd for high school
students, and Caleb Reed placed 3rd for high
school students.
I am grateful for educational programs that
broaden our students’ horizons. I congratulate
the winning students, and I look forward to
what their bright futures hold.
f

TRIBUTE TO REVEREND WILLIAM
JAMES ‘‘W.J.’’ FRIERSON, SR.

HON. JAMES E. CLYBURN
OF SOUTH CAROLINA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor the life and legacy of a devoted public
servant, respected minister, and trusted community leader whose faithful service to
Clarendon County and the people of South
Carolina spanned more than three decades.
Reverend William James ‘‘W.J.’’ Frierson, Sr.
transitioned on December 26, 2025, leaving
behind a legacy defined by faith, integrity, and
an unwavering commitment to service.
Born on July 8, 1953, in Manning, South
Carolina, W.J. Frierson was raised in a family
grounded in faith, hard work, and community
responsibility. As a young man, he accepted
Christ and became an active member of
Green Hill Missionary Baptist Church, where
he answered his call to the ministry and began
a long journey of service within the church and
beyond.
Over the years, he faithfully served in numerous roles, including choir member, sexton,
trustee, ordained deacon, and ordained associate minister, building a foundation of spiritual
leadership that would guide every aspect of
his life. Most recently, W.J. Frierson pastored
Lovely Hill Baptist Church in Holly Hill for 18
years, shepherding his congregation with compassion and wisdom.
Reverend Frierson was equally committed
to education and self-improvement. A 1971
graduate of Manning High School, he pursued
higher education at Texas College, earning a
Bachelor of Science degree in Physical Education and Biology. He continued his Christian
education through the Sumter Baptist M&E
Association and Morris College, preparing
himself to serve not only as a pastor, but as
a thoughtful and compassionate leader
equipped to guide others.
In 1995, W.J. Frierson began what would
become a historic tenure on Clarendon County

Council and represented Council District Two
for thirty years. During his service, he was
known for his steady leadership, thoughtful deliberation, and deep concern for the well-being
of all residents. He approached public office
not as a position of power, but as an extension of his ministry—listening carefully, advocating tirelessly, and always seeking to do
what was right rather than what was easy. His
colleagues and constituents respected him for
his integrity, humility, and willingness to work
through differences for the good of the county.
Beyond elected office, Reverend Frierson
was deeply engaged in civic and community
organizations. He was affiliated with Prince
Hall Masons as a member of Red Hill Lodge
No. 144, the Manning Branch of the NAACP,
Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc., and numerous educational and faith-based boards and
councils. Professionally, he dedicated more
than three decades as Human Resources
Manager at Century Aluminum, retiring in
2013.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in honoring the memory of
Reverend William James ‘‘W.J.’’ Frierson,
Sr.—a servant of God, a servant of the people, and a pillar of his community. He was a
devoted husband, father, grandfather, and
great-grandfather, and a mentor to countless
individuals who will carry his lessons forward.
‘‘W.J.’’ was a man whose life reflected his
faith, whose leadership strengthened his community, and whose legacy will endure.
f

RECOGNIZING THE ATSMA FAMILY

HON. DAVID G. VALADAO
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. VALADAO. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor the Atsma Family, who have been
named the 2025 Dairy Family of the Year by
the Tulare Chamber of Commerce.
The Atsma family’s story is a remarkable
example of hard work, perseverance, and
dedication to agriculture. George Atsma’s father initially immigrated from the Netherlands
to Canada in 1953 at just 20 years old. After
meeting his wife and welcoming their first
child, they moved his young family to Southern California. There, he worked for local
dairymen and eventually entered the dairy
business himself—continuing the family tradition dating back to the 1600s.
In 1994, George Atsma began his own dairy
legacy when he started building his own herd
in Tipton, California. A few years later, he purchased property just east of Tulare, and by
2007 had completed renovations and moved
his herd to the new site. Today, he operates
both a successful dairy and a calf ranch with
his wife, Tina, and their six children: Joshua,
Danielle, Tavis, Annika, Georgiana, and
Roman.
In 2005, Mr. Atsma launched a custom calf
raising business—another example of the family’s commitment to innovation in dairy production. What began with 450 milking cows has

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:01 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

E:\CR\FM\A08JA8.001

E08JAPT1

E14

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

grown to a herd of 1,550, including 1,400 milking cows. That kind of growth doesn’t happen
without a deep respect and knowledge of the
land and livestock.
This June, during the Annual Salute to Dairy
and Dairy Princess Coronation hosted by the
Tulare Chamber of Commerce, the Atsma
Family was recognized for their leadership,
stewardship, and contributions to both the
dairy industry and our local community.
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me
in congratulating the Atsma Family on this
well-deserved honor. Their work represents
the very best of the Central Valley’s agricultural heritage, and their impact will be felt for
generations to come.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF RALPH L.
WADSWORTH

HON. BLAKE D. MOORE
OF UTAH

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
recognize Ralph Wadsworth, who passed
away on December 25, 2025.
In many ways, Ralph is a prime example of
the American dream. Having grown up in
Idaho, he became the first of his family to attend college. At the time, he lived in an abandoned Army barracks and took odd jobs to
pay for lodging and food. When he married his
high-school sweetheart, Peggy, they had just
fifty dollars to their name.
Their poverty did not restrict Ralph’s ambition and drive. After graduating from college
and working for several engineering firms, he
ventured out on his own and founded the
Ralph L. Wadsworth Structural Engineering
company in 1962. This company grew to be
successful throughout the country. They engineered and built many high-rise office buildings in Salt Lake City, Utah, as well as many
temples for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, including most notably the temple here in Washington, D.C.
Ralph prioritized his family, his faith, and his
country. He held a deep love for the United
States of America and raised his children to
recognize the great blessing it is to live in this
country. He always recognized the role that
his faith and belief in God had in his personal
and professional success. Perhaps most importantly, he, along with his wife Peggy, raised
seven sons who continue his legacy of success and hard work.
Ralph is survived by his 7 sons, 21 grandchildren, and 27 great-grandchildren. I extend
my deepest condolences to his family and express my gratitude for the important contributions that Ralph offered to our state and our
Nation.
f

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF WILLIAM WOLPERT HARRIS

HON. ROSA L. DeLAURO
OF CONNECTICUT

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, it is with the
heaviest but most grateful of hearts that I rise

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:01 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

today to pay tribute to the life and legacy of
my dear friend, William Wolpert Harris. Bill
was an extraordinary person who dedicated a
lifetime to improving the quality of life of every
child in every community. Today family,
friends, and colleagues will gather to share
stories and their memories of Bill, highlighting
the incredible impact his good work had on
countless lives.
Bill graduated with a bachelor’s degree in
liberal arts from Wesleyan University in 1961
and later earned a Doctor of Philosophy from
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He
worked for several years in the private sector
and served as a visiting lecturer and adjunct
professor at several universities. However, it
was in 1981 that Bill founded what would become his lifelong passion and ultimate legacy,
KidsPac, a group that helped to focus legislators at every level of government on the importance of early childhood education. It was
through these efforts that I was introduced to
and got to know Bill. Together we worked to
shape and, eventually, enact legislation that
authorized and funded the United States Child
Traumatic Stress Initiative. This initiative has
resulted in the creation of a national network
of thirty-eight centers focusing on child traumatic stress. Bill was also one of the staunchest supporters of the effort to expand the child
tax credit. Over the years, his guidance and
advocacy ensured that this policy remained at
the forefront of discussion and debate. We
were indeed kindred spirits and for more than
two decades, under Bill’s outstanding direction, KidsPac was a leader and respected
voice in the advocacy for policies concerning
childcare, prenatal health, and early education.
For Bill, supporting children and enriching
their early life experiences was not just a passion but a family occupation. Bill’s father, Irving, founded the Erickson Institute as well as
the Ounce of Prevention Fund, and was instrumental in the development of the Yale
Child Study Center and Zero to Three. Bill’s
late wife, Robie, was a celebrated children’s
author, unapologetic defender of free speech,
and remarkable advocate for children. Bill and
Robie’s activism was integrated into every
facet of their lives so it is no surprise that both
of their sons, David and Ben, both followed in
their footsteps. David, taking a page from his
Bill’s work, has focused his professional life on
research and advocacy for policies that address child poverty. Ben, whose interests
more mirrored his mother’s, is now Clinical
Professor at the Psychological Center at The
City College of New York (CCNY), which provides low-to-moderate-cost services to the
CCNY and West Harlem communities. In this
role, and throughout his career, he has
worked with a socioeconomically and culturally
diverse range of children and adolescents as
well as adults.
Bill’s dedication to issues concerning children and their health and well-being extended
far beyond KidsPac. In 1984 Bill founded the
Children’s Research and Education Institute
and he served on the advisory board of the
Child Development Community Policing Program in conjunction with the Yale Child Study
Center. He also served on numerous not-forprofit boards and advisory committees, including the Urban League, Wesleyan University,
the State Legislative Leaders Foundation’s
Children’s Program Steering Committee and

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

January 8, 2026

the National Science Foundation’s Review
Panel of the Public Understanding of Science
Program. Over his lifetime he received a myriad of awards for his work on behalf of children, including the Advocacy Award, Division
of Child, Youth and Family Services, from the
American Psychological Association; the Dale
Richmond Award from the American Academy
of Pediatrics; the Leadership Award for Public
Service from Zero to Three; and the Distinguished Alumnus Award from Wesleyan University. And just a few short years ago, Bill
was honored alongside his son, David, by the
International Society for Traumatic Stress
Studies with its inaugural Public Advocacy
Award for outstanding and fundamental contributions to advancing social understanding of
trauma.
On a personal note, it has been an enormous privilege to work with three generations
of the Harris family—first Irving, then Bill, and
now David—to develop and advocate for policies and programs that give children and their
families the foundational security they need to
learn and thrive. Through their unique understanding that our young people represent the
future and that we as a community and a Nation must give them the tools that they need
in order to succeed.
Bill Harris was a remarkable man who dedicated a lifetime to improving the lives of children. I am honored to rise and pay tribute to
the indelible mark he has left. Today, I thank
my dear friend, Bill, for the difference that he
has made in this country, and the millions of
lives that have been made better through his
vision, his passion, and his kindhearted spirit.
He has been an inspiration to all of us. I will
forever be grateful for the friendship, humor,
and generosity he bestowed upon me over the
years. I extend my heartfelt condolences to his
sons, David and Ben. The world is just a bit
dimmer without his presence, and he will be
deeply missed by all those who knew him.
f

RECOGNIZING AMY ZHANG

HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN
OF COLORADO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize and applaud Amy Zhang of Morrison, Colorado, for winning Best in Show in the
2025 Congressional App Challenge.
Amy built EnAct: AI Guides, Vision-Impaired
Act, an assistive technology app for seeing impaired individuals that describes the user’s environment, helping them avoid pathway collisions. Her application uses multiple AI platforms, and was inspired in part by Amy’s experience with a friend who is seeing impaired.
This accomplishment is an impressive example of Amy’s determination, hard work, and
advanced STEM knowledge base.
I congratulate Amy Zhang for her success in
the Congressional App Challenge. I am certain
she will continue to show the same dedication
and strength of character in all her future endeavors. I am excited to see all she will accomplish.

E:\CR\FM\A08JA8.004

E08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

RECOGNIZING THE LIFE AND
MEMORY OF ALICE KITCHEN

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. JAMES R. BAIRD

HON. EMANUEL CLEAVER

OF INDIANA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF MISSOURI

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. BAIRD. Mr. Speaker, I was indisposed
during this vote due to a vehicle accident. Had
I been present, I would have voted YEA on
Roll Call No. 2; YEA on Roll Call No. 3; and
NAY on Roll Call No. 4.

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

f

HONORING THE LIFE AND SERVICE
OF JAMES KUNKLE

HON. SALUD O. CARBAJAL
OF CALIFORNIA

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. CARBAJAL. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor the remarkable life and legacy of James
Kunkle, a decorated World War II fighter pilot,
aviation leader, and American hero whose
service and courage spanned more than a
century.
James Kunkle was born in October 1922 in
New Kensington, Pennsylvania, and later
moved to California, where he graduated from
Beverly Hills High School in 1940. His commitment to service began early, joining the California Air National Guard as a teenager. During World War II, he earned his pilot’s wings
in 1942 and served as a fighter pilot with the
401st Fighter Squadron of the 370th Fighter
Group under the United States Army Air
Forces, flying the iconic P–38 Lightning in
combat missions over Europe.
On September 16, 1944, during a mission
over Aachen, Germany, Mr. Kunkle displayed
extraordinary heroism in aerial combat. Despite being wounded, sustaining severe aircraft damage, and enduring an onboard fire,
he shot down two enemy aircraft. He successfully bailed out over what he believed to be
enemy-held territory, evaded capture, returned
to Allied lines, rejoined his squadron, and continued flying missions beyond his required
tour. For his valor that day, he was awarded
the Distinguished Service Cross, the Army’s
second-highest award for heroism in combat.
Following his military service, Mr. Kunkle
devoted his life to aviation. He operated aviation businesses, developed airports and airport
facilities across California, throughout the
United States, and in Guam, and remained an
active pilot for decades. He made his longtime
home in the Santa Ynez Valley, where his
contributions left a lasting mark on the Central
Coast aviation community.
In his later years, Mr. Kunkle was honored
repeatedly for his service, including recognition at the 75th anniversary of the D-Day invasion in Normandy, designation as an honorary
member of the United States Space Force,
and the naming of Santa Ynez Airport as
Kunkle Field, honoring three generations of
aviators in his family. Even after turning 100,
he continued to inspire, receiving honors from
the Nebraska Air National Guard and being
recognized as one of the last surviving pilots
of the 401st Fighter Squadron.
James Kunkle passed away peacefully at
home on November 29, 2025, at the age of
103. His life stands as a powerful testament to
courage, perseverance, and lifelong service to
our Nation.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:01 Jan 09, 2026

E15

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. CLEAVER. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
with immense sorrow along with Missouri’s 5th
Congressional District, to commemorate the
life and legacy of a great Kansas Citian, Ms.
Alice Kitchen. The fruits of Alice’s advocacy
for women, children, and marginalized communities will live on for generations to come.
Alice was a force to be reckoned with, stopping at nothing to ensure that others could live
free of abuse, injustice, and discrimination.
Her undeniable impact will continue to grace
Kansas City with inspiration.
Alice’s long history of advocacy began when
as a high school student, she became involved with Guadalupe Center as a volunteer
in the 1950s. As she saw the many families in
predominately Hispanic neighborhoods in Kansas City who lacked access to food, running
water, and electricity disturbed her, she questioned the morality behind sitting by when others lived that way. After graduating from her
Catholic high school, she moved to Encino,
California, where she joined the Sisters of Social Service convent where she ministered to
domestic workers in Beverly Hills, most of
whom were Mexican immigrants. These individuals, she described, were lonely, poorly
paid, and isolated. She took those experiences and paved a life of activism. After graduating with her master’s degree in social work
at the University of California—Los Angeles
(UCLA), Alice returned to Kansas City to work
in a legal aid office where she helped young,
first-time offenders avoid longer criminal
records. With a love for social services, she
continued her career at Children Mercy’s
where she served as the director of social
services for two decades. Under her leadership, she sought funding for specialized treatments needed by children with medical issues
and initiated programs to assist young mothers fight their battles with addiction.
Alice was devoted to bringing light to issues
she believed in, and a full-time job was not
going to hold her back. During Alice’s voluntary night shifts, she established Amethyst
Place, a supportive housing program that
served mothers and children recovering from
abuse, organized neighborhood cleanups as a
board member of the Kansas City Housing
Authority and assisted young mothers in obtaining health insurance. As a volunteer cochair of the Affordable Care Public Education
Committee in the Kansas City Metropolitan
area, she advocated for the expansion of
Medicaid and accessible healthcare. In March
of 2012, her efforts were recognized, and
Alice received the Champion of Change award
from President Barack Obama at the White
House. Gender equity and advocating for policies that support women was another mission
that peaked Alice’s interest. During her time
with the League of Women Voters and Women’s Equality, she was able to educate women
voters and bring light to the disparities women
were facing within workplaces. Her fearlessness led Jane McQueeney, a friend of Kitchen, to give testimony to the City Council in
Kansas City when McQueeney was receiving
less pay when working for the federal govern-

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

ment. Kitchen worked with Kansas City to
adopt an ordinance to prohibit discrimination
against women and to stop employers from
penalizing women with less experience.
When it was time for retirement, Alice saw
it as an opportunity to do her evening tasks
full-time. At age 69, she traveled to the Mosquito Coast of Honduras on a human rights
observation mission. She took her mission on
headfirst and investigated bullet holes in
boats, houses that had burned down, and
wounded villagers with her international activist group, the Cross Border Network. Alice
never stopped looking for a way to improve
the lives of others or to push anyone to their
fullest potential. She lived her life to her fullest
potential, and she continues to inspire others
to do the same. In fact, she had a knack for
finding strengths in people before they did
themselves and pushed them to foster their
strengths. As a woman who was one in a million, she continued to prove to the people who
surrounded her, that they were also just as
special.
Mr. Speaker, please join me in honoring the
life of Alice Kitchen. Her passing is devastating, but the legacy she leaves behind reminds us that no matter how short life tends
to be, we can still make a world of difference.
While she is not here to grace the community
in Kansas City with her valiant voice, or her
indominable spirit, her soul will live on through
the extensive and beautiful legacy that she
built. The legacy she left has lit fires under
enough people in Kansas City, so they can
forage through the noise and echo her advocacy, which will keep her spirit alive for eternity.
f

HONORING THE RETIREMENT AND
LEGACY OF MS. BRENDA SANDERS-WISE

HON. MARC A. VEASEY
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. VEASEY. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize and honor Ms. Brenda SandersWise for her extraordinary life of service, historic leadership, and enduring commitment to
preserving the cultural legacy of Tarrant County through her lasting contributions to the
Tarrant County Black Historical and Genealogy Society, and the Lenora Rolla Heritage
Center Museum.
Despite facing the harsh realities of segregation, which once prevented her from continuing her education in the very school district
she now serves, Ms. Sanders-Wise persevered. She went on to become the first
Black graduate of Haltom High School and,
years later, made history again as the first
Black school board trustee of Birdville Independent School District. Her journey stands as
a testament to resilience, courage, and faith in
the power of progress.
For more than five decades, Ms. SandersWise has been a steadfast steward of Fort
Worth’s Black history and culture. As Executive Director of the Tarrant County Black Historical and Genealogical Society, a role she
has held with distinction for 15 years, she has
preserved irreplaceable narratives, provided
educational programming and genealogy
workshops for adults and children, and championed the importance of historical truth. Her

E:\CR\FM\A08JA8.008

E08JAPT1

E16

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

leadership has also guided the development of
the Lenora Rolla Heritage Center Museum,
fulfilling a long-held vision to create a permanent home dedicated to Fort Worth’s Black
history and culture.
Ms. Sanders-Wise’s tenure has been
marked by passion, integrity, and an unwavering commitment to historical truth. Through her
guidance, the Society has remained a vital institution, strengthening community pride and
honoring the legacy of pioneers such as the
late Honorable Frank Moss, whose vision continues to inspire this important work.
As the Tarrant County Black Historical and
Genealogical Society gathers under the theme
‘‘A Legacy of Love—A Garden of Gratitude’’ to
celebrate her retirement, it is fitting that we
pause to reflect on the profound impact of Ms.
Sanders-Wise’s labor of love. Her leadership
has not only enriched our understanding of the
past but has also laid a strong foundation for
future generations to learn, grow, and lead.
Today, we commend Ms. Brenda SandersWise for her years of faithful service and extend our deepest gratitude for her enduring
contributions to history, culture, and community. We wish her a joyful and fulfilling retirement, and we celebrate a legacy that will continue to bloom for generations to come.
f

RECOGNIZING ANDREW HEINEMAN
AND
HIS
SERVICE
TO
THE
UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

HON. JERROLD NADLER
OF NEW YORK

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. NADLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize and thank Andrew Heineman for
nearly seven years of outstanding service to
the constituents of New York’s 12th Congressional District and to the United States House
of Representatives.
A native of California, Andrew attended California State University, Northridge, where he
graduated cum laude with a degree in Political
Science and International Relations. His early
political work included opposing Proposition 8
in California and later serving as an organizer
on the Obama for President campaign, where
he was known for knocking on even the most
difficult doors.
Andrew later moved to Washington, D.C.,
where he began his congressional career in
the office of Congresswoman DORIS MATSUI.
There, he worked his way from Staff Assistant
to Legislative Correspondent to Legislative Assistant.
In 2019, I was fortunate to have Andrew join
my Washington, D.C. office, working primarily
on Transportation and Infrastructure issues,
before becoming my Legislative Director in
2022. In this role, he oversaw my entire Legislative agenda, prepared bills, amendments,
and statements, and provided thousands of
vote recommendations.
As a key member of my senior staff, Andrew has been at the center of my legislative
work. He was instrumental in helping pass my
landmark legislation, the Respect for Marriage
Act, which enshrined marriage equality into
law. Andrew worked tirelessly to ensure its
passage in both the House and the Senate,
and it was a privilege to celebrate with him at
the White House for the bill’s signing into law.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:01 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

January 8, 2026

He was also central to the passage of the
Pregnant Workers Fairness Act, skillfully negotiating with stakeholders in Washington while
simultaneously participating in a meeting with
New York elected officials—demonstrating his
knowledge and strong political acumen.

HONORING THE LIFE OF FRANK O.
GEHRY

As the head of the legislative team, he has
served as a mentor for countless Legislative
Staffers.

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. LIEU. Mr. Speaker, I rise to honor the
remarkable life and legacy of the renowned architect Frank O. Gehry. He passed away on
December 5, 2025, after a brief battle with a
respiratory illness, Mr. Gehry was not only one
of the most influential architects of our time,
but also a visionary whose work reshaped
skylines and inspired generations.
Frank Owen Goldberg was born in Toronto
in 1929 and later emigrated with his family to
the United States, settling in Los Angeles,
where he was raised. Working as a delivery
driver while he studied at Los Angeles City
College. Frank was inspired by his love of museums and art to study architecture. He later
graduated from the University of Southern
California’s School of Architecture in 1954.
Around that time, fearing the negative impact
of antisemitism on his architectural career,
Frank was persuaded to change his last name
to ‘‘Gehry.’’ He moved with his family as he
began his studies at Harvard University’s
Graduate School of Design but left the program before completion and returned to Los
Angeles where his career in architecture
began.
First working for Victor Gruen, the renowned
Austrian American architect, and later the
French architect, Andre Remonde, Frank
quickly built his own unique design styles, and
he returned to California. In 1967, he founded
Frank Gehry and Associates in Los Angeles.
His earliest designs included Santa Monica
Place, the Cabrillo Marine Aquarium, the California Aerospace Museum, the California Museum of Science and Industry, and the Norton
House in Venice, California. His designs combined imagination with civic purpose, producing buildings that were as much works of
art as they were places for community life.
Mr. Gehry’s daring and modern approach
would later culminate in globally celebrated
landmarks such as the Guggenheim Museum
Bilbao and the Walt Disney Concert Hall, cementing his reputation as one of the most influential architects of the modern era. Even in
the later years of his life, he continued to devote his talents to projects in creative arts and
fashion, including stores for Louis Vuitton and
Bernard Arnault in Beverly Hills, California,
and implementing the final touches on a
1,000-seat concert hall for the Colburn School
of Music, right across the Walt Disney Concert
Hall.
Through these achievements, he inspired
residents, policymakers, and artists alike to
see architecture as a force for imagination and
renewal. His ability to blend bold vision with
functionality was extraordinary, and his legacy
will endure in the skylines and communities he
transformed. Mr. Gehry received numerous
honors, including the Pritzker Architecture
Prize (1989), the National Medal of Arts, and
the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
In addition to these iconic works, Mr. Gehry
dedicated significant time to pro bono projects
and public service. He was the founder of
Turnaround Arts: California, a nonprofit organization that expands access to the arts in
under-resourced public elementary and middle

Andrew has been a leader on transportation
issues in my office, staffing me on the Committee and advancing critical infrastructure priorities such as the Cross Harbor Rail Project
and the Gateway Tunnel, helping ensure that
New York City remains the public transit capital of the world. He led our efforts to establish
congestion pricing in Manhattan and fend off
attacks by President Trump and Secretary
Duffy.
During his tenure, Andrew held hundreds of
meetings with stakeholder groups from across
the district, serving as a trusted representative
of my office. He consistently brought deep
knowledge and a strong understanding of
complex issues to every engagement.
He also led numerous New York Delegation
letters and served as a valued resource for
staff across the House. His extensive network
of colleagues and friends on Capitol Hill is a
testament to the respect he has earned
throughout the institution.
Outside of his official duties, Andrew has remained deeply involved with the California
State University, Northridge Semester in
Washington Program, where he teaches and
mentors students pursuing careers in public
service. His commitment to these students reflects dedication to helping others.
I am glad that Andrew is remaining on the
Hill and I am sure that I will see him around
Rayburn. I look forward to seeing where his
career will take him and thank him for his excellent service.
f

RECOGNIZING AARIV ARORA

HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN
OF COLORADO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize and applaud Aariv Arora of
Broomfield, Colorado, for earning the Rookie
of the Year Award in the 2025 Congressional
App Challenge.
Aariv built an interactive app called
WayBuddy, a community safety app that allows students to report roadway hazards for
fellow pedestrians and bicyclists on a shared
map. This accomplishment is an example of
Aariv’s determination, hard work, and impressive knowledge base in the STEM field.
I congratulate Aariv Arora for his success in
the Congressional App Challenge. I am certain
he will continue to show the same dedication
and strength of character in all his future endeavors. I am excited to see all he will accomplish.

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

HON. TED LIEU
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

E:\CR\FM\A08JA8.011

E08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

schools across California. In 2014, he began
work with the LA River Revitalization Corporation to develop the Los Angeles River Master
Plan, a groundbreaking restoration of the Los
Angeles River to create green space for the
communities and wildlife that thrive along its
path.
In 2015, Frank designed the Children’s Institute in Watts, waiving his design fee to support families who had experienced violence
and poverty. He also designed the Youth Orchestra Los Angeles (YOLA) center, completed in 2021, which provides free instruments, music training, and academic support
to students from disadvantaged neighborhoods. These projects exemplify his belief that
architecture could serve not only as art, but as
a force for equity and opportunity.
In his passing, Mr. Gehry is survived by his
wife, Berta, and three children. I am thankful
for the cultural contributions he made in Los
Angeles County and his global design landscape that has centered architectural design
to serve people. May his memory be a blessing to all who knew him.
f

RECOGNIZING COLONEL DAVID
‘‘MOON’’ HALASI-KUN

HON. RICHARD E. NEAL
OF MASSACHUETTS

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the distinguished service and extraordinary career of Colonel David L. ‘‘Moon’’
Halasi-Kun, who has honorably served our
Nation for more than twenty-five years and
most recently as the Wing Commander of the
104th Fighter Wing at Barnes Air National
Guard Base in Westfield, Massachusetts.
Colonel Halasi-Kun’s career is a testament
to dedication, leadership, and excellence in
service. Commissioned from the United States
Air Force Academy in 1998, he went on to
graduate from the Euro-NATO Joint Jet Pilot
Training program in 2000. Over the course of
his career, he has accumulated more than
3,150 flight hours in the F–15 Eagle and other
aircraft, and has participated in combat and
support missions in Operations SOUTHERN
WATCH, ENDURING FREEDOM, and ATLANTIC RESOLVE.
After a decade of active duty, Colonel
Halasi-Kun joined the Massachusetts Air National Guard in 2008, where he has served
with distinction for the past fifteen years. Rising through the ranks, he has held numerous
leadership positions, including Vice Commander of the 104th Fighter Wing, before assuming command in 2022. In this role, he was
responsible for ensuring that more than 1,000
military and civilian personnel were missionready to defend our homeland and support expeditionary deployments around the globe.
Most notably, Colonel Halasi-Kun has upheld
the stellar reputation that has become associated with Barnes, positioning the base to be
selected as the preferred location to host a
new fleet of F–35A aircraft. This decision solidified Barnes’ place in the western Massachusetts community for decades to come.
Colonel Halasi-Kun’s service has been recognized with some of the military’s highest
honors, including the Legion of Merit, the Meritorious Service Medal, the Air Medal, and the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:01 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

Aerial Achievement Medal. His professional
achievements are matched by his academic
accomplishments, having earned advanced
degrees in Military Operational Art and
Science as well as National Resource Strategy.
On September 30, 2025, Colonel HalasiKun completed his final flight in the F–15C
Eagle, marking both the end of his own flying
career and the conclusion of the F–15 mission
at Barnes Air National Guard Base. In a fitting
tribute, he led a four-ship formation on a twohour mission over the Atlantic, a ‘‘Lunar
Flight’’ named in honor of his call sign,
‘‘Moon.’’ Upon his return, he was greeted by
family, friends, and fellow airmen who celebrated his remarkable career and enduring
legacy.
Mr. Speaker, Colonel Halasi-Kun embodies
the very best of our armed forces: courage,
professionalism, and an unwavering commitment to duty. His leadership has left an indelible mark on the 104th Fighter Wing, and his
service has brought great pride to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and to our Nation.
I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring
Colonel David ‘‘Moon’’ Halasi-Kun for his decades of service and sacrifice. We extend our
deepest gratitude to him, his wife Gretchen,
and his son Luke for their steadfast support
throughout his career. His legacy will continue
to inspire future generations of airmen as the
104th transitions to its next chapter with the
arrival of the F–35s.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF DEACON ANDREW WASHINGTON

HON. DANNY K. DAVIS
OF ILLINOIS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to pay tribute to my dear friend, brother
in Christ, and fellow servant of the community,
Deacon Andrew Washington, who departed
this life on November 14, 2025. Andrew was
a man whose presence, spirit, and service
touched countless individuals across Chicago’s West Side and far beyond.
Born on February 12, 1942, in Dublin, Mississippi, Andrew was raised in a family guided
by faith, wisdom, and resilience. After the untimely passing of his mother, Ruthie Lee
Washington, his father, Reverend Bernard
Washington, remarried, and through perseverance and hope the family made their way to
Chicago in 1955. That journey—rooted in survival and aspiration—shaped the character of
a man who would come to embody strength,
compassion, and unwavering commitment to
others.
In Chicago, Andrew attended Crane High
School before becoming a certified electrician
through Coyne Electrical School. A multi-talented man, he studied music, beauty, welding,
and much more, mastering skills that allowed
him to support his family, build small businesses, and establish himself as someone
who could fix, create, inspire, and lead.
Andrew accepted Christ at an early age and
served faithfully as a deacon at Ruth Memorial
M.B.C. and later at New Galilee Missionary
Baptist Church. I had the privilege of serving
alongside him, and I know firsthand that he

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

E17

took his calling seriously—offering care, counsel, and comfort to God’s people.
Mr. Speaker, Andrew Washington was
known for many things—his impeccable dress,
his sharp wit, his strong opinions, and his ability to make something out of nothing—but
what stood out above all was his deep and
unwavering commitment to helping others.
And I want to highlight two stories that reflect
the true measure of this remarkable man.
First, Andrew would not let a week pass
without calling me—not for himself, but on behalf of someone else. He would say, ‘‘Danny,
I’ve got somebody I need you to help.’’ Never
once did he call to ask for anything for himself. In all the years I knew him, he never
sought favor for his own benefit. His thoughts
were always on the needs of others—young
people, families in crisis, neighbors struggling
with illness, joblessness, or hardship. I can
personally attest that he helped hundreds of
people, and he did so with a quiet humility that
never sought recognition.
Second, I recall vividly the time of President
Barack Obama’s first inauguration. Tickets
were scarce—scarcer, I admit, than even a
Member of Congress might like. Yet Andrew—
resourceful as ever—managed to get tickets
and drove his well-known pickup truck all the
way from Chicago to Washington, D.C. At the
very last minute, he called me: ‘‘Danny, I need
a room. I’ve got my granddaughter with me—
and some family and friends. We need a place
to stay.’’
I thought it would be impossible to find accommodations so close to the inauguration
date. But somehow, through God’s grace and
a bit of determination, we found a room big
enough for them all. Andrew’s joy in that moment reflected the pride so many of us felt witnessing history. And in true Andrew fashion,
the trip wasn’t about himself—it was about
creating memories for his loved ones.
Mr. Speaker, Andrew Washington was a
man of faith, family, community, and conviction. He raised children, grandchildren, and
great-grandchildren who loved him dearly. He
worked hard his entire life, retiring from
Ryerson Steel after decades of service. He
built businesses, guided neighbors, supported
churches, and anchored his community with
generosity, wisdom, and love.
He was a storyteller, a counselor, and a living example of what it means to give more
than you receive. He taught lessons using
props, pictures, and humor. He brought people
roses, and through them, messages of hope.
He attended events across the city, spreading
faith and fellowship wherever he went.
Mr. Speaker, Andrew Washington lived his
life with purpose. He gave more than he took.
He stood tall, spoke truth, walked boldly, and
served faithfully. His legacy is one of service,
compassion, resourcefulness, and unshakable
faith.
Today, I ask my colleagues to join me in
honoring the life of Deacon Andrew Washington and in extending heartfelt condolences
to his beloved wife, Leola Washington; his
children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren;
and the entire Washington family.
May they be comforted in knowing that this
good and faithful servant has finished his
course, kept the faith, and left a legacy that
will continue to bless generations.

E:\CR\FM\A08JA8.014

E08JAPT1

E18

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

TRIBUTE TO HERBERT GADSON

HON. JAMES E. CLYBURN
OF SOUTH CAROLINA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

rfrederick on LAP6701GR3PROD with REMARKS

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor and celebrate the life and legacy of an
educator, public servant, freedom fighter, and
man of deep faith whose service to the people
of Hollywood, South Carolina, and the
Lowcountry of South Carolina spanned more
than five decades. The Honorable Herbert
Gadson transitioned on January 2, 2026, leaving behind a community forever changed by
his courage and leadership.
My longtime friend, Herbert Gadson, was
born on September 22, 1948, in Charleston
County, South Carolina. Reared in the closeknit community of Hollywood, his life was
shaped early by faith, family, and an
unshakable belief in education as the pathway
to opportunity. Baptized at Saint Luke AME
Church and later a devoted member of Wesley United Methodist Church, his life reflected
the values instilled in him from childhood—
service, discipline, and responsibility.
A gifted scholar, Mr. Gadson graduated as
Valedictorian of the Baptist Hill High School
Class of 1967. At a time when barriers for
Black students were formidable, he matriculated at South Carolina State University, earning both bachelor’s and master’s degrees in
education. While a student there, his life was
forever changed by events that would become
known as the Orangeburg Massacre. Beaten
by state police days earlier and later shot during the protest, Mr. Gadson survived one of
the darkest moments of the Civil Rights Movement, carrying a bullet in his hip for the rest
of his life. But rather than retreat, he emerged
with a renewed commitment to justice, dignity,
and public service.
Education remained Herbert Gadson’s first
calling. For 30 years, he served as a teacher,
administrator, and mentor in various South
Carolina public schools. Whether in North Augusta, Johns Island, Wadmalaw Island, or Hollywood, he was known for firm discipline, high
expectations, and genuine care for his students. He was more than an educator; he was
a life coach, mentor, and a father figure to
many.
In 1983, Mr. Gadson entered public service
as a write-in candidate for Hollywood Town
Council. In 1989, he made history when he
was elected the first African American mayor
of Hollywood. He served with distinction until

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:01 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

2003. As mayor, he confronted the crack cocaine crisis, rebuilt infrastructure, promoted
transparency in government, and achieved
what many believed impossible—bringing
water and sewer services to a long-neglected
rural town. His leadership transformed Hollywood, and his legacy is permanently marked
by the Herbert Gadson Intersection, over
which hangs the town’s only traffic light.
Mr. Gadson was a devoted husband to
Linda Gadson, a loving father to Reginald,
Telley, and Shaytee, a grandfather, and a beloved friend to many. He served as Finance
Chair and Treasurer at Wesley United Methodist Church and on the Parish Relations and
Nominations Committees.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in honoring The Honorable
Herbert Gadson—a servant of the people and
a pillar of hope whose legacy will continue to
be a source of guidance to Hollywood and
South Carolina for generations to come.
f

CELEBRATING 150 YEARS OF THE
LANCASTER
COUNTY
BEEKEEPERS SOCIETY

HON. LLOYD SMUCKER
OF PENNSYLVANIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Mr. SMUCKER. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased
to congratulate and recognize the Lancaster
County Beekeepers Society on their 150th anniversary.
The Lancaster County Beekeepers Society
first met on March 13, 1876, in the city of Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Founded by beekeepers
with Lancastrian surnames like Reist, Hershey, and Herr, the first subject discussed was
‘‘Will bee-keeping pay?’’ The Lancaster County Beekeepers Society has continued to meet
in the following 150 years, making it the oldest
continuously operating, non-profit, honeybee
club in the United States.
Throughout their long history, the Lancaster
County Beekeepers Society has provided an
opportunity for beekeepers to share their insights with one another and promote bee-related products. The club also provides public
awareness about honeybees and their importance through lectures, exhibits, and programs
like their annual New Beekeeper Workshop.
The workshop has trained over 1,000 new
beekeepers since its inception in 2010. These
initiatives have benefited schools, churches,
clubs, farm shows, and fairs across the county
and state.

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 8, 2026

Honeybees are a vital part of our ecosystem. As the Lancaster County Beekeepers
Society celebrates a monumental 150 years,
their service to the community deserves to
‘‘bee’’ commended. I thank the club for what
they do, and I wish them another 150 years of
continued success.
f

RECOGNIZING DR. ANGELA
‘‘ANGIE’’ PACCIONE

HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN
OF COLORADO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 8, 2026
Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize Dr. Angela ‘‘Angie’’ Paccione for
her service to constituents in Colorado as Executive Director of the Colorado Department of
Higher Education (CDHE).
Dr. Paccione has been a lifelong public
servant, working in education for over 27
years before joining CDHE. Since her appointment to this role in 2019, Dr. Paccione has
worked to expand access to higher education
for students of all backgrounds. Dr. Paccione
has helped implement a variety of programs to
increase access and affordability for low-income students, including the FosterED and
EmpowerED scholarship programs for students who grew up in foster care and who are
experiencing homelessness. Furthermore, Dr.
Paccione helped implement the Colorado ReEngaged Initiative to allow thousands of Coloradans who did not finish a four-year degree
the opportunity to earn an associate’s degree.
And under her leadership, Colorado was
ranked first in the Nation for educational attainment in 2022.
Throughout her tenure, Dr. Paccione has
been a dedicated advocate, working to expand
opportunities and improve educational outcomes for thousands of Colorado students.
She has conducted robust outreach to prospective students about educational opportunities and resources offered by the state, including speaking with high school students and
families at a FAFSA resource fair held by my
office at Bear Creek High School in April of
2025.
On behalf of the people of Colorado’s 7th
Congressional District, it is my honor to thank
Dr. Paccione for her years of service and to
wish her all the best in her future endeavors.

E:\CR\FM\A08JA8.017

E08JAPT1

Thursday, January 8, 2026

Daily Digest
HIGHLIGHTS
See Interim Résumé of Congressional Activity for the First Session of the
119th Congress (2025).

Senate
Chamber Action
(Legislative Days of January 7, 2026 and January
8, 2026)
Routine Proceedings, pages S95–S119, S121–S122
Measures Introduced: Fifteen bills and six resolutions were introduced, as follows: S. 3596–3610, S.
Res. 576–580, and S. Con. Res. 25.
Page S115
Measures Passed:
January 6, 2021 plaque: Senate agreed to S. Res.
580, directing the Architect of the Capitol to prominently display, in a publicly accessible location in
the Senate wing of the United States Capitol, a
plaque honoring the members of law enforcement responding on January 6, 2021, until the plaque can
be placed in its permanent location.
Pages S111–12, S118

Southern California wildfires anniversary: Senate agreed to S. Res. 577, observing the 1-year anniversary of the 2025 Southern California wildfires.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Pages S117–118, S119

Congratulating University of Washington Men’s
soccer team: Senate agreed to S. Res. 578, congratulating the University of Washington men’s soccer
team on winning the 2025 National Collegiate Athletic Association Division 1 Men’s Soccer National
Championship.
Pages S118, S119
Social Security program: Senate agreed to S. Res.
579, affirming the importance of the Social Security
program to the people of the United States and expressing the sense of the Senate that Social Security
must be preserved, protected, and strengthened for
current and future generations.
Pages S118, S119
Measures Considered:
Hostilities Within or Against Venezuela: By 52
yeas to 47 nays (Vote No. 5), Senate agreed to the
motion to discharge the Committee on Foreign Relations of S.J. Res. 98, to direct the removal of United

States Armed Forces from hostilities within or
against Venezuela that have not been authorized by
Page S100
Congress.
Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water
Development; and Interior and Environment
Appropriations Act, 2026—Cloture: Senate began
consideration of the motion to proceed to consideration of H.R. 6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026.
Pages S119, S121

A motion was entered to close further debate on
the motion to proceed to consideration of the bill,
and, in accordance with the provisions of Rule XXII
of the Standing Rules of the Senate, and pursuant to
the unanimous-consent agreement of Thursday, January 8, 2026, a vote on cloture will occur at 5:30
Pages S121–22
p.m., on Monday, January 12, 2026.
A unanimous-consent agreement was reached providing that at approximately 3 p.m., on Monday,
January 12, 2026, Senate resume consideration of the
motion to proceed to consideration of the bill; and
that notwithstanding Rule XXII, the motion to invoke cloture with respect to the motion to proceed
Pages S121–22
to the bill ripen at 5:30 p.m.
Nomination Confirmed: Senate confirmed the following nomination:
By 53 yeas to 40 nays (Vote No. EX. 6), Alexander C. Van Hook, of Louisiana, to be United
States District Judge for the Western District of
Louisiana.
Pages S100–09, S122
Nominations Received: Senate received the following nominations:
1 Air Force nomination in the rank of general.
1 Army nomination in the rank of general.
1 Marine Corps nomination in the rank of general.
Page S122

Messages from the House:
Page S114
Measures Discharged:
Page S114
Measures Placed on the Calendar: Pages S114, S121

D46

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:14 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D08JA6.REC

D08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

D47

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Measures Read the First Time:
Page S114
Executive Communications:
Page S114
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages S115–16
Statements on Introduced Bills/Resolutions:
Pages S116–19

Additional Statements:
Pages S113–14
Privileges of the Floor:
Page S119
Record Votes: Two record votes were taken today.
(Total—6)
Pages S100, S109

Adjournment: Senate convened at 10 a.m. and adjourned at 4:26 p.m., and reconvened at 4:27 p.m.,
on the same day, and adjourned at 4:29 p.m., until
3 p.m. on Monday, January 12, 2026. (For Senate’s
program, see the remarks of the Acting Majority
Leader in today’s Record on pages S121–22.)

Committee Meetings
(Committees not listed did not meet)

No committee meetings were held.

h

House of Representatives

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Chamber Action
Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 18 public bills, H.R. 6974–6991; and 4 resolutions, H.J.
Res. 138; H. Con. Res. 69; and H. Res. 982–983,
were introduced.
Pages H251–52
Additional Cosponsors:
Page H253
Reports Filed: Reports were filed today as follows:
H.R. 178, to require the Secretary of Agriculture
to carry out activities to suppress wildfires, and for
other purposes, with an amendment (H. Rept.
119–429, Part 1);
H.R. 179, to direct the Secretary concerned to coordinate with impacted parties when conducting a
forest management activity, and for other purposes,
with an amendment (H. Rept. 119–430, Part 1);
H.R. 2250, to reauthorize the National Landslide
Preparedness Act, and for other purposes, with an
amendment (H. Rept. 119–431, Part 1);
H.R. 435, to amend title 5, United States Code,
to provide direct hire authority to appoint individuals to Federal wildland firefighting and firefighting
support positions in the Forest Service or the Department of the Interior, and for other purposes (H.
Rept. 119–432, Part 1);
H.R. 1110, to require the Secretary of Agriculture
to develop and implement a strategy to increase opportunities to utilize livestock grazing as a means of
wildfire risk reduction, with amendments (H. Rept.
119–433, Part 1);
H.R. 2405, to direct the Secretary of Agriculture
and the Secretary of the Interior to carry out activities to provide for white oak restoration, and for
other purposes, with an amendment (H. Rept.
119–434, Part 1); and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:14 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

H.R. 839, to prohibit the implementation of a
Land Protection Plan for Muleshoe National Wildlife
Refuge, with an amendment (H. Rept. 119–435).
Page H251

Speaker: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he
appointed Representative Wied to act as Speaker pro
Page H137
tempore for today.
Recess: The House recessed at 11:50 a.m. and rePage H148
convened at 12 p.m.
Order of Business—Consideration of H.R. 6938:
Agreed by unanimous consent that the question of
retaining a portion of the bill on H.R. 6938 may be
subject to postponement, as though under clause 8
Pages H150–51
of rule 20.
Recess: The House recessed at 2:05 p.m. and reconPage H209
vened at 2:30 p.m.
Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water
Development; and Interior and Environment
Appropriations Act, 2026: The House passed H.R.
6938, making consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, by a yea-andnay vote of 397 yeas to 28 nays, Roll No. 7. Earlier,
the House agreed to retain Divisions B and C by a
yea-and-nay vote of 419 yeas to 6 nays, Roll No. 6,
and to retain Division A by a yea-and-nay vote of
375 yeas to 47 nays, Roll No. 5.
Pages H151–H205, H209–11

H. Res. 977, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 4593), (H.R. 5184), and (H.R.
6938) was agreed to yesterday, January 8th.
Miccosukee Reserved Area Amendments Act—
Presidential Veto: The House voted to sustain the
President’s veto of H.R. 504, to amend the
Miccosukee Reserved Area Act to authorize the expansion of the Miccosukee Reserved Area and to

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D08JA6.REC

D08JAPT1

D48

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

carry out activities to protect structures within the
Osceola Camp from flooding, by a yea-and-nay vote
of yeas to nays, Roll No. 8 (two-thirds of those
present not voting to override).
Pages H208–09, H211–12

Subsequently, the veto message (H. Doc.
119–120) and the bill were referred to the ComPage H212
mittee on Natural Resources.
Finish the Arkansas Valley Conduit Act: The
House voted to sustain the President’s veto of H.R.
131, to make certain modifications to the repayment
for the Arkansas Valley Conduit in the State of Colorado, by a yea-and-nay vote of 248 yeas to 177 nays
with one answering ‘‘present’’, Roll No. 9 (twothirds of those present not voting to override).

Quorum Calls—Votes: Seven yea-and-nay votes developed during the proceedings of today and appear
on pages H209–10, H210, H210–11, H211–12,
H212, H213, and H226–27.
Adjournment: The House met at 10 a.m. and adjourned at 8:47 p.m.

Committee Meetings
No hearings were held.

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

Pages H205–08, H212

Subsequently, the veto message (H. Doc.
119–119) and the bill were referred to the Committee on Natural Resources.
Page H212
Breaking the Gridlock Act: The House passed
H.R. 1834, to advance policy priorities that will
break the gridlock, by a yea-and-nay vote of 230
yeas to 196 nays, Roll No. 11. Pages H212–13, H213–27
H. Res. 780, providing for consideration of the
bill (H.R. 1834) was agreed to by a yea-and-nay
vote of 224 yeas to 202 nays, Roll No. 10.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Pages H212–13

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:14 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

January 8, 2026

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR FRIDAY,
JANUARY 9, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
No meetings/hearings scheduled.

House
No hearings are scheduled.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D08JA6.REC

D08JAPT1

January 8, 2026

D49

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Interim Résumé of Congressional Activity
FIRST SESSION OF THE ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH CONGRESS

The first table gives a comprehensive résumé of all legislative business transacted by the Senate and House.
The second table accounts for all nominations submitted to the Senate by the President for Senate confirmation.
DATA ON LEGISLATIVE ACTIVITY

DISPOSITION OF EXECUTIVE NOMINATIONS

January 3, 2025 through January 3, 2026

January 3, 2025 through January 3, 2026

Senate

House

Total

Days in session ....................................
202
Time in session ................................... 1265 hrs., 21′
Congressional Record:
Pages of proceedings ...................
S8,949
Extensions of Remarks ................
..
Public bills enacted into law ...............
24
Private bills enacted into law ..............
..
Bills in conference ...............................
..
Measures passed, total .........................
449
Senate bills ..................................
109
House bills ..................................
34
Senate joint resolutions ...............
13
House joint resolutions ...............
17
Senate concurrent resolutions ......
6
House concurrent resolutions ......
9
Simple resolutions .......................
261
Measures reported, total ......................
*237
Senate bills ..................................
204
House bills ..................................
5
Senate joint resolutions ...............
..
House joint resolutions ...............
..
Senate concurrent resolutions ......
1
House concurrent resolutions ......
..
Simple resolutions .......................
27
Special reports .....................................
11
Conference reports ...............................
..
Measures pending on calendar .............
201
Measures introduced, total ..................
4,259
Bills .............................................
3,562
Joint resolutions ..........................
100
Concurrent resolutions ................
24
Simple resolutions .......................
573
Quorum calls .......................................
3
Yea-and-nay votes ...............................
659
Recorded votes ....................................
..
Bills vetoed .........................................
..
Vetoes overridden ................................
..

169
581 hrs., 59′

..
..

H6,138
..
E1,249
..
45
..
..
..
1
..
533
982
18
..
375
..
6
..
18
..
4
..
12
..
100
..
419
656
..
..
368
..
..
..
2
..
..
..
2
..
47
..
4
..
..
..
140
..
8,101 12,360
6,926
..
135
..
67
..
973
..
1
..
276
..
85
..
2
..
..
..

Civilian nominees, totaling 568, disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Unconfirmed ..................................................................................
Withdrawn ....................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

417
4
56
91

Other Civilian nominees, totaling 418, disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Unconfirmed ..................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

291
124
3

Air Force nominees, totaling 6,055, disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Unconfirmed ..................................................................................
Withdrawn ....................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

6,027
14
1
13

Army nominatees, totaling 8,143, disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Unconfirmed ..................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

6,068
1,978
97

Navy nominees, totaling 5,207, disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Unconfirmed ..................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

5,198
5
4

Marine Corps nominees, totaling 1,553, disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Unconfirmed ..................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

1,486
56
11

Space Force nominees, total 416, disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Unconfirmed ..................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

414
1
1

Summary
Total nominees carried over from the First Session ...............................
0
Total nominees received this Session ..................................................... 22,360
Total confirmed ..................................................................................... 19,901
Total unconfirmed ................................................................................. 2,182
Total withdrawn ....................................................................................
57
Total return to the White House ..........................................................
220

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

* These figures include all measures reported, even if there was no accompanying report. A total of 98 written reports have been filed in the Senate,
423 reports have been filed in the House.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:14 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0667

Sfmt 0667

E:\CR\FM\D08JA6.REC

D08JAPT1

D50

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 8, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

3 p.m., Monday, January 12

9 a.m., Friday, January 9

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Monday: Senate will resume consideration
of the motion to proceed to consideration of H.R. 6938,
Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations Act,
2026, and vote on the motion to invoke cloture thereon
at 5:30 p.m.

Program for Friday: Consideration of H.R. 5184—Affordable HOMES Act.

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE

Davis, Danny K., Ill., E17
DeLauro, Rosa L., Conn., E14
Lieu, Ted, Calif., E16
Moore, Blake D., Utah, E14
Nadler, Jerrold, N.Y., E16
Neal, Richard E., Mass., E17

Baird, James R., Ind., E15
Carbajal, Salud O., Calif., E15
Cleaver, Emanuel, Mo., E15
Clyburn, James E., S.C., E13, E18

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Pettersen, Brittany, Colo., E13, E14, E16, E18
Smucker, Lloyd, Pa., E13, E18
Valadao, David G., Calif., E13
Veasey, Marc A., Tex., E15

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:14 Jan 09, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D08JA6.REC

D08JAPT1

