UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 7, 2026

No. 4

House of Representatives
The House met at 10 a.m. and was
called to order by the Speaker pro tempore (Mr. VALADAO).
f

DESIGNATION OF SPEAKER PRO
TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Speaker:
WASHINGTON, DC,
January 7, 2026.
I hereby appoint the Honorable DAVID G.
VALADAO to act as Speaker pro tempore on
this day.
MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
f

MORNING-HOUR DEBATE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of January 6, 2026, the Chair will now recognize
Members from lists submitted by the
majority and minority leaders for
morning-hour debate.
The Chair will alternate recognition
between the parties, with time equally
allocated between the parties and each
Member other than the majority and
minority leaders and the minority
whip limited to 5 minutes, but in no
event shall debate continue beyond
11:50 a.m.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

FACING TAX CREDIT EXPIRATION
AND
HEALTHCARE
AFFORDABILITY CRISIS
(Mr. KENNEDY of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. KENNEDY of New York. Mr.
Speaker, with just 24 days left before
open enrollment closes in New York
State and with millions of New Yorkers facing massive premium hikes, I
rise today in outrage.
As an occupational therapist, I spent
more than a decade working on the
front lines of our healthcare system,

helping patients and their families
when an unexpected illness, injury, or
disability turned their world upside
down.
I have seen the devastation that happens when people delay care because
they can’t afford it. Patients ration
medications, skip follow-up visits,
delay essential care, and choose between putting food on the table or seeing a doctor.
When healthcare is out of reach, outcomes get worse, costs go up, and
working families pay the price. That is
exactly what is happening right now
because Republicans have allowed the
enhanced Affordable Care Act premium
tax credits to expire.
When the Affordable Care Act was
enacted in 2014, it made health insurance more affordable and expanded access to care, putting healthcare within
reach for millions of Americans.
In 2021, Democrats built on that
progress by expanding those credits
through the American Rescue Plan,
closing coverage gaps that left middleclass families paying far too much for
far too long.
In 2022, Democrats passed the Inflation Reduction Act to extend these essential enhancements through 2025.
As Democrats, our priorities are
clear. When we lead, we fight for working people. We fight to expand access
to care. We fight to make sure every
American can afford the care that they
need. It is a very different story under
failed Republican leadership.
After years of trying to undermine
the Affordable Care Act, congressional
Republicans chose on December 31 to
let these lifesaving premium tax credits expire, even over the objections
from Members of their own party.
For families already struggling to
make ends meet, the consequences are
immediate and devastating. Marketplace premiums have skyrocketed by
an average of 114 percent, and these
plans cost more and cover less. Enroll-

ment will plummet, and millions of
Americans will lose or forego coverage
entirely.
In New York, thousands will lose
their
health
insurance
purchased
through the marketplace, with hundreds of thousands more facing staggeringly high costs. Young people in
communities of color will be hardest
hit, reversing years of progress and 4
consecutive years of Affordable Care
Act enrollment, a record high.
As this is happening at a moment
when the cost-of-living crisis is already
crushing working families, the people
of this country are saying enough is
enough.
This crisis did not happen by accident. Donald Trump and congressional
Republicans chose tax breaks for the
wealthy over affordable healthcare for
everyday Americans. They pushed
through the largest healthcare cuts in
U.S. history, gutting Medicaid, Medicare, and the Affordable Care Act by
more than $1 trillion.
Now, instead of fixing the damage,
Republican leadership is once again
choosing to turn its back on families
by letting these premium tax credits
expire, a lifeline millions of Americans
rely on to stay insured.
When people lose coverage, they
don’t stop getting sick. They just stop
getting care. We all pay the price
through worse outcomes, higher costs,
and deeper inequities.
Over the past year, many of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
reminded us that elections have consequences. I am here to remind them
that this fight transcends politics.
Ripping away healthcare from hardworking Americans has life-or-death
consequences. That is why Democrats
have forced a vote to extend these credits this week, and that is why I intend
to vote ‘‘yes.’’
Healthcare should not depend on
your ZIP Code, your job title, or the
size of your paycheck. This fight is

b This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
H103

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:14 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A07JA7.000

H07JAPT1

H104

about priorities. It is about choosing
care, dignity, and security for families,
instead of policies that push healthcare
out of reach.
Mr. Speaker, let’s get this done. Let’s
take care of the American people.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING CLINTON COUNTY
RECORD
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to mark the
end of an era. The oldest newspaper in
Clinton County, Pennsylvania, ceased
operations on December 31.
After 154 years of delivering the
news, the weekly Clinton County
Record, formerly known as the Renovo
Record, has stopped publishing due to
escalating costs, a declining subscription base, and a lack of advertisers.
Despite these challenges, it has a
long and storied history that began in
1871 when Renovo businessman John
Upton Shaffer founded the Renovo
Daily Record and published its first
edition.
The first issue of The Record noted
that the letters for the printing press
had not been delivered in their entirety
until the previous day. The first half of
the alphabet, from A through M, had
arrived in the previous week. The first
issue nearly had to go to press without
the second half of the alphabet. Fortunately, the rest of the letters were delivered in time for publication.
Back then, it was a daily paper, except Sunday, bringing the news to
those who lived in the railroad town.
In 1887, Shaffer was elected to the
Pennsylvania State legislature. His
son, John Shaffer, Jr., took over the
management of the newspaper. The
elder Shaffer died in 1902, and his sons
continued publishing.
Since 1871, The Record has been 100
percent independently owned and operated with notable local names publishing the paper after the Shaffers, including Ron Dremel, John Lipez, and,
most recently, Michael Frank.
The newspaper covered local news,
education, government, sports, and
more. This is a devastating loss to the
community that has relied on this
paper since 1871.
In 2021, on its 150th anniversary, The
Record had a special print edition. This
year, on its final publication, I was
pleased and honored to have it reported
that Bucktail Medical Center in
Renovo would receive more than
$260,000 in Federal funding to bring important upgrades to the facility. I was
honored to secure that funding.
Mr. Speaker, it is never easy when we
see our local institutions close, especially those that have played such an
important role in our communities like
The Record has over the past 154 years.
My heartfelt thanks go out to the
staff who have worked diligently over
the years to deliver the news to the
people of Clinton County. For 154

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:14 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

years, through generations of change,
The Record has been there. We are all
grateful for that.
HONORING DOUG LAMALFA

Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, for those who are in the
Chamber or perhaps viewing online,
this morning they will see we are missing an individual who has always been
here at morning session, at noon for 1
minutes, and maybe after votes for 1
minutes. I am speaking of DOUG
LAMALFA, a dear friend from California.
DOUG passed away yesterday. In
honor of him, as is tradition, we have
reserved a memorial seat in the first
speaking position on the Republican
side.
DOUG was a great friend and a great
agricultural leader. He was a champion
for forestry and rural communities. We
traveled the country, preparing for the
farm bill that we had been working on.
Half of it has been accomplished with
the other half still to go.
Mr. Speaker, he was a rice farmer. I
have been on his farm in northern California. I can tell you he was kind of a
crazy muscle car driver. I hung on
tight riding with DOUG.
DOUG has left his mark. Our prayers
go out to Jill and his family. Later this
week, we will have other opportunities
for Members on both sides of the aisle
to offer their tributes and memories to
DOUG.
Mr. Speaker, we want to let DOUG
know that he can rest easy in the arms
of God. We have got this.
f

CELEBRATING PAID FAMILY AND
MEDICAL LEAVE FOR FAMILIES
(Ms. MCBRIDE of Delaware was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. MCBRIDE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to celebrate that paid family and
medical leave officially began in Delaware on January 1.
There is nothing that I am prouder of
during my time in the Delaware State
Senate than leading the successful effort to pass paid family and medical
leave for workers and families across
our State.
After years of work and preparation,
Delaware’s Paid Family and Medical
Leave program is finally a reality
across our State. Paid family and medical leave is about dignity, plain and
simple. It means a parent can be there
for their newborn child, a worker can
recover from severe illness, and a caregiver can support an aging parent, all
without falling behind on groceries or
rent.
Paid leave will strengthen families,
support small businesses, and make our
State more affordable for the people
who live and work in it.
I was proud to work with my colleagues in the State legislature to pass
this bipartisan achievement. It is proof
that when we listen to one another and
focus on solutions, we can deliver for
our constituents. That is something

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

this Chamber would do well to remember.
I am incredibly proud of the work
that we have accomplished in Delaware. I am grateful to all of the advocates who made this progress possible,
including the Delaware Cares Coalition
led by Liz Richards.
Mr. Speaker, I will continue working
to ensure paid family and medical
leave is not just the law of the land in
Delaware but nationwide. Good policy
that is grounded in dignity and supported by a supermajority of Americans is precisely the sort of work that
we should be doing together.
HONORING CORPORAL GRADE ONE MATTHEW
TYLER ‘‘TY’’ SNOOK

Ms. MCBRIDE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life and legacy of
Corporal Grade One Matthew Tyler
‘‘Ty’’ Snook.
On December 23, just 2 days before
Christmas, Ty Snook was shot and
killed while working an overtime assignment at the DMV just outside of
Wilmington.
Corporal Snook served the State of
Delaware as a trooper for a decade. He
was known by his peers and his community as dependable, professional,
and a committed neighbor. His death is
a tragic reminder of the sacrifice that
our law enforcement officers risk every
single day to protect and defend us.
At his memorial earlier this week,
his loved ones painted a picture of Ty
as a spectacular father, husband, son,
and brother. He was a thoughtful friend
and an empowering colleague.
Every speaker struck a similar
chord. Ty was selfless, compassionate,
and deeply invested in the well-being of
others. That is a commitment to community that can be seen throughout
his service.
A native Delawarean, he was a graduate of St. Mark’s High School. He returned after college to serve in the
Delaware State Police, where he was
soon joined in that service by his
brother, Josh. Ty was rising through
the ranks and training the next generation of law enforcement.
The selflessness that defined his service was tragically on full display on
December 23 when, in his final moments, Ty saved others, even as he lost
his own life.
Let us never become numb to senseless acts of violence like the one which
took Ty Snook’s life. Crimes like this
one leave an indelible mark of pain and
loss felt by so many. These include his
friends and family; his wife, Lauren;
and their 1-year-old daughter, Letty.
Kassi Snook Dunphy, Tyler’s sister,
said it best on Monday. ‘‘Tyler did not
just pass on as a hero. He lived every
day as one.’’
Mr. Speaker, every day I am thankful
to the men and women of law enforcement, like Tyler, who risk everything
in defense of all of us. Today, I speak in
this hallowed Chamber in honor of that
hero so that the name and service of
Matthew Tyler ‘‘Ty’’ Snook will be enshrined in the history and RECORD of
the United States Congress forever.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.002

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026
b 1015

RECOGNIZING MARY KRINKIE
(Mrs. FISCHBACH of Minnesota was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor and recognize the distinguished career of Mary Krinkie.
For 25 years, Mary has served as the
vice president of government relations
at the Minnesota Hospital Association.
She is widely regarded as one of the
most persuasive voices for Minnesota’s
healthcare systems and patient care.
I have had the honor to work with
her on various issues, both here in Congress and in the Minnesota State Senate. Her dedication to the healthcare
community has left a permanent mark
on Minnesota.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Mary for her
decades of service, and I wish her a
long, happy, and well-deserved retirement.
RECOGNIZING RICHARD ‘‘DICK’’ PESEK

Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize a distinguished
member of the Minnesota agricultural
community.
I congratulate Dick Pesek of Taunton, Minnesota, who has been named
the Minnesota 2025 Cattleman of the
Year. This honor is well-deserved recognition for his decades of hard work,
dedication to the livestock industry,
and deep commitment to his community.
We commend Mr. Pesek for upholding the best traditions of American agriculture.
RECOGNIZING JILIAN SCHOENFELD AND BRAYDEN
VANDYKE

Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today
to
congratulate
Jilian
Schoenfeld and Brayden VanDyke from
Russell-Tyler-Ruthton High School for
their first-place finishes at the FFA
Winter Leadership Summit.
Jilian placed first in the employment
skills competition, and Brayden placed
first in the English creed speaking
event. Their hard work and commitment are a credit to their school and
community.
I congratulate Jilian and Brayden on
their victories.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT AND
SCHOOLS
(Ms. BONAMICI of Oregon was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to express my profound opposition to this administration’s aggressive
and cruel immigration enforcement actions, especially targeting students and
parents near schools.
Throughout the last year, the Trump
administration’s hard-line immigration enforcement campaign has terrorized communities and created an environment where many students don’t
even feel safe going to school.
Children can’t learn when they are
living in constant fear.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:14 Jan 08, 2026

H105

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

At a townhall meeting last year, a
fourth grade student, a 10-year-old,
gave me a handwritten letter saying
that she was afraid that ICE was going
to come into her school and take her
friends.
Children may not understand the
complexities of the immigration system, but they know that masked people indiscriminately kidnapping people
off the street is wrong and terrifying.
In July, a Beaverton, Oregon, father
was dropping off his child at preschool.
With his child in the car, ICE surrounded him, traumatizing the child,
other parents, and preschool teachers.
ICE then arrested the father within
sight of the school.
In October, two Oregon high school
students were at a drive-through coffee
shop near their school. They were surrounded by multiple ICE agents who
were pointing guns at them. That is
terrifying, outrageous, and obviously
dangerous.
At a recent city council meeting, an
Oregon high school student bravely
shared his concerns and the concerns of
his peers, especially those who cannot
speak up for themselves because they
are too afraid. This compassionate student has been raising money to help
people in his community whose lives
are being torn apart by this administration’s
immigration
enforcement
tactics.
Mr. Speaker, hundreds of students
across northwest Oregon have bravely
protested the ongoing immigration enforcement that is happening in their
communities, and I am grateful for
their acts of peaceful protest that are
calling attention to these injustices.
The reality is that too many students
are afraid to leave their homes, even to
go to school. At a time when chronic
absenteeism is at a record high, more
students are switching to attending
school online if they can because they
don’t feel safe, or they stop going altogether.
A small school district in northwest
Oregon told me that more than 150 students have withdrawn this year, an increase of 120 since this time last year.
It is likely that most of them left
school because they are afraid of ICE.
Statewide, it is estimated that more
than 10,000 students are now unaccounted for.
Recently, the Department of Homeland Security claimed that the media
is force-feeding the public stories about
parents and children being afraid to return to school. This is categorically
untrue. Despite what the Department
of Homeland Security wants people to
believe, ICE is creating significant levels of fear, including around schools.
Mr. Speaker, this is not about targeting criminals. It is about targeting,
arresting, and detaining people because
of their national origin or the color of
their skin. This ought to send chills
down the spines of everyone in this
body and this country.
As someone who has dedicated years
of my career to education and striving

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

to create a better future for children, I
am appalled but, sadly, not surprised
that this administration continues to
terrorize children, using the same playbook as when they separated families
at the border.
Let me be clear: According to the
United States Supreme Court, all children, regardless of their immigration
status, have the right to attend public
schools. The ICE tactics that we are
seeing of targeting students and families will have lasting effects on children and families, and they will cause
generational trauma.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
show some empathy and kindness.
Work with us to protect sensitive locations. Work with us on humane immigration reform. We cannot allow these
abuses of power and these lawless actions to continue.
Let’s put an end to this ugly chapter
in our country’s history and do better
for our Nation and our children.
f

TAX RELIEF FOR WORKING
FAMILIES
(Mr. BAUMGARTNER of Washington
was recognized to address the House for
5 minutes.)
Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to celebrate $181 million in
rural healthcare funding for the State
of Washington.
Not long ago, right here in this
Chamber, I joined my House Republican colleagues to pass the Working
Families Tax Cut Act, the largest tax
cut in American history.
When we voted for this, we also voted
for a new rural healthcare fund, and
$181 million of this rural healthcare
fund will go to transforming Washington State. This is just the first
round of funding, part of a 5-year, $50
billion commitment to rural health
transformation.
This is $181 million to keep our rural
hospitals’ doors open, upgrade critical
infrastructure, expand access to emergency care, protect maternal health,
and strengthen Tribal health services.
Rural Washington is one of the best
places in America to live, work, and
raise a family, and this investment
means more doctors, nurses, stable
hospitals, and peace of mind for the
people who grow our food, power our
grid, and keep our communities strong.
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support
this historic tax relief and this transformational funding.
BABY JAY SETS WASHINGTON STATE’S PECKING
ORDER

Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to celebrate a special tradition of the congressional delegation of
Washington State.
Just 1 year ago, I was sworn in to the
119th Congress and welcomed as one of
the two new members of the Washington congressional delegation. If you
are wondering why I have an oil painting of a baby chick next to me right
now, I will tell you that it is about one
of the most charming traditions of our
Washington delegation.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.005

H07JAPT1

H106

‘‘The Chick’’ was bought at a charity
fundraiser and presented to then-Congressman Joel Pritchard as a gift to his
office in the early 1970s.
Congressman Pritchard, as the story
goes, wasn’t too fond of the painting.
In true Washington fashion, he decided
that the honorable way to handle it
was to regift the baby chick to the
next new member of the Washington
delegation.
As such, he passed it on to Congressman Norman Dicks in 1976, and it then
went to Congressman Mike Lowry in
1979. It has been passed down ever
since, with each new Member from
Washington State signing the back before giving it to the next new, proud
owner.
The only Congressman who didn’t
sign it was then-Congressman Jay Inslee, and Congressman Inslee then lost
his election.
Mr. Speaker, when I was gifted ‘‘The
Chick,’’ I decided to give it a proper
name: ‘‘Baby Jay.’’ As I prepare to part
ways with ‘‘Baby Jay’’ to my Washington State colleague EMILY RANDALL,
I share this lighthearted piece of Washington delegation history and the spirit of continuity and camaraderie that
it represents with the House today.
RECOGNIZING KIRBY MOORE

Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to celebrate the new football
coach of Washington State University,
Coach Kirby Moore.
Just before the holidays, WSU hired
Kirby Moore, a Washington native, as
our new head coach. Kirby Moore is
young, hungry, and armed with an impressive coaching resume. Coach Moore
is ready to lead the Cougs to new
heights in his first head coaching role.
Kirby grew up going to Cougar football games. Kirby said: ‘‘For me, this is
home. We’ve got grandparents in
Palouse. We’ve got aunts in Pullman,
aunts in Spokane. My parents just
built a house in the Tri-Cities, so
there’s some incredible memories for
my kids.’’ They are the same memories
that he grew up with.
Mr. Speaker, as such, I welcome
Coach Kirby Moore back to the
Palouse, back home, and I look forward
to his leadership of our crimson and
gray. Go Cougs.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

RECOGNIZING
SISTER
MARY
JESUS OCHOA ON HER CENTENNIAL BIRTHDAY
(Ms. RIVAS of California was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor Sister Mary Jesus Ochoa of
the Order of St. Francis in San Fernando. This week, she celebrated her
100th birthday.
Sister Mary Jesus is a member of the
Franciscan Sisters of the Immaculate
Conception, who entered religious life
in the 1940s. She has spent decades supporting our most vulnerable across the
San Fernando Valley and in Mexico.
During her service, she worked with
children and families in need, empha-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:14 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

sizing care, stability, and long-term
support.
Sister Mary Jesus played a key leadership role at the Poverello of Assisi
Retreat House in San Fernando. There,
she helped provide retreat services,
community support, and housing for
young women and children.
When earthquakes caused major
damage to the retreat house and the
surrounding buildings, Sister Mary
Jesus led the rebuilding efforts to
make sure that services were not interrupted for those who need it the most.
Sister Mary Jesus’ work reflects
steady leadership, resilience in times
of crisis, and a clear commitment to
serving others with dignity and purpose.
I wish Sister Mary Jesus a happy
100th birthday. The San Fernando Valley is grateful for her dedication to
helping our community.

Los Angeles has made progress in recovery, but we still have a long way to
go. This is why my California Democratic Caucus colleagues and I are urging the Trump administration to deliver nearly $34 billion in disaster funding to help Californians recover. This
includes funding that supports rebuilding homes and schools, restoring critical road and water systems, reopening
small businesses, and helping communities achieve lasting wildfire resilience.
Mr. Speaker, I will continue to push
to make sure that residents in my district and across Los Angeles County
have every Federal resource available
to them to rebuild their lives. Let us
continue to rebuild with equity, care,
and courage so that our communities
are safer, healthier, and more resilient
for everyone.
f

FUNDING TO REBUILD AFTER WILDFIRES

Ms. RIVAS. Mr. Speaker, here we are
in the first voting week of 2026, and Republicans are bringing up bills on
showerheads. They are not doing anything to address the affordability crisis, ICE terrorizing our communities,
Trump’s illegal and unconstitutional
actions in Venezuela, or other states of
emergency. They have not done so during this Congress, even during the Los
Angeles wildfires, which broke out 1
year ago today.
These fires destroyed 16,000 structures, displaced over 200,000 residents,
and took 31 lives. The bravery of firefighters from across the country, who
worked tirelessly to put out the fires
and minimize damage, will not be forgotten.
While the fires caused great destruction and devastation, the strength and
resilience of our neighbors coming together for our communities were on
full display.
Mr. Speaker, 1 year later, communities across Los Angeles County are
continuing to work toward rebuilding
their lives and livelihoods. As communities work toward a return to normal
times, we need to minimize the longterm health consequences that wildfire
debris may have on communities, especially in communities like mine in the
San Fernando Valley.
My district is housing several disposal sites for wildfire debris. As debris
is being transported and stored
throughout the valley, I have been adamant about making sure that my constituents are not subjected to the longterm health effects that they have traditionally been forced to bear.
Recovery from these wildfires asks us
to look ahead to make sure that when
natural disasters strike, everyone can
be prepared to recover equally. This is
a core tenet of environmental justice.
We must invest in resources that allow
communities and families to recover
and rebuild their lives after disasters.
This includes advocating for solutions
that are informed by the voices of
those who are most affected by climate
disasters.

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

b 1030
HONORING THE SERVICE OF
COLONEL PATRICK FLOOD
(Mr. BACON of Nebraska was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. BACON. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor Colonel Patrick Flood,
United States Air Force retired, who
recently departed the House of Representatives as our deputy chief of staff
and national security advisor after
more than 39 years of Federal service.
Colonel Flood comes from a family
with a distinguished record of Federal
and military service dating back to the
American Civil War.
Born in Baltimore, Colonel Flood was
raised in Ohio and entered military
service at the age of 18. He was nominated in 1986 to attend the United
States Air Force Academy by Representative Ralph Regula of Ohio’s 16th
Congressional District.
A distinguished graduate of the
Academy, Pat established an early reputation for excellence in military leadership, academics, and athletics.
In his senior year at the Academy,
Flood commanded Cadet Squadron 33
and was honored as one of the top
squadron commanders in the cadet
wing.
As a commissioned officer, Colonel
Flood’s remarkable career spanned
more than 26 years in the combat air
forces and special operations communities. Serving in nearly every major
U.S. military operation since 1991,
Colonel Flood deployed for operations
Southern Watch, Provide Comfort II,
Deny Flight/Provide Promise, Uphold
Democracy, Enduring Freedom, and
Odyssey Dawn.
His distinguished record also includes
two tours of duty in Korea with service
as a corridor patrol officer for the eastern demilitarized zone, service as a
continuity of operations officer for the
Air Force Chief of Staff during the 9/11
attacks on the Pentagon, and aviation
duty as an RC–135 crewmember flying
long-range combat operations over Afghanistan.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.006

H07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 7, 2026

Selected to lead several of the Air
Force’s most engaged combat intelligence units from 2006 to 2013, Colonel
Flood commanded the 55th Wing’s
488th Intelligence Squadron at RAF
Mildenhall, England; led the 603rd Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance Division at Ramstein Air Force
Base, Germany; and commanded Distributed Ground Station 2 and the
548th Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance Group at Beale Air Force
Base, California.
Following my election to the House
in 2016, I invited Pat to help me establish our Washington, D.C., office. We
both arrived in Congress in January of
2017 with no prior legislative experience. Without hesitation or any formal
training, for the next 9 years Pat selflessly committed himself to learning
and mastering Congress’ complex legislative processes. Pat personally drafted
hundreds of legislative bills and
amendments, shaping America’s national defense policy, force structure,
and capabilities.
The results of his efforts have been
remarkable with a significant number
of his proposals enacted into law via
the National Defense Authorization
Act and the Defense Appropriations
Act from the years 2018 to 2025.
While by no means exhaustive, here
are some of the accomplishments: quality of life reforms for the all-volunteer
force and military families; comprehensive management reforms for
DOD’s electromagnetic spectrum superiority policy; numerous casualty assistance policies; program reforms for
Gold Star and surviving families; the
first DOD program for integrated military-civilian national emergency medical response; the reconstruction of
Offutt Air Force Base following the
devastating 2019 floods; the DOD’s
Warfighter Brain Health Initiative; the
elimination of Russian fuel at U.S.
military installations in Europe; the
significant expansion of the EA–37B
Compass Call electronic attack combat
aircraft fleet; academic copyright ownership for civilian faculty members of
DOD academic institutions; direct support to military service academy foundations; sustained funding for the Baltic Security Initiative; and significant
funding to establish the first secure
software development facility to modernize our aging nuclear command,
control, and communications enterprise.
However, these legislative victories
only tell a small part of the story of
the impact Pat has had. As my closest
and most trusted adviser, he turned my
intent and aspirations as a member of
the Committee on Armed Services into
legislative action that delivered tangible progress and results for DOD, Nebraska, and for the men and women
who commit, and sometimes sacrifice,
their lives for our security and the defense of our freedom.
I was selected multiple times as the
most effective Member of Congress,
and I owe much of this to Pat Flood.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:32 Jan 08, 2026

H107

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, I thank Pat for his
years of service to our great Nation.
f

RISING HEALTHCARE COSTS
(Mrs. SYKES of Ohio was recognized
to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mrs. SYKES. Mr. Speaker, today I
rise because families in Ohio’s 13th
Congressional District and across the
country are already paying the price
for
Republicans’
inaction
on
healthcare. The enhanced ACA premium tax credits expired December 31,
2025, and now health coverage is more
expensive and families are already feeling the impact.
In my district, 90 percent of the 32,000
people who get ACA coverage rely on
those subsidies. Four out of five were
previously able to find plans for $10 or
less per month. That safety net is now
gone. Families are seeing premiums
jump by hundreds of dollars a month or
thousands of dollars a year. Across the
country, more than 4 million Americans have already lost or are at risk of
losing their healthcare coverage entirely.
This isn’t a theory. It is happening
right now. In Canton, AultCare, a regional insurer tied to Aultman Hospital, stopped offering some individual
family and small business ACA plans
before December 31. That affects 6,000
people in my district. These are working families and small business employees losing coverage because Republicans refuse to act.
I have fought to protect these credits
by cosponsoring legislation to extend
them and by signing on to Leader
JEFFRIES’ discharge petition to bring
the issue to a vote on the House floor.
Instead of acting, Speaker JOHNSON and
House Republicans chose to delay, and
that action is simply unacceptable.
Don’t just take my word for it. Just
a few weeks ago, Congressman MIKE
LAWLER called Speaker JOHNSON’S refusal to allow a vote idiotic and political malpractice, and I agree. What
happened? Speaker JOHNSON sent us
home for the holidays while American
families paid the price.
Republicans also pushed a partisan
healthcare bill that would make things
much worse by increasing the number
of uninsured people, shifting costs onto
working families, and weakening the
protections that so many Americans
rely upon.
I offered an amendment to protect
working families from losing health
coverage and to protect access to reproductive healthcare. But guess what.
Republicans blocked it. Once again,
they chose politics over people.
We cannot forget the real people
caught in the middle of this. These are
families deciding between healthcare
and groceries and between medicine
and rent. Access to healthcare should
be a right, not a gamble. At a time
when we are talking about the horrors
and tragic costs of the drug trade and
the impact it has on American people,
let us not forget how people get drug

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

treatment. It is from the Medicaid program that has already been cut by a
trillion dollars and the ACA marketplace health plans.
The Republicans’ failure to act is literally going to kill people across this
country. They let deadlines pass, premiums rise, and coverage disappear.
That is not leadership. That is failure.
Mr. Speaker, the choice is clear. Congress can either act to restore affordable healthcare or we can continue to
let premiums sore, coverage vanish,
and families face financial ruin.
I know one thing is for certain, Mr.
Speaker. I was brought to Congress to
work on behalf of the people of Ohio’s
13th Congressional District to lower
costs, to keep them safe, and to make
sure that they had affordable, accessible healthcare coverage.
Mr. Speaker, I encourage every single
Member of this Chamber to do those
things, not only for the people in my
district but for the people all across
America who are asking and needing
Congress to act.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF ROBERT
L. KNIPRATH
(Mr. HARIDOPOLOS of Florida was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. HARIDOPOLOS. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to honor the life and service
of Robert Kniprath who was proudly
recognized as October’s Brevard County Veteran of the Month.
Mr. Kniprath answered our Nation’s
call during World War II, serving in the
United States Navy in both the Atlantic and Pacific theaters. As a petty officer second class, he carried out vital
responsibilities
supporting
critical
naval operations that contributed to
Allied success in the Southwest Pacific. His service earned him multiple
commendations, including the Asiatic
Pacific Campaign Medal, the Philippine Liberation Medal, and the European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign
Medal.
After his military service, Mr.
Kniprath built a life rooted in family,
hard work, and community in Brevard
County. He was known as a devoted father, husband, and grandfather, and as
a man who deeply believed in civic
duty, the importance of voting to safeguard our Republic and our democratic
values.
Mr. Speaker, Brevard County and our
Nation are stronger because of patriots
like Robert Kniprath.
RECOGNIZING DEBBY ELLEN MOONE

Mr. HARIDOPOLOS. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to recognize an extraordinary Floridian and patriot, Debby
Ellen Moone. She was named Brevard
County’s November Veteran of the
Month.
Captain Moone dedicated 32 years of
her life to serving our Nation in uniform, answering the call in both the
United States Air Force and the United
States Army. After serving 22 years in
the United States Air Force and rising

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.008

H07JAPT1

H108

to the rank of senior master sergeant,
she continued her service by becoming
a commissioned Army officer, ultimately retiring as a captain in the
Medical Service Corps.
Throughout her distinguished career,
Captain Moone deployed in Operation
Desert Storm, served overseas in
Korea, and led soldiers as a medical
company commander. Her service has
been recognized with numerous honors,
including: the Meritorious Service
Medal, Joint Service Commendation
Medal, and the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, among many
others.
Mr. Speaker, Captain Moone represents the very best of the Space
Coast: selfless, resilient, and devoted to
something greater than herself. Our
Nation is stronger because of her service, and Brevard County is proud to
call her one of our own.
HONORING LUIS FRANCISCO RAMOS RAMIREZ

Mr. HARIDOPOLOS. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to honor Luis Francisco
Ramos Ramirez who has been selected
as January’s Brevard County Veteran
of the Month.
Mr. Ramos Ramirez proudly served
our Nation in the United States Army,
answering the call of duty during a
critical moment in our history. He
served in Vietnam where he conducted
reconnaissance missions, some of the
most dangerous and demanding assignments in combat. He served honorably,
even volunteered to remain in Vietnam
for additional time, demonstrating his
extraordinary courage and selflessness.
For his service, Mr. Ramos Ramirez
earned the National Defense Service
Medal, the Vietnam Service Medal,
Two Bronze Service Stars, and the
Vietnam Campaign Medal, decorations
that reflect both his valor and his sacrifice.
Like so many of our veterans, his
legacy extends beyond the uniform. His
commitment to protecting our freedoms remind us that the liberties we
enjoy today were secured by Americans
willing to put country before self.
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Florida’s
Space Coast and a grateful Nation, I
thank Luis Francisco Ramos Ramirez
for his service, his sacrifice, and his example of leadership.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

RECOGNIZING BETHESDA BAPTIST
CHURCH AND PASTOR HORACE
SANDERS, JR.
(Mr. LATIMER of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
recognize and salute the dynamic faith
community of Bethesda Baptist Church
in New Rochelle as they welcome their
new pastor, Reverend Horace Sanders,
Jr., and his wife, Lady Katrina Sanders, to the pulpit. Bethesda Baptist will
be celebrating this month over installation weekend, highlighted by a congregational celebration gala on Friday
night, January 16.
The faithful of Bethesda have given
God the glory for over 138 years, since

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:14 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

1888, with weekly Sunday services, Friday morning prayer line, Wednesday
Bible study, programs for seniors on
Tuesdays and Thursdays, a food pantry
for the needy and hungry, and programs targeted to the youth of the
community.
Pastor-elect Sanders served for over
a decade at Mount Olivet Missionary
Baptist Church in Schenectady and
previously in Peekskill. His energetic
leadership was on display last week
when Bethesda hosted Watch Night
services, joined by two other New Rochelle congregations. Reverend Sanders’ sermon ‘‘Leave the Baggage Behind’’ was a perfect theme to start the
new year and his new responsibilities
at Bethesda.
Mr. Speaker, I welcome him and
Lady Katrina to New Rochelle from the
floor of the House of Representatives,
and I look forward to his many contributions in the days to come.
HONORING THE BIRTHDAY OF C. NATHAN EDWERS

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
honor Archbishop C. Nathan Edwers,
spiritual leader and senior pastor at
Friendship Worship Center in Mount
Vernon as he celebrates his 65th birthday this month. His congregates,
friends, and admirers will gather that
weekend for a festive event in his
honor, and we join in that recognition
for a man of God who has been a leader
in the community inside and outside of
his church.
Bishop Edwers holds a number of academic degrees, including a doctorate
from the United Theological Seminary
in Dayton, Ohio. He began his ministry
in 1983 and came from Brooklyn to
Mount Vernon in 1989 to lead the
Friendship Worship community. He has
grown the church dynamically with
outreach to embrace a large presence
in the Mount Veteran community with
the religious vision for worship, prayer,
Bible study, and a community vision
for services to the youth, seniors, and
those in need with food delivery, afterschool and summer programs, a warming center for the homeless, foster family services, and more.
Bishop Edwers has held numerous positions in the church organization, also
in the Masons, Omega Psi Phi fraternity, and as a founder and leader of the
United Black Clergy of Westchester
County. He has done all of this with his
wife, Aro Denise Edwers, as his life
partner, and all of this was done in a
mere 65 years.
Mr. Speaker, I wish a happy birthday
to Bishop Edwers from the floor of the
House of Representatives.
b 1045
RECOGNIZING SHORELINE PUBLISHING

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, in a
world where local newspapers and radio
stations are disappearing, it is valuable
to recognize and salute those organizations that are continuing to provide information about our local communities’ life and times.
In Westchester County we owe a public debt of gratitude to Shoreline Pub-

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

lishing, which serves the people of
southern Westchester with five community newspapers; a countywide Jewish monthly newspaper; and a full-color
quarterly
magazine,
Westchester
Women.
Under the leadership of president and
publisher Edward Shapiro, Shoreline
provides an information lifeline across
our towns with the Pelham Post, the
Bronxville Bulletin, the Harrison Herald, the Larchmont Ledger—as you can
see, alliteration still has its appeal—
and the New Rochelle Review.
Editors Cynthia Pena and Joyce
Farrell ensure timely local news
reaches the readers in each community, as well as the readers of Westchester Jewish Life, which is always
available in the local synagogues and
temples. Other key Shoreline executives round out the local team, including Lauren Levine and Mary DeYoung.
I thank Shoreline Publishing from
the floor of the House of Representatives for continuing to keep local news
at the forefront of our hometowns.
f

HONORING DR. CALVIN BAKER
(Mr. CISCOMANI of Arizona was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today with a heavy heart to honor my
friend Dr. Calvin Baker, an education
giant in our community who sadly
passed away on December 26 of this
past year.
It is nearly impossible to put into
words what Cal meant to our community. I am so sorry for Nancy’s loss. Cal
Baker was a truly devoted husband, father, friend, and a transformational
leader in public education.
For 32 years, Cal served as superintendent of the Vail School District
dedicating his life to students, educators, and families across southern
Arizona. During his tenure, Cal pioneered K–12 education in Arizona, guiding Vail’s growth from fewer than 400
students to nearly 14,000 students by
the time he retired in 2020. His legacy
lives on through the Calvin Baker
Leadership Center, a lasting tribute to
his service and vision.
Cal is remembered for his strength,
his wisdom, his faith, and deep love for
his
family
and
his
community.
Throughout his entire health battle, he
kept a positive attitude and always, always had a smile to give. Though he is
no longer with us, his impact will be
felt for generations.
In a loving message, his family described Cal as a man of ‘‘grit and perseverance,’’ words that perfectly capture
his life’s work and his heart, as well.
Laura and I were honored to know
Cal and are heartbroken by his passing.
We are keeping his lifelong bride,
Nancy, the love of his life; their family;
and all who loved in him in our prayers.
We lost one of the greats. We thank
Cal. May my friend rest in peace.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.009

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026
HONORING STUART ‘‘STU’’ CARTER

Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor Mr. Stuart ‘‘Stu’’ Carter, a veteran, a pillar of the Sierra
Vista community, and a friend to so
many, who sadly passed away in November of 2025.
Stu Carter exemplified a life of service. He was a retired U.S. Air Force
lieutenant colonel. He dedicated more
than 45 years to military and Federal
service. Even after retiring, Stu continued giving back, combining his passion for cycling with a deep commitment to supporting fellow veterans.
In 2017, Stu founded VeloVets Sierra
Vista, a nonprofit that provides disabled veterans with adaptive bicycles
and a supportive community to help
them regain mobility and also connection. Laura and I were honored to ride
with Stu and the VeloVets in 2024 and
again this past December for the inaugural Stu Carter Memorial Ride held in
his honor.
Through VeloVets, Stu became a
vital resource for veterans living with
physical injuries and PTSD. He also
served as the President of Cochise Bicycle Advocates, helping secure grants
that brought dozens of bikes, bike
racks, and bicycles to Sierra Vista and
improved cycling safety and accessibility.
Beyond cycling, Stu served numerous
organizations, including the Air Force
Association of Arizona, the Sierra
Vista Commission on Disability Issues,
the Southern Arizona Veterans Memorial Cemetery Foundation, and the Volunteer Interfaith Caregiving Program.
He is remembered for his compassion,
organization, and tireless dedication to
others, as well.
Stu Carter’s legacy of service will
live on in these veterans and in our
community that he so faithfully
served.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

RECOGNIZING JOYCE REIDCOLEMAN
(Mrs. HAYES of Connecticut was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to celebrate the life of Joyce
Reid-Coleman, who passed away on December 15 after a courageous battle
with cancer.
Poochie, as she was affectionately
known, was beloved by the community.
After overcoming many challenges in
life, she decided to channel all of her
energy to giving back.
While employed at the Siemon Company, she spearheaded many annual
events and programs for employees, including the Haunted Cafe for the children of employees, a Thanksgiving
feast, and a Christmas extravaganza.
Joyce created Big, Bold and Beautiful Productions to expand her service
work to the Waterbury community. As
an entrepreneur, she opened New York
Handbags Plus Dresses in downtown
Waterbury. Through her organization,
Joyce provided the means to send chil-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:14 Jan 08, 2026

H109

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

dren to prom. She worked closely with
all of the high schools to select students to receive services. These services included gowns, tuxedos, shoes,
haircuts,
hairstyling,
manicures,
pedicures, all accessories, flowers, pictures, and even transportation.
Her love for children inspired her to
create The Back to School Kids Day,
an all-day event providing food, games,
activities, and free haircuts for all of
the children.
Her love for her community was unprecedented. During the holiday season, her organization would provide
Thanksgiving dinner to the homeless
and those in need, toys for children,
and blankets for the sick and shut in.
Even as she was in hospice, she hosted
a large Thanksgiving dinner this last
Thanksgiving.
Joyce dedicated her life to God and
was a faithful servant at Grace Baptist
Church in Waterbury, Connecticut. Her
generous, giving, and loving spirit
made her a unique blessing to so many.
Her work was celebrated in the city of
Waterbury and throughout the State of
Connecticut.
To say that her living spirit will be
missed by all who knew her is an understatement. I pray for her husband,
Gene, and the family. Joyce will surely
be missed. May Poochie rest well. She
has earned it.
f

LODI TEACHERS RECOGNITION
(Ms. POU of New Jersey was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. POU. Mr. Speaker, I rise to recognize Christine Orosz and Melanie
Panarese, two exceptional educators in
Lodi, New Jersey, whose dedication to
their students and community exemplifies the very best of public education.
A graduate of Lodi public schools,
Christine returned home to serve the
district that shaped her. Since joining
Lodi in 2012, she has grown from school
counselor to supervisor of school counseling, overseeing guidance and mental
health support for students across her
district.
Working with first-generation college aspirants, English language learners, and students from working-class
families, Christine has demystified college applications and financial aid. She
has opened doors that once seemed out
of reach.
Her leadership has helped raise Lodi’s
high school graduation rate from
roughly three-in-four students to nearly 90 percent.
Melanie Panarese, an English teacher
at Lodi High School, brings the same
commitment to her classroom every
single day. With two decades in the
profession and 7 years serving Lodi students, Melanie’s lessons encourage critical thinking and creativity.
She also pioneered an academic yearbook course allowing students to design, write, and produce the school’s
yearbook, building collaboration and
pride in their work. Colleagues praise

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

her exceptional ability to make every
student feel seen and valued.
Both Christine and Melanie were
named New Jersey Exemplary Educators in 2025, an honor reserved for
educators who demonstrate true leadership and positive influence on students and colleagues.
At a time when school districts face
growing challenges and diminishing resources, educators like Christine and
Melanie continue to step up, providing
stability, opportunity, and hope for
young men and women.
Together, their work reminds us that
investment in public education is ultimately an investment in our communities and our future.
Christine and Melanie represent the
very best of public education, and I am
proud to honor them today.
PATERSON SCHOOLS FUNDING

Ms. POU. Mr. Speaker, while we are
talking about education in America, I
want to talk about something more serious: the Department of Education’s
continued war on our schools.
Last month, without warning, the
Department informed eight schools in
our district that it was rescinding $8
million in critical funding.
I urgently appealed to Secretary
McMahon. My office met with the Department, and our school districts repeatedly sought engagement. We were
ignored.
Over the holidays, the Department
informed us that the cuts were final
and will begin immediately.
Over the next 3 years alone, schools
in our district will lose millions of dollars promised and planned for. The program has already shown positive educational outcomes, and the negative
consequences for our kids will be felt
for years to come.
Our school districts have been willing
to work with the Trump administration to remedy any issue to find a fair
path forward, but that willingness has
not been matched.
Across the U.S., the Department of
Education
is
dismantling
public
schools. New Jersey is the latest victim.
I will continue working with our district school officials to use every single
tool available to restore this funding
and to fight to support public education. I will not give up on our children.
f

RECOGNIZING AND THANKING
JOANNE HORN
(Mr. SMUCKER of Pennsylvania was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. SMUCKER. Mr. Speaker, today I
rise to recognize and thank an extraordinary public servant, Joanne Horn,
who has retired after decades of faithful service to the people of Pennsylvania’s 11th Congressional District.
Joanne has been a valued member of
my staff since 2017, and before that, she
served for 20 years working for Congressman Joe Pitts. For nearly three

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.011

H07JAPT1

H110

decades, Joanne has been a steady,
compassionate presence for constituents across the 11th District who needed help navigating Washington’s vast
alphabet soup of agencies and departments.
We did some calculation, and during
her time in my office alone, not counting her time with Congressman Pitts,
Joanne helped more than 7,500 individuals and secured over $46.8 million in
savings and benefits that were rightfully owed to the people we serve.
Those numbers only tell part of the
story. Joanne always helped seniors
with Social Security, families navigating economic assistance during
COVID, veterans, and countless others
who felt overwhelmed and unheard
until Joanne stepped in.
She didn’t just do what we call casework. She actually changed lives. Joanne treated every constituent with
dignity, persistence, and care, and she
never gave up on someone who needed
help.
There is truly no one quite like Joanne Horn. Our office, district, and
Commonwealth are better because of
her service, and we are deeply grateful
as she begins this next chapter.
b 1100

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

CELEBRATING A CENTURY OF ROOT’S COUNTRY
MARKET

Mr. SMUCKER. Mr. Speaker, I am
pleased to congratulate and recognize
Root’s Country Market on their 100th
anniversary.
Root’s Country Market is a farmer’s
market and auction based in Manheim,
Pennsylvania. The market’s history
stretches back to 1925 when it was
founded by A.W. Root as a poultry auction.
Since then, Root’s has expanded to
include homegrown produce, handmade
goods, and a flea market, the last of
which was acquired in 2005.
Today, there are 250 stands in Root’s
Country Market, 180 stands at Root’s
Old Mill Flea Market across the street,
and two auctions. Root’s operates
every Tuesday year-round and sees up
to 10,000 visitors each week.
While seeing tremendous growth in
the century since its founding, the
market has stayed true to its roots.
Root’s remains family-owned and is
currently led by fifth-generation market master Emily Longenecker Rineer.
What began as a poultry auction one
century ago has become a staple of
Lancaster County’s heritage. As Root’s
Country Market celebrates 100 years in
business, I thank the family and their
stand holders for making our community a vibrant place.
Congratulations to the Root’s Country Market, and I wish them another
century of success.
CONGRATULATING CONSTITUENTS NAMED 2025–
2026 PENNSYLVANIA FFA OFFICERS

Mr. SMUCKER. Mr. Speaker, I am
pleased to congratulate and recognize
the three individuals from Pennsylvania’s 11th Congressional District who
were installed as 2025–2026 State offi-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

cers for the Pennsylvania FFA: State
President Sarah Firestone, State Vice
President Sally Bollinger, and State
Secretary Leah Flinchbaugh.
Having emerged from a rigorous
nomination and election process, a
total of seven State officers were chosen to lead the Pennsylvania FFA this
year. Three of the seven individuals belong to chapters in Pennsylvania’s 11th
Congressional District.
Sarah Firestone, the new president,
is a member of the Garden Spot FFA
Chapter and a graduate of LampeterStrasburg High School. The new vice
president, Sally Bollinger, is a member
of the Cloister FFA Chapter and is a
graduate of Ephrata High School. The
new secretary, Leah Flinchbaugh, is a
member of the Eastern York FFA
Chapter and a graduate of Eastern
York High School.
Agriculture is crucial to Lancaster
and York Counties, and the newly
elected officers have demonstrated
both passion for and knowledge of our
local community.
I commend Sarah Firestone, Sally
Bollinger, and Leah Flinchbaugh for
their leadership in the Pennsylvania
FFA. As they settle into their new
roles and prepare for bright futures
ahead, I wish them continued success
in all of their endeavors.
f

MARKING ANNIVERSARY OF LOS
ANGELES FIRE
(Ms. CHU of California was recognized
to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. CHU. Mr. Speaker, 1 year ago
today, the communities of Altadena
and Pasadena that I represent in California were struck by tragedy. In just a
matter of hours, the Eaton fire, driven
by hurricane-force winds reaching 90
miles an hour, forever changed the
communities my constituents have
called home for generations.
The fire destroyed over 9,000 structures, most of them single-family
homes. It scorched over 14,000 acres,
decimating entire neighborhoods and
turning places of worship, schools, restaurants, and community institutions
to rubble.
Most tragically, it took the lives of
19 of our loved ones, neighbors, and
friends. We have recently learned that
440 additional people across southern
California died in the month following
the fire due to delays in medical care
and exposure to toxic elements.
The Eaton fire was the second most
destructive wildfire in California’s history. Those we lost helped to shape the
fabric of their communities, and their
absence has left a void that cannot be
filled. They are in our thoughts on this
1-year anniversary of the fire.
We remember Anthony Mitchell, Sr.,
a 68-year-old father, grandfather, and
great-grandfather who brought everybody together, and we remember his
son, Justin, who was born with cerebral
palsy and was known for his infectious
smile. Anthony and Justin both died
waiting for help that they would never
receive.

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

We remember Victor Shaw, who resided in his beloved Altadena home for
60 years and who died with a garden
hose in his hand, fighting to save his
property.
These are just a few of the stories of
those we lost, all of whom were taken
far too soon. That is why, today, I have
introduced a resolution with Representative SHERMAN and Senators
SCHIFF and PADILLA to commemorate
and honor all the lives that we lost in
these fires.
Even in our darkest days and every
day since, survivors have shown extraordinary resilience and strength.
First responders put their lives on the
line to save others. Neighbors opened
their doors to offer shelter to those
who had nowhere to go. Organizations
big and small came together to make
sure our neighbors who had just lost
everything had a warm meal, a roof
over their heads, and a shoulder to cry
on.
Federal, State, and local governments mobilized to get families the
help they needed, help that has made a
tremendous impact on our road to recovery and rebuilding. Emergency operation hubs were propped up in a matter of hours. Recovery centers were
created at an amazingly rapid speed so
that survivors could access free individualized guidance and assistance
when they needed it most.
On top of that, FEMA approved over
$150 million in housing and other emergency assistance. SBA approved over $3
billion in loans for small businesses,
homeowners, and renters. The U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers did an amazingly fast residential wildfire cleanup.
It was the fastest in our Nation’s history.
These efforts saved lives and laid the
groundwork for recovery, but the work
is nowhere close to being complete.
Every day that Congress and the
Trump administration continue to
delay, recovery becomes harder and
more expensive. Families have already
waited 1 year while rebuilding costs
rise, housing shortages deepen, and displacement assistance expires.
Disaster aid is not a favor. It is a responsibility. Today, 70 percent of
Eaton fire survivors have not yet returned home, and the majority have
not even begun the arduous process of
rebuilding. Almost one-half of survivors still reside in either temporary
or unstable housing. Families are exhausting their savings, taking on debt,
skipping medical care, and making impossible choices just to get by.
Small businesses are struggling to reopen. Families whose homes are still
standing but are contaminated with
dangerous toxins are being forced to
decide between a place to sleep and
their health.
Survivors need our help, and they
need it right now. That is why I say
something very important: President
Trump and congressional Republicans
must fulfill their responsibility to help
communities impacted by disaster and

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.012

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

fully deliver Governor Newsom’s $34
billion disaster supplemental request
with no strings attached.
I have joined Democrats and Republicans across California in urging the
administration to act immediately.
Families can’t afford further delay. We
do not abandon people after a disaster.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

EXTEND ENHANCED PREMIUM TAX
CREDIT
(Ms. DEGETTE of Colorado was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. DEGETTE. Mr. Speaker, right
now, we have a chance to protect
Americans from going broke.
On January 1, families across this
country were hit by the largest
healthcare cost increases we have seen
in more than a decade. Millions of
Americans watched their premiums
more than double overnight. A family
of four making $128,000 a year—teachers, nurses, small business owners—
just got slapped with an average
$14,000-increase in their silver plan premiums.
As the senior Democrat on the
Health Subcommittee of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, I
have been raising this issue, along with
my colleagues, for many months now.
Despite the warnings, President Trump
and congressional Republicans did
nothing. They could have had a vote in
December, yet they blocked Democratic efforts to extend the Affordable
Care Act’s enhanced premium tax credits. They looked Americans in the eye
and said no.
We have an opportunity to fix this
right now. This week, we can pass the
bill that would extend the ACA’s premium tax credits for 3 years. This extension will cut premium spikes by 80
percent, on average. It will wipe out increases for lower income families. It
will save over 5 million Americans
from losing their insurance.
This is the solution. We have it in
our hands.
While this is a straightforward fix for
the short term, we know that our entire healthcare system needs to have
reform so that we can control costs.
I was part of the original team that
negotiated and passed the Affordable
Care Act. While we were forced to accept less than the universal healthcare
plan we wanted, we secured protections
that have since saved tens of thousands
of lives, ending discrimination against
people with preexisting conditions, letting parents keep their kids on their
insurance policies while the kids start
their careers, and guaranteeing that
every plan covers basic essential care.
The majority, since that time in the
last 15 years, has tried to destroy it.
They have voted more than 70 times to
repeal the Affordable Care Act and always with no replacement. They subjected the ACA to death by a thousand
cuts, offering nothing but snake oil alternatives like high-deductible plans
and health savings accounts that would
leave families high and dry.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

H111

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

When we passed the ACA on this
floor, I said this is just a start to affordable universal healthcare. Democrats have worked to improve the ACA.
That is why we passed the tax credits
in the first place. Millions of people
signed up, and they were able to sleep
without worrying about one hospital
visit bankrupting their families. My
colleagues on the other side want to rip
that away, the reason for which I have
no idea.
This crisis has shown that the only
solution
is
ultimately
universal
healthcare. I have been a cosponsor of
the Medicare for All Act since day one
because I know it will guarantee a
healthy nation. Unfortunately, my colleagues across the aisle have made it
crystal clear: They have no appetite for
meaningful reforms like Medicare for
All.
Here is what we need to do right now:
We need to extend the enhanced tax
credits. They are the only thing standing between millions of Americans and
complete financial devastation.
In my State of Colorado, we did the
right thing. The State stepped in with
our own tax credits, but not every
State is Colorado. Americans in States
like Florida and Texas will be out of
luck, and in Colorado and every other
State, we can’t afford to take this burden on forever.
We need a nationwide solution. We
have the votes for this fix. Four Republicans joined us in the petition to bring
this bill to the floor.
We must pass it. We must bring it to
the floor, pass it in the House, and send
it over to the Senate this week. President Trump must sign it into law. If we
don’t, here is the reality: Families will
drop health coverage to put food on the
table, gambling with their lives. Medical debt will bury them bill by bill,
week by week. They will keep waiting
for the Trump healthcare plan that
will be promised but will never come.
For anybody at home sitting there
asking: Do the Republicans know what
they are doing? The answer is, sadly,
yes, they do.
Americans are watching. They know
that the Democrats are fighting like
hell for them and for their healthcare.
Now, they are waiting to see if the majority has any conscience left.
It is time to vote ‘‘yes.’’
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
FONG). Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule
I, the Chair declares the House in recess until noon today.
Accordingly (at 11 o’clock and 14
minutes a.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1200
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. SIMPSON) at noon.

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

PRAYER
The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret
Grun Kibben, offered the following
prayer:
Create in us a clean heart, O God,
and put a new and steadfast spirit
within us. For You know the human
heart—its desires and its demands, its
feebleness and its faithlessness—and
yet You are quick to show us mercy.
As we approach You on this day, testify to us of Your matchless wisdom,
that even in the corners of our soul, in
our inmost beings, we would know the
conviction and the consolation of Your
eternal truth. Restore us to the wholeness that is ours when we entrust everything—heart, mind, and soul—to
You.
Grant us the joy of Your salvation
and maintain in each of our spirits the
willingness to follow Your guidance
and to yield to Your correction.
Then open our lips, that the words we
speak today will reflect the sincerity of
a faith shaped by a humble spirit, that
they will proclaim the hope of a faith
that depends on Your everlasting
promises, and that they will sing the
joy of a faith that has received the gift
of Your redeeming love.
We stand in the bounty of Your
mercy and pray in the power of Your
gracious and loving name.
Amen.
f

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair has examined the Journal of the
last day’s proceedings and announces
to the House the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Will the
gentleman from New York (Mr. LATIMER) come forward and lead the House
in the Pledge of Allegiance.
Mr. LATIMER led the Pledge of Allegiance as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

MESSAGE FROM THE SENATE
A message from the Senate by Mr.
Ferrari, one of its clerks, announced
that the Senate has passed without
amendment a bill of the House of the
following title:
H.R. 224. An act to amend section 102(a)(20)
of the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974 to require the exclusion of service-connected disability compensation when
determining whether a person is a person of
low and moderate income, a person of low income, or a person of moderate income, and
for other purposes.

The message also announced that the
Senate has passed bills of the following
for titles in which the concurrence of
the House is requested:
S. 320. An act to reauthorize the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977, and for
other purposes.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.014

H07JAPT1

H112

S. 1626. An act to reauthorize the National
Landslide Preparedness Act, and for other
purposes.
f

EXPRESSING THE PROFOUND SORROW OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON THE DEATH
OF
THE
HONORABLE
DOUG
LAMALFA
Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Speaker, I offer a
privileged resolution and ask for its
immediate consideration.
The Clerk read the resolution as follows:
H. RES. 978
Resolved, That the House has heard with
profound sorrow of the death of the Honorable Doug LaMalfa, a Representative from
the Senate of California.
Resolved, That the Clerk communicate
these resolutions to the Senate and transmit
a copy thereof to the family of the deceased.
Resolved, That when the House adjourns
today, it adjourn as a further mark of respect to the memory of the deceased.

The resolution was agreed to.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

RECOGNIZING MARK LUSK
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize
Lycoming County Sheriff Mark Lusk,
who retired Monday after 50 years of
outstanding community service.
Mark was elected as Lycoming County sheriff in 2009 and served in this role
for four consecutive terms. Over his 50year career, Mark has held a variety of
positions, including patrolman, criminal investigator, corporal, chief of police, and deputy coroner.
Mark’s leadership has been pivotal,
and he was responsible for many rescue
operations when the county experienced major floods.
Beyond his role as sheriff, Mark has
volunteered for the Old Lycoming
Township Volunteer Fire Company for
45 years. He has also worked alongside
the local VFW and American Legion.
Mark has received various awards for
his leadership over his career. In 2007,
he was recognized by the Lycoming
County Department of Public Safety
and the Pennsylvania State House of
Representatives.
Mr. Speaker, Mark has dedicated his
career to serving the community and
answering the call of those in need. I
thank him for his service, and I wish
him the very best.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

WAR FOR OIL
(Mr. DOGGETT asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Speaker, unable
to run America, Trump says that he
will run Venezuela.
Unwilling to provide help to Americans facing soaring health premiums,
he offers new tax subsidies to Big Oil.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:32 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

Long eager to drag America back to
the ugly glory days of White nationalism under his hero, President William McKinley, Trump now is apparently going to make imperialism great
again, also.
Declaring that he and he alone will
dominate the Western Hemisphere, he
sends a chilling message to his fellow
authoritarians, like Putin, Xi, and others: Might makes right. Just stay in
your own neighborhood.
With no interest in democracy, he
has made clear that this is a war for oil
and that he will work with any pawn
that will get it to him, even those who
are launching a new wave of repression
in Venezuela.
Colombia, Mexico, Greenland—he is
handing Putin a gift by dividing NATO.
Our allies had to meet yesterday to defend Denmark on Greenland from this
bully in chief.
So many conflicts but no plan to provide security to American families. He
ignores our needs.
f

RECOGNIZING CO-OP CITY TIMES
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, in a
world where local news services—newspapers and radio stations—are disappearing on a frightening level, it is
important to recognize and salute
those organizations that are continuing to provide information about
our localities, the lives and times of
the individuals of our communities.
In the Bronx—specifically, in Co-op
City—we have a public debt of gratitude that we owe to the Co-op City
Times, which is serving the 40,000-plus
people who reside there.
Owned and operated by the Riverbay
Corporation, the Co-op City Times, led
by Rozaan Boone, editor-in-chief, and
her team of reporters, covers the work
of the Co-op Board of Directors and the
many organizations of Co-op City, from
the NAACP branch to The American
Legion post and every other group in
between.
The Co-op City Times provides weekly news, free of charge, that covers the
events and information of the individual building organizations, local
arts and performances, and the churches and houses of worship and all of
their events, and they spotlight the
persons and the personalities that
move Co-op City every day.
I thank Co-op City Times from the
floor of the House of Representatives
for showing that local news can still be
vocal news.
f

END HUNGER NOW
(Mr. MCGOVERN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, after
months of delay, the Trump adminis-

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tration finally released an annual food
security survey, which confirms what
we know to be true: Hunger is increasing in this country.
Nearly 48 million Americans, including 14 million children, in the richest
country in the history of the world, are
food insecure, meaning that they lack
the money and resources to acquire
adequate food to feed their families.
Those are moms, dads, grandparents,
and kids who are unable to consistently access the most basic necessity:
food.
Mr. Speaker, it is no wonder that the
Trump administration has unilaterally
canceled all future food security reports. They know that their big, ugly
bill and Trump’s terrible economy are
going to cause food insecurity to skyrocket, and they are desperate to hide
the data from the American people.
Mr. Speaker, I am here to say that
Democrats in Congress are not going to
stand by while Trump tears apart basic
needs programs. We will continue calling attention to the increase in hunger
caused by this administration and
their Republican allies in Congress,
and we will always fight for a future
when we finally end hunger now.
f

b 1210
ELECTING A MEMBER TO A CERTAIN STANDING COMMITTEE OF
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, by direction of the Republican Conference, I
send to the desk a privileged resolution
and ask for its immediate consideration.
The Clerk read the resolution, as follows:
H. RES. 979
Resolved, That the following named Member be, and is hereby, elected to the following standing committee of the House of
Representatives:
COMMITTEE ON ETHICS: Mr. Knott.

The resolution was agreed to.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 4593, SAVING HOMEOWNERS
FROM
OVERREGULATION WITH EXCEPTIONAL RINSING ACT; PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 5184, AFFORDABLE HOUSING OVER MANDATING EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
ACT; AND PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 6938, COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE; ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, by direction of the Committee on Rules, I
call up House Resolution 977 and ask
for its immediate consideration.
The Clerk read the resolution as follows:

E:\CR\FM\A07JA7.002

H07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 7, 2026

H. RES. 977
Resolved, That upon adoption of this resolution it shall be in order to consider in the
House the bill (H.R. 4593) to amend the Energy Policy and Conservation Act to revise
the definition of showerhead. All points of
order against consideration of the bill are
waived. The bill shall be considered as read.
All points of order against provisions in the
bill are waived. The previous question shall
be considered as ordered on the bill and on
any amendment thereto to final passage
without intervening motion except: (1) one
hour of debate equally divided and controlled
by the chair and ranking minority member
of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
or their respective designees; and (2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 2. Upon adoption of this resolution it
shall be in order to consider in the House the
bill (H.R. 5184) to prohibit the Secretary of
Energy from enforcing energy efficiency
standards applicable to manufactured housing, and for other purposes. All points of
order against consideration of the bill are
waived. The amendment in the nature of a
substitute recommended by the Committee
on Energy and Commerce now printed in the
bill shall be considered as adopted. The bill,
as amended, shall be considered as read. All
points of order against provisions in the bill,
as amended, are waived. The previous question shall be considered as ordered on the
bill, as amended, and on any further amendment thereto, to final passage without intervening motion except: (1) one hour of debate
equally divided and controlled by the chair
and ranking minority member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce or their respective designees; and (2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 3. Upon adoption of this resolution it
shall be in order to consider in the House the
bill (H.R. 6938) making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes. All
points of order against consideration of the
bill are waived. The bill shall be considered
as read. All points of order against provisions in the bill are waived. The previous
question shall be considered as ordered on
the bill and on any amendment thereto to
final passage without intervening motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally divided
and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees; (2)
proceedings under section 4 of this resolution; and (3) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 4. The proceedings referred to in section 3 of this resolution are as follows:
(a) after debate pursuant to section 3 of
this resolution, the Chair shall, in the order
specified by the Chair, put the question on
(1) retaining Division A and (2) retaining Divisions B and C;
(b) the yeas and nays shall be considered as
ordered on each of the questions under subsection (a); and
(c) after disposition of the questions under
subsection (a), the Chair shall put the question on engrossment and third reading of the
text comprising those portions of the bill retained pursuant to subsection (a).
SEC. 5. In the engrossment of H.R. 6938, the
Clerk shall conform division and section
numbers and make related corrections to
cross-references in the event a portion of the
bill is not retained pursuant to section 4 of
this resolution.
SEC. 6. The chair of the Committee on Appropriations may insert in the Congressional
Record not later than January 9, 2026, such
material as he may deem explanatory of H.R.
6938.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentlewoman from Indiana is recognized
for 1 hour.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

H113

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, for the
purpose of debate only, I yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentleman
from Massachusetts (Mr. MCGOVERN),
pending which I yield myself such time
as I may consume. During consideration of this resolution, all time yielded is for the purpose of debate only.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days in which to
revise and extend their remarks.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Indiana?
There was no objection.
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, earlier
this morning, the Rules Committee
met to produce a rule, H. Res. 977, providing for the House’s consideration on
the following three bills:
First, the rule provides for H.R. 4593,
the SHOWER Act, to be considered
under a closed rule. It provides 1 hour
of debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, or their respective
designees, and provides for one motion
to recommit.
Second, the rule provides for H.R.
5184, the Affordable HOMES Act. H.R.
5184 would be considered under a closed
rule. It also provides for 1 hour of debate equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Energy and
Commerce, or their respective designees, and provides for one motion to
recommit.
Third, the rule provides for H.R. 6938,
Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy
and Water Development; and Interior
and Environment Appropriations Act,
2026. H.R. 6938 would be considered
under a closed rule, and it also provides
1 hour of debate equally divided and
controlled by the chair and ranking
minority member of the Committee on
Appropriations, or their designees, and
provides for one motion to recommit.
The rule provides for separate votes
on division A and divisions B and C.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of this
rule and in support of the underlying
legislation. These bills reflect a simple
governing philosophy: freedom of
choice, fiscal responsibility, regulatory
clarity, and a government that focuses
on the American people, not bureaucracy.
Let me begin with the appropriations
package. Beginning with H.R. 6938, the
Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy
and Water Development; and Interior
and Environment Appropriations Act
of 2026, these bills make targeted, disciplined investments to strengthen
American energy dominance, reinforce
our nuclear deterrent capabilities, support law enforcement, and expand access to critical minerals. These policy
priorities are shared by President
Trump, congressional Republicans, and
millions of Americans. Importantly,
this
appropriations
package
ends
Biden-era policies enacting a more con-

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

servative vision, all while cutting fiscal year 2026 spending by nearly $2 billion, delivering significant savings for
taxpayers. Let me repeat that: Passing
full year appropriations ensures we are
not defaulting to Biden-era spending
levels or radical priorities. It allows
Congress to reset funding levels in support of the conservative policies
aligned with President Trump’s agenda.
The Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations
Act of 2026 provides $78 billion in discretionary funding, including resources
to stop the flow of fentanyl, and provides critical funding to support State
and local law enforcement. It increases
funding for the Drug Enforcement Administration to combat the fentanyl
crisis, supports the Department of Justice grant programs that target opioids
and child exploitation, and facilitates
immigration enforcement. It protects
the Second Amendment by keeping
long-standing safeguards in place that
prevent Federal agencies from restricting lawful firearms, ammunition, and
sporting equipment without congressional approval, and decreases funding
for the ATF. It also maintains pro-life
Hyde protections to ensure taxpayer
dollars are not used to fund abortions.
The Energy and Water Development
and Related Agencies Appropriations
Act directs $58 billion towards national
security and strengthens America’s energy independence. These investments
are essential to restoring American
leadership in nuclear energy and
achieving the administration’s goal of
dramatically expanding nuclear capacity by mid-century. At the same time,
they eliminate wasteful Biden-era offices that prioritize ideology over outcomes.
The Interior, Environment and Related Agencies Appropriations Act provides $38 billion to expand access to
public lands, reverse harmful regulatory overreach, and rein in agency
budgets. It increases funding for responsible onshore and offshore energy
development in oil and gas, exempts
farmers and ranchers from burdensome
greenhouse gas emissions reporting
schemes, and reduces funding for the
EPA.
In addition to these wins for the
American people, I am proud that my
office was able to secure $8 million in
community project funding for Indiana’s Ninth Congressional District.
This funding will support projects, including a riverbank stabilization plan
for the Ohio River shoreline in Clarksville, Indiana, and support booster
pump stations that are needed to increase water capacity to serve constituents in Bloomington, Monroe
County, and the home of Indiana University football and students at Indiana University.
Funding in this package will also
provide residents and businesses in
Brown County with long, and greatly
needed, sewer services and support for

E:\CR\FM\A07JA7.005

H07JAPT1

H114

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

the city of Madison’s stormwater mitigation project to reduce flooding and
improve water quality.
These investments will support critical infrastructure and local priorities
that communities themselves identified, bringing improvements from
shoreline protection, to water systems,
to supporting economic development
that will directly benefit residents
across the Ninth District.
b 1220
Together, these bills reflect a disciplined approach to governing by investing in community priorities, cutting unnecessary spending, and reducing good governance.
Turning next to H.R. 4593, the SHOWER Act, this is a simple bill with a simple goal: end the regulatory whiplash
and return consumer choice and common sense to a basic household product. A showerhead should not require
extensive regulation. Yet, under the
Obama and Biden administrations, bureaucrats redefined a clear term to advance an ideological agenda creating
confusion for manufacturers and frustration for consumers.
This was the status quo under the
leadership of Democrats—regulate everything in our lives right down to our
showerheads. It is incredible if you
think about it. This may seem like a
ridiculous bill to be considering by our
Democrat counterparts. Believe me, it
is ridiculous that their policies would
require legislation to prevent this kind
of government intrusion, but here we
are.
The Biden administration regulated
every nozzle in every American home
individually, reducing water pressure
and frustrating homeowners, all while
increasing costs for compliance. Ending this rule will permanently save
Americans billions of dollars, reduce
regulatory bloat, and restore a workable standard.
The Department of Energy estimates
that eliminating this rule, along with
dozens of related inflationary standards, will save consumers $11 billion
and will cut more than 125,000 words
from the Code of Federal Regulations.
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I turn to H.R.
5184, the Affordable HOMES Act, which
I was proud to author with Congressman MIKE FLOOD. This bill addresses a
real problem in the housing market,
one that affects our most vulnerable
homebuyers. It reduces the upfront
costs of buying a home, making it easier for Americans to achieve the dream
of homeownership. The Affordable
HOMES Act restores clarity by placing
manufactured housing standards back
under the Office of Housing and Urban
Development where they belong and
eliminating duplicative regulatory authority by the Department of Energy.
It overturns a 2022 Biden administration rule that increased manufactured
housing costs, again, without regard
for what consumers want or how the
market actually works prioritizing energy efficiency under the Green New

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

Deal and directly contributing to the
housing affordability issues we see
today.
The objective here is clarity so manufacturers can build more homes and
families can afford them.
Mr. Speaker, this rule moves legislation that reflects fiscal discipline, regulatory sanity, consumer choice, and a
commitment to affordability and
growth. I urge my colleagues to support the rule and the underlying bills.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentlewoman from Indiana
for yielding me the customary 30 minutes, and I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Mr. Speaker, it is a new year in
America, but judging by the remarks of
the gentlewoman from Indiana, it is
the same old Republican Party. Here is
where we are at on January 7, 2026. We
have a Republican President who promised to put America first. Instead, in
just under a year he has bailed out Argentina, bombed Venezuela, gave Qatar
an air force base in Idaho, pardoned the
former Honduran drug trafficking
president, and cozied up to dictators all
around the world.
We have a Republican majority that
promised to bring down prices. Guess
what. Prices are going up. Families
across this country are hurting. People
are losing health coverage because you
guys chose deliberately, Mr. Speaker,
to let the Affordable Care Act tax credits expire. Rent keeps going up. Grocery prices keep going up. Paychecks
are not keeping pace.
Meanwhile, the President of the
United States is openly boasting that
America is now running a foreign country. His own advisers can’t even answer
basic questions about what the hell
comes next, what the plan is, how this
ends, or when the Venezuelan people
can expect democracy.
We have a Speaker of the House who
is the weakest and most incompetent
Speaker of the House in the history of
this body. I mean, honest to God, Mr.
Speaker, I don’t know whether that is
a good thing for the country or a bad
thing. On one hand, he is so incompetent he can’t get anything done. On
the other hand, the things he wants to
get done are crazy.
Don’t ask him his opinion on anything. He doesn’t have one. He doesn’t
watch the news. I don’t even think he
goes outside. I don’t know what keeps
him so busy that he doesn’t have an
opinion on anything, but he certainly
isn’t legislating.
With all that is going on—conflict,
economic strain, and real crises facing
the American people—let us turn to
the calendar and see what important
issue that this Republican majority
has us debating on the floor this week,
Mr. Speaker. Do you want to know
what it is? It is not housing, not food
prices, not rent, not war and peace, foreign policy, or America’s future, no,
no, no, no. All of us are here on the

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

floor right now at the behest of this
Republican
majority
to
debate
showerheads. You can’t make this stuff
up.
As if that weren’t bad enough, they
are still trying to pass last year’s appropriations bills. Let that sink in.
These are bills that should have been
passed months ago. That is the state of
governance under this Republican majority: late, unserious, and completely
detached from the lives of the people
they claim to represent.
One of these appropriations bills
funds the Department of Justice and
Federal law enforcement. That brings
us to something Republicans would
rather forget, but what our country
must not: Yesterday marked the 5-year
anniversary of the January 6 insurrection.
It has been 5 years since a violent
mob, whipped into a frenzy by the lie
that Trump won the election even
though he lost, stormed into this building to overturn a free and fair election.
Mr. Speaker, it has been 5 years since
law enforcement officers, Capitol Police, and others were beaten, crushed,
stabbed, pepper sprayed and hunted
down by a MAGA mob determined to
overturn the election and stop the
peaceful transfer of power.
They hunted Members of Congress,
Democrats and Republicans alike. I can
still remember them chanting ‘‘hang
Mike Pence’’ because I was here that
day, Mr. Speaker, right where you are
sitting right now, right in that chair. I
was one of the last Members to leave
the House floor, and I watched officers
barricade the Chamber doors behind me
here with furniture, knowing that they
were outnumbered but refusing to surrender. I smelled the tear gas. I felt the
chaos. I saw the mob outside of the
Speaker’s lobby.
The officers who were here that day
saved lives. They upheld their oath to
the Constitution. Many of them were
hospitalized. Many were permanently
injured. Some died either from injuries
sustained that day or by suicide after
the trauma that they endured.
Nearly 2,000 people were arrested,
tried, and found guilty for their crimes
that day. What did Donald Trump do?
He pardoned every single one of them.
He pardoned the criminals who beat officers bloody, desecrated this building,
and tried to tear American democracy
apart. In my book those pardons were
unforgivable, unforgivable.
Do you know what he did yesterday?
He put up a disgusting, disgraceful
statement on the official White House
website lying about what happened
that day, blaming the police, blaming
the police and calling everyone who
was here that day innocent. There was
not a single mention, not a single mention of the 140 officers who were assaulted that day with weapons like
bear spray, stun guns, hockey sticks,
broken pieces of furniture, and flag
poles—not a single mention.
In fact, the White House even put up
a statement that ‘‘zero law enforcement officers lost their lives,’’ which is

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.022

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

a disgusting lie. It is a disgusting lie
and a disgrace to the memory of Officer
Brian Sicknick who laid in honor in
the rotunda of this Capitol Building
after he died in the aftermath of January 6.
After all of that, after all of that,
Speaker JOHNSON still refuses to display a plaque in the Capitol Building to
honor the officers who stood up to the
mob that day, a memorial he is required by law to put up. I mean, you
know, here it is, Mr. Speaker. Here it is
right here. That is what the Speaker
refuses to put up.
b 1230
This is what it looks like. It is not
the real one because the real one is
downstairs in storage somewhere.
Speaker JOHNSON refuses to hang it up.
Why? Why? We all know why. We all
know why. He won’t hang it up because
he is Donald Trump’s puppet. That is
all this is. If he hangs up the plaque,
Trump might get mad at him. What a
pathetic and shameful abdication of
duty.
I am sure the gentlewoman won’t address a single point I made here about
January 6. I don’t know whether she is
afraid of the repercussions, but the bottom line is that I just want to say, for
the record: Shame on Republicans for
trying to cover up their complicity in
what happened that day, and shame on
them for wasting the people’s time on
showerheads while ignoring the economic, democratic, and moral crises
staring this country in the face.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
I am not sure if the gentleman from
Massachusetts heard my opening, but
this is about housing. We literally have
a bill called the Affordable HOMES
Act, and it addresses the cost of housing.
He also commented that we are only
appropriating and considering our appropriations bills yet today, but we
weren’t the ones who shut down the
government for 41 days, preventing us
from doing our appropriations work.
They did this. The Democrats shut
down the government to fight for taxpayer-funded healthcare subsidies that
would go to the wealthiest ObamaCare
enrollees across the Nation.
Think about that, Mr. Speaker. They
shut down the functioning of the government, preventing us from appropriating on the very good things that
we talked about in the opening comments, meaning millionaires would be
eligible to receive tens of thousands of
dollars of taxpayer-funded subsidies for
their ObamaCare plans. This would
give $350 billion in taxpayer bailouts
not to the American people, but to big
health insurance companies, all while
they are receiving record profits.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

H115

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

This incentivizes bad actors to manipulate individuals to sign up for coverage through the ACA marketplace,
oftentimes without people even realizing that they had been enrolled.
This is government waste, fraud, and
abuse at its worst, and I am proud the
House Republicans stood up against
that.
The gentleman from Massachusetts
also referenced the SHOWER Act that
we have here today. I would just like to
say that I will stand up here every day
of every week to restore freedom of
choice and freedom of movement back
to the American people.
You have to start somewhere, Mr.
Speaker, from electric vehicle mandates to prohibitions on gas stoves and
heaters. Showerhead efficiency and efficiency standards in affordable homes
and manufactured housing will cause
the cost of homeownership to go up and
void American Dream opportunities for
millions of Americans, but that is business as usual with Democrats in Congress. Closing businesses and demanding quarantine is Big Brother knows
best, and that is what the Democrats
are best at.
House Republicans are going to fight
back to restore that personal choice,
all while ensuring fiscal responsibility.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Texas (Mr. WEBER).
Mr. WEBER of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentlewoman for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in strong support
of House Resolution 977, the combined
rule for the consideration of H.R. 4593,
H.R. 5184, and H.R. 6938.
Mr. Speaker, it gets fun listening to
the fairy tales from the other side from
time to time. I have to give them that.
This rule advances the combined appropriations package that includes
critical investments for Texas’ 14th
Congressional District, which I am
proud to represent. My district is home
to some of the largest refineries in the
United States, three LNG gas export
terminals, numerous petrochemical facilities, and vital energy infrastructure
that keeps our Nation running.
The energy produced in southeast
Texas, Mr. Speaker, moves across
America and to our allies through pipelines, trains, trucks, and even cargo
ships. Federal provisions in this bill ensure that energy continues to flow reliably and securely.
Funding for the coastal Texas protection and restoration project, more locally known as the coastal spine
project, is included in this underlying
bill. This critical project focuses on
flood damage reduction and environmental enhancement as well as economic resiliency. It could save $2.3 billion, with a b, annually by reducing
flood damage and improving over 6,000
acres of coastal marsh and land to help
mitigate storm surges.
Just as importantly, it protects 30
percent of the Nation’s refining capacity, 42 percent of specialty chemical
feedstock, and 80 percent of our military-grade fuel supply.

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The bill also provides over $9 million
to upgrade the Sabine-Neches Waterway, which moves over 194 million tons
of cargo each year and is projected to
exceed 210 million tons in the near future. This waterway supports approximately 375,000 jobs.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman.
Mr. WEBER of Texas. It is indispensable to America’s economy and energy
security.
Mr. Speaker, this appropriations
package delivers real results not just
for southeast Texas but for the Nation.
I urge my colleagues to support the
rule and this critical legislation.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, let me just respond to
the gentlewoman: A lot of words, a ton
of words, but as I predicted, there is
not a single word about the brave officers who defended this Chamber and
defended every Member of Congress on
January 6 who were attacked by a violent mob. I heard not a single word, not
a single word.
I just also want to remind the gentlewoman, because maybe she forgot, regrettably, Republicans are in charge.
They are in charge of the House, they
are in charge of the Senate, and they
are in charge of the White House. So
they can complain about Joe Biden and
they can complain about Democrats,
but they are running this show.
I was really fascinated to hear the
gentlewoman talk about the shutdown.
Again, the Republicans are in charge of
everything. They have the votes to do
whatever they want to do, but when
the government shut down—it was a
Republican shutdown, by the way.
When it shut down, they could have
worked on the appropriations bills, by
the way, which were already late by
definition. By the time of the shutdown, they were already late. Republicans could have worked on getting
the appropriations work done.
What did my Republican friends do?
They decided to go home and take a
vacation. They just left. They walked
away. They did not do a thing. They
went on an extended vacation rather
than doing the people’s business.
I have to say to the gentlewoman:
With all due respect, I do townhalls all
the time. I don’t know whether the
gentlewoman does. I know a lot of Republicans do not, but when I do my
townhalls, what I hear from people is
about the high cost of living. I hear
about the high cost of groceries. I hear
about the high cost of healthcare. I
hear about the high cost of housing.
Mr. Speaker, do you know what I
don’t hear people talk about? It is
showerheads. When they talk about
freedom and liberty, they don’t talk
about showerheads. I don’t know what
planet my Republican friends are living on, but I have news for them: The
number one issue in America is not
showerheads.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.024

H07JAPT1

H116

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

It is healthcare. It is affordability. It
is housing. It is making sure that they
can support their families. People look
at life through their kitchen window,
and they have to pay bills. They have
to make sure that they make ends
meet, and right now, under this Republican economy, life is too damn expensive. People can’t afford basic needs.
I just gave a 1-minute speech before
we got into this debate about the increase in hunger in this country.
Do you know what the Republican response to that is, Mr. Speaker, what
the Trump administration is doing to
combat hunger?
They are now banning the monthly
report, which gives us the data on how
many people are hungry in this country. No, we are not investing in programs to help combat hunger. We are
not fighting for higher wages. We are
not trying to lower healthcare costs.
We are just going to hide the information from people so that people don’t
know how bad the situation is.
So, again, I appreciate all the gentlewoman’s words, but, quite frankly,
they ring hollow. What people want us
to do is to fight to make life more affordable and more reasonable for them.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
b 1240
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I remind my colleague
on the other side of the aisle that
House Republicans did pass a funding
mechanism out of the House of Representatives to the Senate, and because
of the 60-vote rule in the Senate we did
need the help of Democrats in the Senate to fund the government. They held
out, again, for the purpose of funding
taxpayer-funded healthcare subsidies
to benefit the wealthiest ObamaCare
enrollees in the Nation and fat cat insurance companies.
I would also note that much of what
the gentleman has been referring to,
the deflection is like a magic trick.
You can say words, just like he accused
me of saying many words, but the facts
outweigh the deflection, which is that
it took much of 2025 to rid ourselves of
the sleepy Joe, America last, Biden
economic hangover, but Republicans in
Congress and President Trump have delivered. America is now reaching new
milestones under Republican leadership, turning the tide back to American greatness.
Let’s just look at the economy. Quarter three GDP growth was a roaring 4.3
percent, the fastest growth in years.
The deficit is being addressed. The Federal Government’s cumulative deficit
for fiscal year 2026 at the end of November was 19 percent lower than the
same time last year. Core inflation is
at 2.6 percent, the lowest we have seen
in 4 years.
Rents are falling month after month,
and shelter inflation is at a 4-year low.
Gas prices are down to their lowest levels in 4 years. Stocks were at near

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

highs by the end of the year, with the
S&P climbing by 17 percent in 2025.
All of this occurred before the gains
of the Working Families Tax Cut Act
are realized, and we are just getting
started.
It will take us a while to recover
from the years of inflationary policies
of the Biden administration, but the
facts show that House Republicans
under President Trump’s leadership are
delivering on promises to reduce costs
for American families.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman
from
Arizona
(Mr.
CISCOMANI).
Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in support of this bipartisan conference agreement covering the Commerce, Justice, and Science; Energy
and Water; and the Interior and Environment appropriations bills.
This package shows that when Congress works together, we can deliver
full-year funding that meets the needs
of our communities. This package
makes smart, responsible investments
in public safety, energy reliability, our
public lands and, for those of us in the
West, water conservation and infrastructure.
As the only member of the Arizona
delegation in both the Senate and the
House serving on the Appropriations
Committee, I have worked to make
sure this bill delivers real results back
home in Arizona’s Sixth Congressional
District. That includes specific Community Project Funding requests developed directly with local leaders who
know their communities best and targeted at the issues that matter to our
communities the most.
This bill supports, for example, community safety vehicle fleet modernization so that Tucson’s first responders
have reliable vehicles when every second counts in their line of work. It also
includes funding for the Sahuarita Police Department radio replacement, so
officers can communicate clearly and
safely in the field.
As the Colorado River continues to
face a worsening drought, water security is more important than ever. This
package helps fund water reclamation
facility upgrades in Tombstone that
will improve efficiency and replace
aging infrastructure.
It supports the multi-municipality
sewer treatment project that modernizes systems and protects public health
across multiple communities in Graham County.
It also invests in source water system improvements at Marana Regional
Airport and the Pioneer Well PFAS
Treatment Project to help ensure safe
and reliable water for families and
businesses. These are practical, locally
requested projects that are transparent, accountable, and focused on results.
Mr. Speaker, this conference agreement reflects a responsible use of taxpayer dollars while strengthening public safety, water security, and critical
infrastructure. I am proud of the work

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

we have accomplished, and I strongly
urge my colleagues to support this
package.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, again, the gentlewoman
said nothing about January 6 or nothing about the brave men and women
who protected this Chamber and all of
us on that terrible, terrible day.
I have to say that I was more than
amused by listening to the gentlewoman spout about how great everything is right now: The Trump economy is perfect. Everybody is doing
great. Everything is wonderful. Everything is terrific.
I don’t know whether the gentlewoman holds townhalls or not, but I
wonder whether the voters of Indiana
actually share that point of view. I
have got to tell you, I don’t think so
because I don’t think the voters in general in this country, the citizens of this
country, share that view.
Every poll that I have seen, every
townhall that I have been at—by the
way, not only in my district but in
other States—people have complained
about how expensive things are. They
say Trump’s economy is making life
more expensive, more difficult. The
price of health insurance is going
through the roof because this Chamber
won’t extend the ACA tax credits. Groceries are going up. I don’t know
whether the gentlewoman goes to the
supermarket or not, but the price of
groceries is going up.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to include in the RECORD an article from Politico titled: ‘‘Poll: Trump’s
own voters begin blaming him for affordability crisis.’’
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Massachusetts?
There was no objection.
[From POLITICO, Dec. 4, 2025]
POLL: TRUMP’S OWN VOTERS BEGIN BLAMING
HIM FOR AFFORDABILITY CRISIS
(By Erin Doherty)
New polling shows many Americans have
begun to blame President Donald Trump for
the high costs they’re feeling across virtually every part of their lives—and it’s
shifting politics.
Almost half—46 percent—say the cost of
living in the U.S. is the worst they can ever
remember it being, a view held by 37 percent
of 2024 Trump voters. Americans also say
that the affordability crisis is Trump’s responsibility, with 46 percent saying it is his
economy now and his administration is responsible for the costs they struggle with.
Those are among the new results from The
POLITICO Poll that crystallize a growing
warning sign for Republicans ahead of next
year’s midterms: Some of the very groups
that powered Trump’s victory last year are
showing signs of breaking from that coalition, and it’s the high cost of living that’s
driving them away.
It’s a growing vulnerability that Democrats exploited repeatedly in recent months,
with campaigns focused on affordability
sweeping key races in last month’s elections
in New Jersey and Virginia and powering an
overperformance in a deep-red House seat in
Tennessee on Tuesday.
‘‘This is a small warning, but it’s one that
Republicans need to understand, is that to

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.026

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

hold the House in 2026, it’s going to be an allhands-on-deck effort,’’ GOP strategist Ford
O’Connell said after the Tennessee election,
where Republican Matt Van Epps beat Democrat Aftyn Behn by 9 points, but underperformed against Trump’s 22-point margin in
2024.
One year ago, Trump’s economic message
helped him piece together a diverse winning
coalition, fueling his return to the White
House amid widespread frustration over spiraling inflation.
Then Trump, after campaigning against
Joe Biden, inherited the economy he spent
months attacking, and both parties were anticipating the moment when voters would
begin to turn their blame to the new incumbent.
Almost one year into Trump’s term, that
shift is well underway.
The POLITICO Poll, conducted by Public
First, found that despite Trump’s continued
support among the Republican base, his softest supporters—the ones the GOP most needs
to hold onto next year—are expressing concern.
Republicans were already worried about
how they can turn out lower-propensity voters during a midterm cycle when Trump
himself is not on the ballot. Now Democrats
are also trying to peel away their voters by
focusing aggressively on affordability, which
remains a top priority for 56 percent of
Americans, according to The POLITICO Poll.
As was the case in November, affordability
was central to the Tennessee special election, with Behn repeatedly centering her
campaign on an affordability pitch.
‘‘Republicans have long had the advantage
on dealing with the economy, but if [it] remains in the doldrums and prices remain
high, it’s harder to find a good job, they will
blame the party in power, and that’s Republicans,’’ said Arizona-based Republican strategist Barrett Marson.
Republicans’ growing vulnerabilities on
the economy represent a stark inversion on
an issue that has long defined the GOP, and
presents an emerging splintering in Trump’s
2024 winning coalition as his party heads
into a high-stakes midterm fight.
Three-quarters of Trump voters say they
trust the Republican Party over Democrats
to reduce the overall cost of living. But his
numbers are far weaker among those who
say they voted for him, but do not identify
as ‘‘MAGA Republicans’’—61 percent, compared to 88 percent of MAGA-aligned voters—pointing to a possible weak spot in his
coalition.
Even among Trump voters a meaningful
portion—nearly 1 in 5—say Trump holds full
responsibility for the state of the current
economy.
The White House disputes that Trump is
losing ground on the economy. ‘‘Cleaning up
Joe Biden’s economic disaster has been a
Day One priority for President Trump,’’
spokesperson Kush Desai said in a statement.
‘‘President Trump is just getting started
implementing the policies that created historic economic prosperity in his first term,
and Americans can rest assured that the best
is yet to come.’’

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

AMERICANS AGREE THAT AFFORDABILITY IS
THEIR TOP PRIORITY, AND THEY HOLD TRUMP
RESPONSIBLE FOR ADDRESSING IT

Across parties, age groups, races, genders
and income levels, Americans say the cost of
living is the nation’s top problem, The POLITICO Poll finds, a sign that the economy
will again overshadow other political topics
in next year’s midterms.
The poll underscores just how pervasive
the affordability crisis cuts across Americans’ everyday lives. A 45 percent plurality

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

H117

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

list grocery costs as the most challenging
things to afford, followed by 38 percent who
say housing costs and 34 percent who say
health care. (Respondents could select multiple responses.)
Forty-three percent of Americans—including 31 percent of Trump voters—say there is
less economic opportunity in the U.S. now
than there has been in the past.
Other indicators present a similarly bleak
view: Consumer sentiment fell in November
to one of its lowest levels on record, according to the University of Michigan.
And while Trump frequently points to his
predecessor to deflect blame for inflation
and high prices, the survey reveals that defense is starting to crack.
More Americans say Trump holds most or
all responsibility for the economy (46 percent) than say Biden does (29 percent).
‘‘Voters aren’t going to go, ‘I voted for
Trump to better the economy, but Biden just
hamstrung [him] too much,’ ’’ Marson said.
‘‘Voters are going to very quickly forget
about Joe Biden and just as quickly turn
their ire to Trump unless things get better.’’
The survey underscores how Trump is now
running into the kinds of economic
headwinds that dogged Biden and the Democratic Party during the 2024 campaign.
While inflation rates have fallen from a
high of 9.1 percent during the Biden administration to roughly 3 percent last month, voters’ frustration with the cost of living has
remained elevated.
Biden repeatedly pointed to job growth to
argue the economy was strong, even as
prices rose. Now Republicans—who repeatedly hammered Biden over his handling of
affordability concerns—are increasingly concerned that Trump is taking a similar tack.
‘‘It’s striking to see President Trump
make the same mistake,’’ said Michael
Strain, the director of Economic Policy
Studies at the historically conservativeleaning American Enterprise Institute.
VOTERS SAY TRUMP ISN’T DOING ENOUGH, AND
IT’S FRACTURING HIS COALITION
The survey shows that there is a limit to
how long Trump voters are willing to give
him to deliver on a core campaign pledge.
Already, 1 in 5 say he has had a chance to
change the economy but has not taken it,
underscoring how an issue that helped
Trump form his coalition is now splitting it.
A significant portion of Trump’s voters
last year did not come from his base—more
than a third, 38 percent, self-identified as not
being a ‘‘MAGA Republican’’ in the survey—
and those voters are more likely than selfidentified MAGA Republicans to hold a pessimistic view of Trump’s handling of the
economy.
Among non-MAGA Trump voters, 29 percent say Trump has had a chance to change
things in the economy but hasn’t taken it—
more than double the 11 percent of MAGA
voters who say Trump had not taken his opportunity.
Non-MAGA Republicans were also much
more likely than MAGA voters to say the
Trump administration is more responsible
for the things they find difficult to afford,
including grocery costs, utility bills and
health care costs.
Democrats are eager to take advantage of
the shifting politics of affordability and
make the 2026 midterms a referendum on
Trump’s economic record—and plan to link
GOP candidates up and down the ballot to
his policies.
Democrats from New York to Georgia zeroed in on affordability to propel them to
victory in last month’s elections, and many
party leaders believe it’s a playbook that
candidates should follow closely next year.
‘‘House Republicans should 100 percent expect to see ads next year calling them out

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

for their broken promise to lower prices and
for supporting Trump’s tariffs,’’ CJ Warnke,
a spokesperson for the Democratic super
PAC House Majority PAC, said in a statement.
Republicans, for their part, argue they’re
the ones focused on reducing costs. ‘‘While
Democrats are fighting amongst themselves
on who can be the next Zohran Mamdani socialist, Republicans are laser-focused on lowering costs, rebuilding prosperity, and delivering relief for the middle class,’’ NRCC
spokesperson Mike Marinella said in a statement.
Trump allies also say he’s making an affordability pitch, even if voters aren’t yet
feeling improvements in their daily lives.
But Trump himself has sent mixed messages
on the issue.
On Saturday, he posted on Truth Social
about drug prices that he claimed are falling
so fast Republicans should easily win the
midterms, declaring: ‘‘I AM THE AFFORDABILITY PRESIDENT.’’
Days later, he said ‘‘affordability’’ is a
‘‘Democrat scam’’ and ‘‘con job’’ during a
Tuesday Cabinet meeting.
‘‘They just say the word,’’ he said. ‘‘It
doesn’t mean anything to anybody. They
just say it—affordability. I inherited the
worst inflation in history, there was no affordability. Nobody could afford anything.’’

Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I don’t
want to be lectured about wealthy people in this country because the Republicans have done everything they can
to help those who were well off get
more and those who are struggling get
less.
We saw the One Big Beautiful Bill
Act that included tax cuts for multimillionaires
and
multibillionaires,
giveaways to billionaires, giveaways to
Big Ag, Big Tech, Big Oil, and we see
cuts to programs that help average
people in this country to get by.
By the way, their big, ugly bill included a trillion dollar cut to Medicaid.
They are cutting moneys for SNAP,
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program. That is basically to help people put food on the table. By the way,
increasingly, a majority of the people
who are on SNAP are working families,
and they are cutting that at the same
time that groceries are going up. However, if you are a billionaire, don’t
worry about it.
We are fighting a war of oil right now
because we want to make sure Big Oil,
that invested so heavily in the last
campaign, gets their payback. The bottom line is, when it comes to people
who are well off, well connected, and
have lots of money, you know, they are
doing fine. Everybody else is getting
screwed.
If you ask the average person on the
street about what they think of Donald
Trump’s economy, I will tell you what
they will say. They will say it sucks.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Let’s just review some of the wins in
the Working Families Tax Cut Act because taxpayers are expected to take
home an additional $91 billion in refunds and keep an additional $30 billion
in their paychecks from reduced
withholdings.

E:\CR\FM\A07JA7.006

H07JAPT1

H118

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Taxpayers are set to continue to receive support in tax years to come
through a double standard deduction
and lower tax rates, making the 2017
tax cuts permanent, an increase in the
standard deduction by up to $1,500 per
family in 2025, no tax on tips, no tax on
overtime, no tax on Social Security, a
boost to the child tax credit of $2,200
while indexing its value to inflation,
expanding access to childcare and paid
leave tax credit permanently, expanding the 529 savings accounts to help
families choose education that best fits
their needs, and expanded health savings accounts so American families can
control their own healthcare. That
doesn’t sound like benefits to millionaires and billionaires. It sounds like
benefits to hardworking American families.
Also, I note that the subsidies that
the gentleman from Massachusetts so
wants to support, the American people
would not see a dime of that. It would
go directly to insurance companies
who, again, are seeing record profits.
The one thing we can do is continue
to support health savings accounts,
continue the Trump-era tax cuts from
2017, making them permanent, and continue to promote the tax provisions in
the Working Families Tax Cut Act that
received no Democratic support, by the
way, that really will help American
families.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Ohio (Mr. TAYLOR).
Mr. TAYLOR. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentlewoman from Indiana for
yielding me the time.
Ohio families are working harder
than ever day in and day out just to
make ends meet. They are frustrated
that they have to stretch their dollar
as far as it can go just to keep a roof
over their heads, afford to buy the basics, and deal with higher utility bills
to keep their water and power on.
Buckeye families have worked too hard
to struggle this much, and I am standing here today ready to do something
about it.
House Republicans have listened to
hurting families, and we are bringing
forward legislation to help them get
ahead. The Affordable HOMES Act will
cut through unnecessary and complicated red tape that has been driving
up the cost of manufactured housing
for far too long.
Who has ultimately shouldered the
burden of these soaring costs? It is not
the manufacturers. It is the hardworking families who are simply trying
to buy a home and live the once-attainable American Dream.
b 1250
Owning a home shouldn’t be this
much of a challenge. This bill will help
Ohio families check homeownership off
the list, knowing they were able to
achieve exactly what they worked for.
House Republicans are also reining in
the Biden administration’s overregulation of everyday household water fixtures and bringing down costs for all

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

Americans with the SHOWER Act. I
applaud Representative FRY for leading
on this legislation.
Americans don’t need the government to tell them which showerhead to
use. They need the government to get
out of the way so they can afford the
necessities and have money to spend on
other things in their lives. This bill
will claw back ridiculous Biden-era red
tape and put American families first.
Lastly, I am working alongside my
fellow Republicans to pass full-year
funding for several critical programs.
In my district, several water and police
projects will be funded, which will benefit some of the poorest and most rural
areas in this country. These projects
will help fund long-overdue water infrastructure projects and make local
improvements,
ultimately
driving
down costs for communities throughout the Nation.
Mr. Speaker, I recognize Representatives HOUCHIN and RUSSELL FRY, as
well as our Republican leadership and
the Appropriations Committee led by
Chairman COLE, for their leadership on
these critical pieces of legislation
being considered. I urge Congress to
pass these commonsense bills to lower
the cost of living not only for Buckeye
families but for families across America.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I will tell everybody a
little secret here. The Republicans are
really clever, but not really as clever
as they think they are. The big, beautiful bill that they passed, the one that
includes tax cuts for multimillionaires
and multibillionaires and the one that
guts Medicaid by a trillion dollars, is
incredibly unpopular. It is incredibly
unpopular.
In fact, the Kaiser Family Foundation said that 64 percent of American
families oppose it, and even FOX News
says that 59 percent of the American
people oppose it.
Why do they oppose it, and why is it
so unpopular? It is because of what is
contained in it. Rather than fix that—
and we just heard the gentlewoman do
this. Rather than fix it, they renamed
the bill the Working Families Tax Cut
Act. That never passed the House. That
is a new title they made up.
They think all they need to do is
change the title of a bill, and then the
American people won’t realize all the
garbage that is tucked into the bill. It
is like lipstick on a pig. It is ridiculous. This is insane.
The American people are hurting because of the Republican policies. The
American people are hurting because
they won’t extend the ACA tax credits.
By the way, people will see their
health insurance costs go down if the
ACA tax credits are extended. The gentlewoman is all upset about it, but I
will urge her to talk to some of her Republican colleagues, by the way, who
have signed on to a discharge petition
to force a vote on extending the ACA
tax credits. We will begin that debate
today and vote on it tomorrow.

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

It is not just Democrats. There are
some Republicans who are hearing
from their constituents that they are
getting
screwed
over
on
their
healthcare, and they want us to do
something.
The bottom line is, they can change
the titles of bills and all that kind of
stuff, but if they don’t change the substance, if they don’t get Donald Trump
to back off on his tariffs—which, by the
way, are responsible for rising housing
costs in this country—if they don’t get
him to change his views on that, things
are going to continue to get worse.
They can change the titles of bills all
they want, but they are not changing
the reality for millions of Americans.
It is hard to believe that in the House
of Representatives, which is supposed
to be a serious body, this is what we
are talking about. We are changing titles of bills so that maybe the American people won’t know what we are
talking about.
Mr. Speaker, if we defeat the previous question, I am going to offer an
amendment to the rule to bring up H.
Con. Res. 33, which calls for the plaque
honoring the brave police officers that
defended this Capitol and our democracy on January 6 to be put up in the
Capitol as required by law.
Mr. Speaker, I am sick and tired of
Republicans standing up and proclaiming their unwavering support for
law enforcement when they won’t even
honor the law enforcement that saved
them, that saved us and our democracy
here on January 6.
Yesterday was the fifth anniversary
of the January 6 attack on the Capitol
by supporters of Donald Trump. Over
140 officers were injured, an officer was
killed, and others died by suicide following the trauma of that day.
Do you know how the White House
marked this anniversary? They marked
it by putting up an Orwellian web page,
rewriting history, and claiming it is
the officers who were to blame for the
violence. How disgusting. How despicable. How disgraceful.
I ask my Republican colleagues: Do
you really believe that crap? When you
look in the eyes of the Capitol Police
who guard this building, do you accuse
them of being responsible for the violence of that day?
How dare the President of the United
States say such a thing, and how
shameful of this Republican majority
to stay silent in the face of this depravity and rewriting of history.
Republicans found the time to illegally slap Donald Trump’s name onto
the Kennedy Center, defacing a memorial to a great President in a single
day, within 24 hours, but a legally required honor for the officers who defended this democracy? It is 5 years of
excuses, 5 years of delay, 5 years of
cowardice and disrespect to law enforcement by Republicans.
When all is said and done, history
will not look kindly on these Trump
Republicans and this Republican majority, and they all know it.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.028

H07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 7, 2026

At this point, let me say to my Republican friends that it is always the
right time to do the decent thing, the
thing the law requires, which is to
hang the plaque honoring these brave
men and women who put their lives on
the line to defend us, to defend this
building, and to defend this democracy.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of my amendment into the RECORD, along with any
extraneous
material,
immediately
prior to the vote on the previous question.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Massachusetts?
There was no objection.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
2 minutes to the gentlewoman from
Utah (Ms. MALOY).
Ms. MALOY. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
support of this rule that moves appropriations bills, bills that reflect the
leadership of Chairman COLE and the
priorities of this Congress, avoiding another shutdown and spending taxpayer
dollars responsibly in a way that directly benefits Americans.
These bills lower the cost of living
and boost the economy. They support
domestic energy production, resulting
in lower costs for American families
and businesses, and invest in water infrastructure to address drought and
protect
supplies
for
communities
across this country.
These appropriations bills that are
included in the rule spend hard-earned
tax dollars responsibly, reduce spending below current levels, putting
money back in Americans’ pockets,
and reduce our deficit. They ensure
that government funding works efficiently to deliver services that make
life better for Americans.
The American people are watching
us. They want to see Congress do our
most basic, essential function, which is
spending government dollars and controlling the power of the purse.
Through bipartisan, bicameral negotiations, led by appropriators, we are
turning priorities into action and putting America first.
Mr. Speaker, this package demonstrates the value of Congress by delivering results for communities in
Utah and across the country.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support the bill.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, again, no discussion, no
comments on what happened on January 6 or about what the White House
put on its web page yesterday, blaming
police officers for the violence of January 6, saying that no police officer died
when we know that is a lie, and no explanation as to why we are having such
a difficult time hanging a plaque that,
quite frankly, the law requires us to
hang.
Again,
the
gentlewoman
voted
against an amendment to force the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

H119

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Speaker to hang the plaque. I am
happy to yield to the gentlewoman if
she wants to explain why she voted
that way. Does she have any reaction
to the White House’s horrific and disgraceful statement yesterday, basically smearing the brave men and
women who are in our law enforcement
and the Capitol Police officers?
b 1300
Mr. Speaker, I am happy to yield to
the gentlewoman.
And nothing. And nothing. I mean,
really? That is what things have come
to? We can’t even come together and
stand in defense of the Capitol Police
who defended us that day? We can’t
honor them? Somehow that is a no-no
because Donald Trump doesn’t like it. I
mean, that really is shameful.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
2 minutes to the gentleman from Florida (Mr. HARIDOPOLOS).
Mr. HARIDOPOLOS. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentlewoman for yielding
time.
Mr. Speaker, the Affordable HOMES
Act is commonsense legislation that
cuts red tape and lowers housing costs
for hardworking American families.
We all recognize between 2021 and
2024 that interest rates went from 3
percent to 7 percent. In my home community, that meant we spent $1,200
more a month for the average home in
my community. We spent $1,200. We
need to think of commonsense ways to
turn this around and make housing
more affordable.
President Reagan once said: ‘‘If it
moves, tax it. If it keeps moving, regulate it. If it stops moving, subsidize it.’’
Today, Washington has regulated the
same thing twice. Manufactured homes
are being hit with overlapping energy
mandates from HUD and the Department of Energy. The Affordable
HOMES Act fixes this by repealing
DOE’s separate energy rules, restoring
clear authority to HUD, which already
oversees construction and safety standards.
Lower costs mean more homes built
and greater supply. More families will
be able to build equity and secure their
future. This is conservative policy at
its best. It is less government, more opportunity, and more relief for American families.
Let us also remember that home
prices also went up because 10 million
people came into this country in a 4year time period. The simple law of
supply and demand tells me that
causes prices to rise radically, much
like radical policies from 2021 through
2024.
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support
the Affordable HOMES Act to cut red
tape and help more Americans achieve
the dream of homeownership. I very
much thank the chairwoman for leading this charge.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
2 minutes to the gentleman from Missouri (Mr. ALFORD).
Mr. ALFORD. Mr. Speaker, for too
many American families, the American
Dream seems further out of reach each
and every year, especially when it
comes to owning a home.
Do my colleagues know that housing
is the number one monthly expense for
most families? When Washington piles
on blue tape mandates and bureaucratic nonsense, working families pay
the price.
Under the Biden administration,
their so-called Inflation Reduction Act,
which was really nothing of the sort,
homebuilders were buried under costly
green new scam mandates and overregulation, driving up construction
costs and pushing homeownership even
further out of reach.
This was also known as the green
new scam in action. House Republicans
are changing that. We are cutting the
blue tape. We are lowering costs. We
are making homeownership more affordable in 2026 and beyond.
One great example is the Affordable
Homes Act, led by my colleague Congresswoman ERIN HOUCHIN. This commonsense bill removes unnecessary
Federal interference and eliminates
costly energy mandates that drive up
the price of manufactured housing.
This is one of the most affordable pathways to homeownership for first-time
buyers, young families, and seniors.
This is just one example, Mr. Speaker, of how House Republicans are working to lower housing prices. As co-chair
of the Real Estate Caucus, I worked
with the Trump administration to reverse these disastrous policies because
the government should get out of the
way and not stand in the way of the
American Dream.
Back home in Missouri, I have seen
exactly what these mandates do. A
Kansas builder showed that so-called
green energy codes save homeowners
only about $125 a year but add more
than $1,200 a year to families’ mortgages.
It is simple, folks. If a policy costs
families more than it saves them, it is
not a smart policy. House Republicans
are fighting to make housing affordable again. They are putting families
first. The first step is this bill.
Mr. Speaker, I urge passage of the
rule. I urge passage of this act. Let’s
make homes affordable in America
again and save the American Dream.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, may I
inquire as to how much time is remaining.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from Massachusetts has 9 minutes remaining. The gentlewoman from
Indiana has 4 minutes remaining.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, let’s be honest about
what we have seen from this Republican majority. Republicans can’t govern. They can’t lead. They won’t and
don’t fight for the people who sent
them here.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.030

H07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H120

They rush, rush, rush to the floor to
redefine what a showerhead is. That is
the big issue. They move at lightning
speed on tax breaks for billionaires.
They bend over backward to enrich
Trump and his inner circle, going so far
as to invade another country to grease
the skids for Big Oil. It is not about democracy. It is not about human rights.
It is not even about drugs. It is about
Big Oil.
The priorities of Big Tech, Big Oil,
Big Pharma, and Big Banks move at
lightning speed. Tax cuts for the
wealthy pass overnight. Corporate
giveaways face no obstacles.
When
it
comes
to
protecting
healthcare for millions of Americans,
suddenly there is hesitation. Suddenly,
there are delays. Suddenly, there is no
money. Suddenly, they move in slow
motion. Suddenly, we can’t do anything.
It may be 2026, but it is the status
quo for this Republican majority. It is
a new year but the same BS for them
except when it comes to what is happening in Venezuela. Then they are
dragging us back to 2003.
Other than that, it is always the
same funding from elite donors with
phony talk about helping regular people. It is the same contempt for their
own voters. It is the same recklessness
abroad. It is the same incompetence at
home.
Here is what Republicans always underestimate. The American people are
paying attention. They are not stupid.
They know when billionaires get everything and everyone else gets excuses.
They know when governance is replaced by stunts, distractions, and culture war nonsense. There is always a
reckoning for that kind of failure. This
year will be no exception. They know
all the gimmicks.
We passed this monstrosity of a bill
called the One Big Beautiful Bill Act.
The American people are horrified by
what is in it. There are excessive giveaways to the wealthiest in this country. There are cutbacks in healthcare.
There are cutbacks in everything that
matters to working families. Every
poll that is done says that it is incredibly unpopular.
What do they do? Rather than fix the
problem, they come up with a counterfeit name for the bill. It is no longer
the One Big Beautiful Bill Act. Now it
is the Working Families Tax Cut Act. I
don’t know what the hell that is. I
don’t know who came up with that
idea. Maybe some pollster gave it to
them, as if changing the name of what
they call this big, ugly bill will make a
difference.
Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that
with all that is going on in this country right now, with all of the concerns
that the American people have, and
with people desperately pleading with
this Republican President and this Republican majority in the House and
Senate to do something to make their
life better, we have an opportunity to
maybe legislate and help people. In-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

stead,
we
are
talking
about
showerheads. I mean, really? I urge my
colleagues to vote ‘‘no’’ on this bill.
Mr. Speaker, I will also again remind
people about the vote on the previous
question. We have a chance to actually
do something positive today, and that
is to honor the men and women who
protected us on January 6. Unfortunately, Republicans on the Rules Committee all voted ‘‘no’’ to require the
Speaker again to hang the plaque.
They all voted ‘‘no.’’ Not a word has
been said. There is no explanation as to
why. Not a word about what happened
on January 6 has been spoken on this
floor by the Republicans today. I don’t
know how that can be. I don’t know
how that can be.
Mr. Speaker, I was there that day. I
was in the Speaker’s chair. I saw what
happened. I saw what happened when I
walked out to the Speaker’s lobby. I
saw the people who protected us being
beaten by this angry mob, and not a
word. We can’t get the Speaker of the
House to hang up this plaque. That can
change with the previous question
vote.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
b 1310
Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, this rule is very
straightforward. We are here to cut
burdensome red tape and regulatory
overreach that leads to higher energy
costs for Americans. Commonsense reforms like these are simple and long
overdue.
We are also here to move an appropriations package that provides critical funding and returns us to more responsible spending levels while delivering for the American people.
One thing we have noted is that there
is fraud in government programs, including in Medicaid and SNAP. Republicans have sounded the clarion call to
try to eliminate waste, fraud, and
abuse, while Democrats want to minimize it.
We have known about it for decades,
even when we went after some of the
waste, fraud, and abuse in ObamaCare,
and guess what. After we passed the
One Big Beautiful Bill Act, the CBO
stated that healthcare premiums would
go down as a result of our work.
We went after Medicaid fraud, especially involving illegal immigrants. By
the way, a Federal court recently ordered officials to turn over Medicaid
information to ICE enforcement. If illegal immigrants weren’t accessing
Medicaid on Democrats’ watch, as they
tirelessly asserted, then why would a
Federal court provide such an order?
We went after waste, fraud, and
abuse through our rescissions package,
and once again, Democrats refused to
acknowledge that that premise ever existed.
Mr. Speaker, we are cutting out
waste, fraud, and abuse. We are becoming fiscally responsible. We are putting

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the American family first by reducing
burdensome regulations that increase
costs.
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to moving these bills out of the House this
week. I ask my colleagues to join me in
voting ‘‘yes’’ on the previous question
and ‘‘yes’’ on the rule.
The material previously referred to
by Mr. MCGOVERN is as follows:
AN AMENDMENT TO H. RES. 977 OFFERED BY
MR. MCGOVERN OF MASSACHUSETTS
At the end of the resolution, add the following:
SEC. 7. Immediately upon adoption of this
resolution, the House shall proceed to the
consideration in the House of the concurrent
resolution (H. Con. Res. 33) directing the Architect of the Capitol to install at a permanent location on the western front of the
United States Capitol an honorific plaque
listing the names of all of the officers of the
United States Capitol Police, the Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia, and other Federal, State, and local
law enforcement agencies and protective entities who responded to the violence that occurred at the United States Capitol on January 6, 2021. All points of order against consideration of the concurrent resolution are
waived. The concurrent resolution shall be
considered as read. All points of order
against provisions in the concurrent resolution are waived. The previous question shall
be considered as ordered on the concurrent
resolution to adoption without intervening
motion except one hour of debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on
House Administration or their respective
designees.
SEC. 8. Clause 1(c) of rule XIX shall not
apply to the consideration of H. Con. Res. 33.
SEC. 9. The Clerk shall transmit to the
Senate a message that the House has adopted H. Con Res. 33 no later than one calendar
day after adoption.

Mrs. HOUCHIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
back the balance of my time, and I
move the previous question on the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, on
that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will be postponed.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess subject to
the call of the Chair.
Accordingly (at 1 o’clock and 12 minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1630
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. WOMACK) at 4 o’clock and
30 minutes p.m.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.031

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Proceedings will resume on questions previously postponed.
Votes will be taken in the following
order:
Ordering the previous question on
House Resolution 977; and
Adoption of House Resolution 977, if
ordered.
The first electronic vote will be conducted as a 15-minute vote. Pursuant
to clause 9 of rule XX, the remaining
electronic vote will be conducted as a
5-minute vote.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 4593, SAVING HOMEOWNERS
FROM
OVERREGULATION WITH EXCEPTIONAL RINSING ACT; PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 5184, AFFORDABLE HOUSING OVER MANDATING EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
ACT; AND PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 6938, COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE; ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on ordering
the previous question on the resolution
(H. Res. 977) providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 4593) to amend
the Energy Policy and Conservation
Act to revise the definition of
showerhead; providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 5184) to prohibit
the Secretary of Energy from enforcing
energy efficiency standards applicable
to manufactured housing, and for other
purposes; and providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 6938) making
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes, on which the yeas
and nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 213, nays
211, not voting 7, as follows:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 2]
YEAS—213
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H121

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole

Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hunt
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean

Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)

Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)

Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—211

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)

Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall

Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi

Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—7
Baird
Dunn (FL)
Larson (CT)

McCaul
Murphy
Rutherford

Thompson (MS)

b 1657
Messrs. Stanton and Costa changed
their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
So the previous question was ordered.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on adoption of the resolution.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, on
that I request a recorded vote.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will be postponed.
f

IN MEMORY OF CONGRESSMAN
DOUG LAMALFA
(Mr. CALVERT asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Speaker, yesterday we learned of the sudden passing of
our dear friend and colleague, Doug
LaMalfa.
As a fourth-generation rice farmer,
Doug’s experience shaped his advocacy
for his northern California constituents. He first served them in the California Legislature. Then he was elected
to the House of Representatives in 2012.
In the House, Doug distinguished
himself as a leader on matters involving water, farming, forest management, and rural issues. In recognition
of that leadership, he was unanimously
elected to serve as chairman of the
Western Caucus last year.
We offer our thoughts, prayers, and
support to Doug’s wife, Jill, and their
entire family.
Doug was a good and decent man, an
authentic public servant. With Doug,
what you saw is what you got.
As the tributes poured in, over and
over people remembered his warmth,
his wisdom, his sense of humor, kindness, and above all his authenticity. He

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.036

H07JAPT1

H122

will be deeply missed and fondly remembered.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from California (Ms. LOFGREN),
my good friend and the chair of the
Democrat delegation.
Ms. LOFGREN. Mr. Speaker, we are
heartbroken at the news that we have
lost Doug LaMalfa. We served with him
so proudly and got to know him as a
friend, someone who you could disagree
with without being disagreeable. We
loved him dearly, and I value personally the chance I had to work with
Doug and many others on the Farm
Workforce Modernization Act. The insight that he had on that as a longterm rice farmer was just incalculable.
I value the moment that he came and
brought me a little bag of rice that he
had grown himself. We are in shock,
and I would just like to add that our
condolences go to the family as has
been expressed so well. All of us are
heartbroken at this terrible news.
The SPEAKER. The Chair now asks
all those present in the Chamber, as
well as Members and staff throughout
the Capitol, to please rise for a moment of silence in remembrance of the
late Honorable Doug LaMalfa of California.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1700
PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 4593, SAVING HOMEOWNERS
FROM
OVERREGULATION WITH EXCEPTIONAL RINSING ACT; PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 5184, AFFORDABLE HOUSING OVER MANDATING EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
ACT; AND PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 6938, COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE; ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
The SPEAKER. Pursuant to clause 8
of rule XX, the unfinished business is
the vote on adoption of the resolution
(H. Res. 977) providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 4593) to amend
the Energy Policy and Conservation
Act to revise the definition of
showerhead; providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 5184) to prohibit
the Secretary of Energy from enforcing
energy efficiency standards applicable
to manufactured housing, and for other
purposes; and providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 6938) making
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes, on which a recorded
vote was ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the resolution.
This will be a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—ayes 214, noes 212,
not voting 5, as follows:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

[Roll No. 3]
AYES—214
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)

Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hunt
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)

Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOES—212
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman

Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner

Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan

Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—5
Baird
McCaul

Murphy
Rutherford

Thompson (MS)

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
WOMACK)(during the vote). There are 2
minutes remaining.
b 1732
Mr. LARSEN of Washington changed
his vote from ‘‘aye’’ to ‘‘no.’’
So the resolution was agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 1834, BREAKING THE
GRIDLOCK ACT
Mr. JEFFRIES. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to clause 2 of rule XV, I call up the
motion to discharge previously noticed.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from New York calls up a motion to discharge the Committee on
Rules from further consideration of
House Resolution 780.
The Clerk will report the title of the
resolution.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Under
the rule, the gentleman from New York
(Mr. JEFFRIES) will be recognized for 10

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.038

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

minutes and the gentleman from Missouri (Mr. SMITH) will be recognized for
10 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from New York.
Mr. JEFFRIES. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to call up a bipartisan motion to
discharge legislation to extend the Affordable Care Act tax credits to make
sure that tens of millions of everyday
Americans do not experience dramatically increased premiums, copays, and
deductibles that will prevent them
from being able to go see a doctor when
they need one.
I strongly urge a ‘‘yes’’ vote on this
bipartisan motion so that we can take
a meaningful step forward in this Congress to address the healthcare crisis in
the United States of America.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Mr. Speaker,
it is pretty simple: I oppose this motion, and I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. JEFFRIES. Mr. Speaker, we have
an opportunity in this Congress in a bipartisan way to address the healthcare
crisis in this country and to make sure
that tens of millions of people have the
ability to go see a doctor when they
need one in this great country of ours.
We have an affordability crisis in the
United States of America. We know
that healthcare costs are out of control, housing costs are out of control,
and grocery costs are out of control.
There is an affordability crisis that
needs to be addressed decisively, and
we have an ability to take meaningful
action today. Vote ‘‘yes’’ on advancing
this motion to discharge.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
The question is on the motion offered
by the gentleman from New York to
discharge the Committee on Rules
from further consideration of House
Resolution 780.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Mr. JEFFRIES. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 221, nays
205, not voting 5, as follows:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 4]
YEAS—221
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H123

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu

Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fitzpatrick
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna

Krishnamoorthi
LaLota
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Miller (OH)
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer

Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden

Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Valadao
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NAYS—205

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hunt
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim

Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
Langworthy
Latta
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)

Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)

Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—5
Baird
McCaul

Murphy
Rutherford

Thompson (MS)

b 1744
So the motion to discharge was
agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
KENNEDY of Utah). The clerk will report the resolution.
The Clerk read the resolution as follows:
H. RES. 780
Resolved, That immediately upon adoption
of this resolution, the House shall proceed to
the consideration in the House of the bill
(H.R. 1834) to advance policy priorities that
will break the gridlock. All points of order
against consideration of the bill are waived.
An amendment in the nature of a substitute
received for printing in the portion of the
Congressional Record designated for that
purpose in clause 8 of rule XVIII dated at
least one day before the day of consideration
of H.R. 1834, if submitted by the ranking minority member of the Committee on Rules,
shall be considered as adopted. If more than
one such amendment is submitted, then only
the last amendment submitted shall be considered as adopted. The bill, as amended,
shall be considered as read. All points of
order against provisions in the bill, as
amended, are waived. The previous question
shall be considered as ordered on the bill, as
amended, and on any further amendment
thereto, to final passage without intervening
motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally
divided and controlled by the majority leader and minority leader or their respective
designees; and (2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 2. Clause 1(c) of rule XIX and clause 8
of rule XX shall not apply to the consideration of H.R. 1834.
SEC. 3. The Clerk shall transmit to the
Senate a message that the House has passed
H.R. 1834 no later than one calendar day
after passage.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from New York is recognized
for 1 hour.
Mr. JEFFRIES. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that the distinguished gentleman from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (Mr. MCGOVERN) control the remainder of my time.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.041

H07JAPT1

H124

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Without
objection, the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. MCGOVERN) will control
the time.
There was no objection.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, during
consideration of this resolution, all
time yielded is for the purposes of debate only.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days to revise
and extend their remarks.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Massachusetts?
There was no objection.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, all I can say is, it is
about damn time. I mean, we have had
to wait months while the Republican
leadership of this House dragged their
feet, all so we could take up a simple
vote on whether to stop people’s
healthcare premiums from doubling or
tripling.
We could have done this months ago.
Instead, Republican leadership literally shut down the entire government rather than just allow this one
vote on making sure that regular people can afford their healthcare. That is
absurd.
If billionaires want another tax
break, they get it in a nanosecond. If
the rich and powerful want another
loophole, it materializes out of thin
air. Somehow days stretch into weeks
and then stretch into months when it
comes to healthcare for hardworking
families.
Every night, those families are sitting around their kitchen tables trying
to figure out how to pay for childcare
so they can get to work. They are trying to figure out how they can pay
their rent so their kids have a safe
place to grow up. They are trying to
figure out how they can afford groceries amid skyrocketing costs.
Because of the stalling and hesitation and delay from this President
and this Speaker, millions of these
families are now left trying to figure
out how they can afford their
healthcare.
Mr. Speaker, I would like to think it
is not up for debate that in the richest
country in the history of the world, no
person—and I mean no person—should
be left without healthcare. No mom or
dad should have to forego their own
health insurance because they can’t afford to pay for their kids and themselves. No small business owner should
have to go without coverage to pay the
bills.
That is exactly what is happening
right now. It is happening all because
this leadership here in this House refused to lift a finger. They were too
busy helping Big Banks, Big Oil, Big
Tech, and whatever billionaire needed
a handout.
This Congress musters up the will to
spend trillions of dollars on tax breaks

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

for billionaires and to send the Pentagon billions of dollars more than
they even ask for.
b 1750
Mr. Speaker, the administration
came up with tens of billions of dollars
to bail out Argentina, for God’s sake.
Somehow, helping moms and dads,
grandparents, and kids afford trips to
the doctor is a step too far for this Republican leadership.
The truth is that this should not be a
partisan issue. We are here today debating this rule because four Republicans joined Democrats to put good
policy ahead of party and demand that
this House take up this measure.
Thanks to their efforts to be on the
right side of this, we were able to get
around the Speaker’s logjam and force
a vote on this bill.
We have a moral obligation to act,
Mr. Speaker. It is unconscionable that
anyone in the richest country in history should not have access to good,
quality healthcare.
How long have we heard that the Republican healthcare plan is coming? It
still hasn’t materialized. The reality is
that, in the meantime, reversing the
massive premium increases that families across this country are grappling
with is the bare, bare minimum that
we should do.
America’s healthcare system is broken, and I am not going to defend the
status quo. It has been broken for decades. America spends more per patient
than any other major country for the
worst outcomes. People lack access to
care. Medical bills still leave families
in debt. This sure as hell isn’t the
healthcare system that I would have
designed.
In fact, Democrats believe that every
person in the United States should
have
high-quality,
affordable
healthcare. I personally believe in
Medicare for All. Also, there is no
doubt in my mind that the American
people are better off due to the Affordable Care Act.
Like I said, our system was broken
long before the ACA, and the ACA took
major steps to try to move us toward
comprehensive coverage. That is part
of the reason that the ACA is so popular. An overwhelming majority of
Americans support the ACA because it
protects people with preexisting conditions, provides free preventative care,
and requires coverage for essential
health benefits like emergency services
and maternity care.
The ACA gave health insurance to
millions of people, and improvements
made to the law made premiums more
affordable. Failing to act and failing to
extend these tax credits will leave millions of Americans paying more for
their healthcare.
Families in my district are reaching
out to me to share that their
healthcare premiums are going up by
hundreds and even thousands of dollars
every month due to the inaction of this
Congress.

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mr. Speaker, I know that many of
the people back home must be writing
to you with similar stories. We can’t
fail these families. We can’t turn our
backs on working people who are struggling to get by. Healthcare is a basic
and fundamental human right. If we
have it in our power right now, today,
to help make people’s lives better, how
could we not take the opportunity to
do that?
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from New Jersey (Mr. PALLONE), the distinguished ranking member of the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, there is
no more important bill than Leader
JEFFRIES’ bill to make healthcare more
affordable for more than 20 million
Americans whose monthly health premiums have skyrocketed because of
Republican inaction and indifference.
When I was home during the holidays, all I heard from my constituents
was that their healthcare premiums
were doubling and tripling in the State
of New Jersey.
This bill is a godsend. I am not exaggerating. This bill is a godsend for people who are concerned that they are
not going to have health insurance or
already don’t have health insurance because they weren’t able to buy it on
January 1.
What happens when they don’t get
health insurance? Mr. Speaker, the effects of this don’t just affect the 20 million people who don’t get it because of
the Affordable Care Act or ObamaCare.
The effects are on everyone who has
health insurance because emergency
rooms will once again be overflowing
with people who are forced to wait
until they are so sick that they have
no choice but to go to the ER because
they don’t have a doctor.
Patients will be sicker. Doctors and
nurses will be stretched thin. Hospitals
will be left with large sums of uncompensated care, which will be passed on
to everyone with insurance in the form
of higher monthly premiums. This isn’t
just about the ACA, but it is most important for those people who had the
ACA and perhaps don’t have it anymore.
Unfortunately, the Republican majority has known these price hikes
were coming all along, but they didn’t
do a single thing to stop this from happening.
Last year, Republicans instead spent
their time giving permanent tax breaks
to billionaires and large companies,
but refused to extend the ACA enhanced premium tax credits to help
lower healthcare costs for everyday
people. Today, we have a chance to
right that wrong and help out our hardworking Americans.
Mr. Speaker, Republicans may not
want to admit it publicly, but they
know that the ACA has resulted in historically low insurance rates, helped
millions of families stay covered, and
saved lives—and I stress saved lives. If
we don’t take action, all of this

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.045

H07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 7, 2026

progress could be reversed as the American people are priced out of the ability
to see their doctors.
Vote for this bill.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentleman from New
York (Mr. LAWLER).
Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, after the
43-day Democratic-led shutdown, I
agreed to sit down with my Democratic
and Republican colleagues to negotiate
in good faith to extend the ACA enhanced premium tax credit with reforms.
We negotiated a 2-year extension
with income limits, with insurance reforms, and with the elimination of
zero-premium plans. Unfortunately, we
could not get that bill to the floor for
a vote, so I and three of my other Republican colleagues felt that we had no
choice but to sign the discharge for
this 3-year clean extension.
I am voting in favor of this discharge
and this legislation to send it to the
Senate so that the Senate will have the
opportunity to put forth a reform
package that can pass Congress and become law.
The fact is that health insurance premiums have risen 96 percent since
ObamaCare took effect in 2010, with insurance companies’ profits increasing
by 2,000 percent.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman from New York.
Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, insurance companies’ profits have increased
by 2,000 percent.
Republicans and Democrats can
agree that our system is broken, and
we need to fix it. We need to work in a
bipartisan way.
To me, this is two-pronged: deal with
the immediacy of the enhanced premium tax credit, and deal with the
larger healthcare reform issues that
have to take effect. Enough of the
blame game on both sides. Let’s focus
on
actually
delivering
affordable
healthcare for Americans.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. OLSZEWSKI).
Mr. OLSZEWSKI. Mr. Speaker, despite Americans consistently identifying higher costs as their number one
issue, today marks 369 days that this
Republican-led Congress has failed to
take any significant action to address
the affordability crisis. Instead, chaotic trade policies, along with devastating cuts to healthcare and food
programs by the President, have only
driven up costs.
The recent expiration of ACA tax
credits makes things even worse. In
Maryland, it is the equivalent of a
$4,700 tax hike. I have heard from many
constituents who are now forgoing insurance altogether, exposing them to
risks and spiking premiums across the
board.
I am also deeply concerned about the
chilling economic effect that this will

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

H125

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

have. If we aren’t going to pass legislation to lower costs in this Congress,
can we at least pass legislation to keep
them from going up even more?
I urge my colleagues to support the
rule and the legislation before us. Extend these tax credits for struggling
families.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentlewoman from
Florida (Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ).
Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ. Mr.
Speaker, I rise to insist that we pull
our Nation back from the largest-ever,
Republican-forced loss of healthcare in
our history.
These catastrophic coverage cutoffs
and massive premium hikes will hammer millions of us back in Florida, and
it is all because Republicans chose billionaire tax breaks over extending the
Affordable Care Act tax credits for our
hardworking families.
That is all on top of the $1 trillion
that Republicans slashed from Medicaid and $500 billion from Medicare.
Over 203,000 people will lose coverage in
my district. Let’s be really clear: Many
of them will get needlessly sick or die.
Thankfully, Democrats refused to accept this Republican healthcare crisis
and forced this vote to extend the ACA
tax credits.
Mr. Speaker, Republicans have made
life too expensive. From burger and
coffee prices to rent, home insurance,
and utilities, costs keep soaring. We
can’t add crushing cost burdens by
forcing families to pick between seeing
a doctor and buying groceries.
Yes, Republicans chose to unleash
this healthcare crisis, but they can
avoid it right now. Millions of anxious
families are watching.
Mr. Speaker, I urge a ‘‘yes’’ vote.
b 1800
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentlewoman from
Texas (Ms. JOHNSON).
Ms. JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today in strong support of this
legislation to extend the Affordable
Care Act and the tax credits.
In my district alone, nearly 100,000
people rely on these tax credits to afford coverage, and because Republicans
let them expire, many of them are
starting off the year without access to
care.
I hear from families all across north
Texas every day begging for help. One
constituent in Dallas, a small business
owner with a child who has type 1 diabetes, told me plainly: ‘‘I need these
tax credits so my baby can survive.’’
This is life or death for so many families in our communities. Yet, Republicans have refused to extend these tax
credits,
making
healthcare
unaffordable for millions of people.
I refuse to accept Republicans governing in the currency of cruelty. It is
critical that we restore these credits
and put the money back in the pockets
of the people who need it the most.
I urge every Member of this body,
Democrat and Republican alike, to sup-

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

port this bill and stand up for the
American people. We deserve better. I
will never stop fighting to protect the
basic necessities that every family
needs to survive.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentlewoman from Oregon (Ms. BONAMICI).
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in support of this critical bill
that will lower the cost of healthcare
for thousands of Oregonians and millions of Americans by extending the
Affordable Care Act premium tax credits.
Right now, too many people are
struggling. At the end of 2025, Republicans let healthcare costs skyrocket,
adding to the stress Americans are already experiencing, because Republicans have done nothing to address the
high costs of housing, groceries,
childcare, utilities, and more.
David from Tillamook, Oregon, said
premiums for him and his wife increased from $415 a month to $2,384 a
month, a 474 percent increase.
For Stacy in St. Helens and her husband, their premiums went from $539 a
month to $2,396, a 344 percent increase.
It is unconscionable, it is unacceptable, and it is unnecessary. This is the
United States of America, and everyone should feel secure, not fearful when
they get sick or injured. Our constituents want affordable healthcare. They
deserve better, and we can make things
better, starting with this vote to extend the tax credits.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentlewoman from Virginia (Ms. MCCLELLAN).
Ms. MCCLELLAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
in strong support of a 3-year extension
of the Affordable Care Act’s enhanced
premium tax credits.
Millions of Americans who benefited
from these credits are now facing the
real prospect of losing their health insurance because they can no longer afford their premiums. We have told
their stories for months. These are
small business owners, their employees, the self-employed, farmers, restaurateurs, beauticians, landscapers,
mediators, chiropractors, on and on.
They are people like Bobby Connor
from Brunswick County, Virginia, who
is 3 years away from Medicare. Last
year, with the tax credit, he paid $34
per month for his insurance. This year,
he was set to pay $92 with the tax credit. Now, without it, he is looking at
$1,700 a month.
Lester and Yolanda Johnson of Richmond, Virginia, co-owners of Mama J’s
Restaurant, and their 8-year-old daughter are going from paying about $700 a
month with the tax credit last year to
over $1,400 this year without it.
We have a chance to give Bobby, Lester, Yolanda, and millions like them
the peace of mind that if they get sick
or injured, they can get the care they
need without losing everything.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentlewoman from
Florida (Ms. CASTOR).

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.046

H07JAPT1

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

H126

CORRECTION

Ms. CASTOR of Florida. On behalf of
the over half a million hardworking
neighbors back home and across the
Tampa Bay area, I rise in strong support of the extension of the lifesaving
and cost-saving ACA tax credits.
Families are being crushed by inflation and high healthcare costs, and
they need the savings that the ACA tax
credits provide. Mr. Speaker, 4.7 million Floridians, one in five who live in
the Sunshine State, depend on the
ACA. It is estimated that without the
tax credits, over 1.4 million Floridians
will lose their health insurance entirely.
They are entrepreneurs. They are
caregivers. They are cancer patients.
They are part-time workers. They are
small-business workers who have seen
their premiums more than double, and
they deserve so much better.
That includes Yohanna, a small business owner in Tampa and the mother of
a daughter with Down syndrome, who
without enhanced tax credits defaults
to an insurance plan where every visit
will cost her $150 for a copay. It includes Matthew, a truck driver from
St. Petersburg, whose premiums rose
from $64 a month to $736 per month.
We need to extend these tax credits,
and we need to do it now.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentlewoman from Hawaii (Ms. TOKUDA).
Ms. TOKUDA. Mr. Speaker, imagine
being a farmer choosing between insurance and seed, a small business owner
weighing a doctor’s visit against payroll, families hoping nothing goes
wrong because they are one ER visit
away from being homeless. This is the
reality for rural America today.
The big, ugly bill took a sledgehammer to rural healthcare, and letting the ACA enhanced premium tax
credits expire will accelerate the damage and hasten the harm.
In rural America, places like Hawaii,
insurance coverage is the business
model that keeps hospitals, clinics, and
emergency rooms open. When premiums rise, coverage drops, revenue
disappears, and hospital doors close.
Without those credits, rural Americans
will see their monthly healthcare costs
rise by 107 percent. A single premium
hike will make the difference between
whether a family eats, pays their rent,
or sees a doctor.
Mr. Speaker, 2.8 million rural Americans will lose coverage. For them, this
is not politics. This is life or death.
Healthcare should never depend on
your ZIP Code. This clean extension of
the ACA tax credits will save lives.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentlewoman from
Vermont (Ms. BALINT).
Ms. BALINT. Mr. Speaker, 1 week
ago today, Republicans allowed the
ACA premium tax credits to expire
after telling us there was no money to
do so.
Healthcare premiums have soared,
and millions of Americans will lose
their healthcare coverage because they
simply can’t afford it.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:07 Jan 09, 2026

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 059060

Just 3 days later, the President found
money, a lot of money, to pay for a
very extensive and expensive military
raid to capture the President of Venezuela. This regime change and the nation building that will come later is
going to cost us additional billions of
dollars.
We have seemingly endless money to
spend for illegal, unauthorized warmongering, but there is no money
available for healthcare for Americans.
It doesn’t have to be this way. We are
the richest Nation in the world. We
have the money to make sure everyone
has healthcare.
Voting to extend these healthcare
tax credits is the least that we can do
for Americans to show them that we
are focused on them and their needs.
Mr. Speaker, I urge a ‘‘yes’’ vote.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
1 minute to the gentleman from Rhode
Island (Mr. MAGAZINER).
Mr. MAGAZINER. Mr. Speaker, in
Rhode Island and all across the country, people are being crushed by high
healthcare costs because Republicans
have refused to extend the Affordable
Care Act funding. People are seeing
their premiums go up by thousands of
dollars a year, and many of them are
having to make that hard choice to not
go with insurance at all and hope that
they won’t end up with an emergency
room bill that will bankrupt them.
Meanwhile, President Trump and the
Republicans are talking about buying
Greenland. They have the money to
buy Greenland but not to help fund
healthcare for the American people.
They have the money. Donald Trump
wants to expand the size of the military budget by $500 billion which he
just posted today, but they don’t have
the money to fund healthcare for the
American people. They have the money
for ballrooms and lavish parties.
Here is an idea. How about we invest
in providing relief to the American
people who are being crushed by out-ofcontrol healthcare costs. We have an
opportunity now to do the right thing
by the people who sent us here and to
extend this Affordable Care Act funding now once and for all.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
This is it, Mr. Speaker. We need a
majority of this House to vote ‘‘yes’’
on this rule so that we can have an upor-down vote on reversing the premium
increases. It is that simple.
If we do nothing, millions of families
will lose their healthcare. People won’t
be able to see doctors if they get sick.
Medical bills will stack up. Millions
more will be left paying hundreds or
even thousands of dollars more every
month just to maintain their coverage.
They will have to cut back on food or
won’t be able to make their rent because of these steep increases.
In some cases, the damage has already been done. Many people have already decided to forgo coverage. In my
home State of Massachusetts, over
25,000 people canceled their coverage

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

because Republicans let premiums skyrocket.
b 1810
That is nearly double the number of
people who canceled coverage last
year. It is a huge increase that will
drive up costs for everyone and make
America less healthy. I am sure that
my colleagues are seeing their constituents make similar choices.
Let me end with this. We have the
power right now to give peace of mind
to working families that they won’t go
bankrupt just trying to afford health
insurance. We can make their lives a
little easier. We can help them sleep a
little more soundly and breathe more
easily knowing that they can afford
coverage for their families.
I have said this over and over and
over again, but we are the richest
country in the history of the world.
People ought to have better coverage.
They ought to have more affordable
coverage. Healthcare is a fundamental
human right, and we should come together in a bipartisan way and support
this rule and support the underlying
legislation. We can prevent a catastrophe from impacting millions and
millions of people in this country.
We have lots of disagreements, but,
boy, I would like to think if we could
all agree on one thing, it ought to be
that people ought to not get screwed
over when it comes to healthcare, that
they ought not be paying double, triple, quadruple what they normally pay
for their health insurance premiums.
I urge a ‘‘yes’’ vote on this rule. I
yield back the balance of my time, and
I move the previous question on the
resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Without
objection, the previous question is ordered.
There was no objection.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the resolution.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. WEBER of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question are postponed.
f

REAPPOINTMENT OF MEMBER TO
THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON
THE STRATEGIC COMPETITION
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES
AND THE CHINESE COMMUNIST
PARTY
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair announces the Speaker’s reappointment, pursuant to section 4(a)
of House Resolution 5, 119th Congress,
and the order of the house of January
3, 2025, of the following Member to the
Select Committee on the Strategic
Competition
Between
the
United
States and the Chinese Communist
Party:
Mr. KHANNA, California, to rank before Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI.

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\H07JA6.REC

H07JA6

January 7, 2026

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess for a period of less than 15 minutes.
Accordingly (at 6 o’clock and 15 minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1820
SAVING
HOMEOWNERS
FROM
OVERREGULATION WITH EXCEPTIONAL RINSING ACT
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, Pursuant to House Resolution 977, I call up
the bill (H.R. 4593) to amend the Energy Policy and Conservation Act to
revise the definition of showerhead,
and ask for its immediate consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 977, the bill is
considered read.
The text of the bill is as follows:
H.R. 4593
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Saving
Homeowners from Overregulation With Exceptional Rinsing Act’’ or the ‘‘SHOWER
Act’’.
SEC. 2. REVISED DEFINITION OF SHOWERHEAD.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 321(31)(D) of the

Energy Policy and Conservation Act (42
U.S.C. 6291(31)(D)) is amended to read as follows:
‘‘(D) The term ‘showerhead’ has the meaning given such term in ASME A112.18.1–2024,
except such term does not include safety
shower showerheads.’’.
(b) REVISIONS TO REGULATIONS.—Not later
than 180 days after the date of enactment of
this Act, the Secretary of Energy shall promulgate such revisions to regulations as
may be necessary to conform such regulations to the definition of showerhead in section 321(31)(D) of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act, as amended by subsection (a)
of this section.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill
shall be debatable for 1 hour equally divided and controlled by the chair and
ranking minority member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce or
their respective designees.
The gentleman from Kentucky (Mr.
GUTHRIE) and the gentleman from New
Jersey (Mr. PALLONE) each will control
30 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Kentucky.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days to revise
and extend their remarks on the legislation and to include extraneous material on H.R. 4593.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Kentucky?
There was no objection.
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, under the previous administration,
American
consumers

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

H127

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

were subjected to Washington’s constant micromanagement of appliances
and equipment in their homes and businesses.
In fact, the Biden-Harris administration finalized more than 30 new or
amended energy efficiency standards,
totaling over $60 billion in costs and
regulating nearly every appliance in
Americans’ homes. Part of this effort
focused on complicating the definition
of a showerhead by prohibiting multinozzle shower systems if the whole system collectively delivers more than 2.5
gallons of water per minute, instead of
following the straightforward statutory definition of a showerhead.
The new, highly bureaucratic definition was an amazing 13,000 words in
length and a novel interpretation. This
resulted in shower systems with more
than one nozzle having a lower flow
rate
compared
to
individual
showerheads.
Additionally, this definition is misleading to consumers looking to buy
multi-nozzled shower systems for the
purpose of increasing water flow.
President Trump has taken executive
action to restore the regulatory definitions and standards to the law’s original intent by allowing a maximum
water use of 2.5 gallons per minute for
each faucet in a shower system. H.R.
4593 would codify President Trump’s
definition by allowing the 2.5 maximum flow rate to apply to each nozzle
in the shower system.
This legislation will ensure manufacturers, like Delta Faucet in my district
in Morgantown, Kentucky, are not subjected to the swing of the political pendulum with ever-changing interpretations of the law.
Further, this legislation is simple
and pro-consumer choice. It is unfortunate that my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle are seeking more regulation for its own sake and limiting the
choices of American consumers. If an
individual wants low water pressure,
they have a variety of options. They
can
purchase
a
single-nozzle
showerhead, or they can simply turn
down the faucet. It is that simple, but
those choices must be left to individual
Americans and not to Washington.
H.R. 4593 would bring regulatory certainty to manufacturers, performance
effectiveness to a household appliance
we all use, and choice to American consumers.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support it, and I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
The American people are struggling
to make ends meet. They are feeling
the pinch of the affordability crisis and
bearing the brunt of rising costs at the
hands of Republicans. Yet my colleagues continue to turn a blind eye to
the cost-of-living crisis. In fact, President Trump has called the affordability
crisis a con job and a Democratic scam.
That is how out of touch they are,
Mr. Speaker. Healthcare costs are sky-

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

rocketing, and electricity bills are
through the roof. Meanwhile, President
Trump just illegally invaded Venezuela, and Secretary Kennedy is putting children’s lives at risk by restricting access to vaccines.
There is a lot this Congress could be
doing this week, but the first bill Republicans bring to the floor in 2026 is
about showerheads. It is almost impossible to believe. To make matters
worse, this bill will actually drive up
monthly utility bills for American
families.
Electricity prices are up 13 percent
across the country. Eighty million
Americans are struggling to pay their
utility bills, and Republicans want to
make that financial pain even worse.
Meanwhile, grocery prices are surging,
and, of course, monthly healthcare premiums are skyrocketing across the Nation, thanks to the healthcare crisis
Republicans created by failing to extend the Affordable Care Act’s enhanced premium tax credits. As a result of their inaction, more than 20
million Americans are now facing skyrocketing monthly healthcare premiums. In many cases, and I will say in
my home State of New Jersey, Mr.
Speaker, they are double or triple the
cost that they paid last year.
We just heard a debate on the discharge petition a few minutes ago, and
as a result of that discharge petition,
and no thanks to most of the Republicans and the leadership, we are going
to have an opportunity to vote on the
premium tax credits. The bottom line
is that that has nothing to do with the
Republican leadership. This was a
Democratic initiative that a few Republicans finally joined with us so that
we have an opportunity to vote on it.
There isn’t a single thing that the
Republicans can point to about dealing
with the affordability crisis that they
have created. President Trump and his
Republican accomplices are completely
out of touch with the alarming reality
millions of Americans are facing. Republicans have no plans to address affordability, and I think today proves it.
They are beginning this new Congress with a bill that changes the definition of ‘‘showerhead’’ in order to
open the door for the Trump administration to increase already rising
monthly utility bills and to waste our
scarce water resources. This bill would
actually increase costs for consumers.
In Trump’s first term, he redefined
‘‘showerheads’’ to allow them to use
significantly more energy and water.
Showerheads with multiple nozzles
could vastly exceed the current limits.
For example, a showerhead with eight
nozzles could use up to 20 gallons of
water per minute under Trump’s 2020
definition.
Think about this, Mr. Speaker: You
are raising the costs. You are increasing utility bills not only for electricity
but also for water. You are wasting energy, and you are wasting water.
The bottom line is that manufacturers didn’t want this. They largely rejected this move by President Trump

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.051

H07JAPT1

H128

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

and didn’t produce showerheads that
exceeded the limit that existed. That
was because they knew that consumers
value money-saving and water conservation showerheads that are good
for both their wallets and the environment.
Energy and water conservation
standards, Mr. Speaker, save consumers money. The only reason that
we have these energy-efficient standards both for showerheads and for so
many other things is that Congress, on
a bipartisan basis, decided to establish
a program where if the Department of
Energy or other Departments, mostly
the Department of Energy, could show
that, in fact, you could save money for
consumers and eliminate a lot of waste
in terms of water and energy, then
they would put forth these standards.
These are bipartisan standards.
In 2024 alone, energy and water conservation standards slashed $576 off
Americans’ utility bills while cutting
our energy and water consumption.
I am just trying to point out, Mr.
Speaker, that Republican priorities are
completely out of touch with the concerns of everyday Americans. They are
out of touch with the manufacturers
and out of touch with the average
American.
The only Republican priority is
pleasing President Trump with whatever he wants. They give in to his
every wish, even if it means driving up
utility bills for American families.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘no’’ on this bill, and I reserve the
balance of my time.
b 1830
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
When the gentleman from New Jersey (Mr. PALLONE) had his poster, he
didn’t actually have the poster that
President Trump was referring to when
he was talking about affordability.
It was a poster that showed the different States and the rising price of energy. It showed certain States and certain areas—he colored them blue and
red States on his poster—and the difference in what people are paying for
electric rates.
You can tie it directly to State and
local governments that are making decisions to shut down generation of energy. When you overregulate—why are
people paying more for appliances,
dishwashers and stoves? It is because of
the regulations.
Why are they paying more for
showerheads? As we said, if people can
have the choice, they can also turn
down their water. As I said, it is just
that simple.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Texas (Mr. WEBER),
my good friend, the vice chair of the
Energy Subcommittee.
Mr. WEBER of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today in support of the SHOWER
Act, led by the gentleman from South
Carolina (Mr. FRY).
Over the last several years, Americans have seen firsthand what happens

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

when a radical regulatory agenda takes
over Washington. The previous administration, it is sad to say, inserted
itself into nearly every aspect of American life, raising costs and imposing
rules that made no sense for American
families.
One of the clearest examples is what
they did, believe it or not, to our showers. They twisted the law to claim—
you can’t make this stuff up—that the
2.5-gallon-per-minute standard applied
to the entire shower system instead of
just each individual showerhead. You
can’t make this stuff up. Quite frankly,
I think they were all wet. The result
was weaker water pressure and daily
frustration for homeowners, all in the
name of government control.
For a year now, this Congress has
worked to reverse the damage left behind by previous administrations, Mr.
Speaker. The SHOWER Act is simply
another step in that effort. It locks in
the law’s original intent and ensures
that future leftist administrations cannot weaponize regulations against everyday Americans again.
This bill is one of many we must
pass, Mr. Speaker, to reverse the harm
already done and restore America to
the one we once knew. Mr. Speaker, I
urge my colleagues to support the
SHOWER Act.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 5
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Florida (Ms. CASTOR), the ranking
member of our Energy Subcommittee.
Ms. CASTOR of Florida. Mr. Speaker,
I thank the gentleman from New Jersey for yielding the time.
I rise in opposition to H.R. 4593 with
a great concern that House Republicans simply do not care to work on
any solutions to lower the cost of living for our hardworking neighbors
back home.
In 2025, House Republicans failed to
bring one bill to the floor to lower the
cost of living or to tackle the high rate
of inflation, but here is some good news
actually: By tomorrow, thanks to
House Democrats and a handful of Republicans who stood up to their Speaker, the House will vote to lower the
cost of healthcare coverage for millions of Americans. That is a little bit
of good news.
If Americans were hoping that Republicans in Congress would start 2026
off with some relief for their pocketbooks, I am sorry to report that, no,
Republicans are not bringing bills to
lower the cost of living.
I congratulate my Republican colleagues, their first bill of 2026, to set
the tone, is to address showerheads.
This is critical. You heard that right.
It is ridiculous, isn’t it? It is so out of
touch.
The President promised he was going
to cut Americans’ power bills in half,
but since he took office last year, electric bills are up by 13 percent across
the country, and they are much higher
in some places. There are 80 million
Americans who are struggling just to
pay their electric bills. In Florida, the

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Republican-controlled utilities commission just approved the highest rate
increases in the history of the country—they are calling them that—a $6
billion rate increase.
Across the country, folks are facing
about $86 billion in electric rate increases, so hold on to your wallet.
Rather than help, Republicans have
only made things worse. They have
gone along with arbitrary tariffs that
have raised the cost of living and taken
a hatchet to cleaner, cheaper energy.
They have gone along with illegally
halting energy projects. They ended
tax cuts and rebates that helped people
afford their electric bills in order to
pay for tax breaks for billionaires.
They are out of touch.
Folks in the Northeast are worried
about their rising electric bills because
the President in December arbitrarily
terminated five offshore wind projects
that were under construction. That energy onto the grid would have helped
keep the pressure on lower electric
bills.
The President canceled final approval for what would have been the
Nation’s largest solar farm, a 6.2
gigawatt project in the Nevada desert.
He illegally ended low-cost solar installation for working-class families
that would have helped them and their
family budgets.
The President now has canceled
major upgrades to the power grid out
of the bipartisan infrastructure law,
such as the Grain Belt Express transmission line.
Republican policies now—we are adding it up—have cost Americans about
266 gigawatts of planned electricity
generation projects in 2025 at a time
when there is a surge of new demand
for electricity across the country. They
are out of touch.
Speaking of being out of touch, of
course, the President doesn’t believe
there is an affordability crisis. He has
called it a hoax. The real issues for the
President are shower pressure, redecorating the White House, and so much
more.
Yes, it was last April that the President thought it was so important he
issued an executive order to end the
Obama-Biden war on water pressure
and make America’s showers great
again. He is out of touch. However, he
urged Congress to codify that order, so
that is what we are doing here tonight
on the first bill of 2026 by this Republican majority. Are they serious?
What has been the President’s focus
during all this time he has called the
affordability crisis a hoax? Well, he
paved over the Rose Garden. He has
torn down the East Wing of the White
House to make way for a grand ballroom funded by people who have business in front of the Federal Government.
I haven’t been over to the White
House, but all of the pictures show 24
karat gold ornamentation all through
the White House. He has installed marble floors. I have seen him tweet that

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.054

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

out. He has also added his name to the
Kennedy Center.
For those of you who haven’t come to
Washington, D.C., he has put banners
of his picture up on Federal buildings.
He is proposing to put his likeness on
gold coins.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MOORE of Utah). The time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from Florida.
Ms. CASTOR of Florida. Mr. Speaker,
I think you get my drift here. It was so
galling as people are trying to pay
their electric bills and their grocery
bills that the President here is bragging about how he has redone the Lincoln
bathroom,
yes,
with
gold
showerheads.
We don’t need to redefine what constitutes a showerhead. We don’t need
to weaken energy and water conservation measures that help people save
money. We don’t need to make life
more expensive for hardworking neighbors back home. We don’t need to boost
foreign manufacturers who want to import inferior products to the U.S., but
that is what they are doing.
No, in 2026 we are going to need real
solutions. I beseech my colleagues to
work with us to tackle the high cost of
living. You can look back on 2025 now;
Federal spending is up. They added $2
trillion to the national debt and they
have lost manufacturing jobs when you
add it all up. Now their answer on the
first bill of the Congress in 2026 is
showerheads. They are out of touch.
b 1840
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, when we
talk about affordability, we did pass
and sign into law no tax on Social Security. It is a deduction for people who
generally have incomes that are almost
all Social Security. They won’t pay
any tax on that. We passed the no tax
on tips. People working on tips income
won’t be paying tax on their tips.
I come from the world of manufacturing where people work hard all week
hoping for overtime over the weekend
so they can earn more money for their
families. Now there is no tax on overtime to make things affordable for people and give them more money in their
pocket to pay for things, but we also
need to make them cheaper.
We worked hard on energy. We have
passed bills out of committee and
across the floor on permitting energy.
We have energy in this country, but we
have to be able to generate the electrons, and we have to be able to move
the energy to where it needs to be. The
problem is permitting. I am a believer
in all of the above, and we need to develop an all-of-the-above energy strategy.
We have 112-gigawatts of power—a
gigawatt is the city of Seattle. There
are 112-gigawatts of power scheduled to
go offline in the next decade because of
environmental regulations, which we
can do safely and securely and save our

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

H129

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

environment and produce the energy
that people need.
Again, if you bring the poster that
the President used, you can see States
that have the highest energy prices,
and it goes to their energy regulation
that their State and local governments
have done to themselves.
Mr. Speaker, I was in California putting gas in a rental car, and I looked
over to the guy next to me and said: Do
you have any idea how much people
pay for gas in the rest of the country?
I paid $2.80 in Kentucky and paid
over $4 in California. It is State and
local governments that make these decisions, and they are bringing that to
Washington, D.C. We want to make it
cheaper and for our people to have
more affordability.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 5 minutes to the
gentleman from South Carolina (Mr.
FRY), the sponsor of this legislation
and my good friend.
Mr. FRY. Mr. Speaker, I think it is
important to set the scene in contrast
to some of the revisionist history that
Democrats seem to be talking about
today.
The definition of a showerhead was
outlined very clearly in a 1975 act that
Congress passed, not some bureaucrat
and not some administration. Congress
actually got together and said we are
going to have some efficiency standards on showerheads and a number of
other things. We are going to pass this
bill, in 1975, and for over 30 years that
was the national standard.
Even the American Association for
Mechanical Engineers, this is their definition that is in this bill. Along comes
the Obama administration, and rather
than take the very simple, easy-to-understand, congressionally mandated
standard of what a showerhead is, the
Obama administration, in some closet
somewhere, decided we are going to reinvent the definition of a showerhead.
Now, why is this important? Because
this is exactly why people have a problem with Washington, D.C. They make
rules that are not congressionally driven, that the people elect their representatives to be their voice in Washington. No, it is some unelected, unaccountable bureaucrat that decides to
create a problem and then solve the
problem that they created.
This is a microcosm to a much larger
problem. That is overregulation. I
think the ranking member said Trump
changed the definition. No, he changed
it back. He changed it back to what
Congress intended to begin with.
Now, we have the Biden administration that comes in and pulls it back
again. We have this ping-pong effect of
regulations that are creating uncertainty for manufacturers and creating
uncertainty for consumers. You can
take showerheads, but the Biden administration also did this on home appliances, gas stoves, any number of
things. The degree of regulation that
Democrats and their bureaucratic allies are willing to do even, as something as small as a showerhead, that

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

should send alarm bells. Why are we
not empowering people to make
choices about what they want in their
own homes?
If they want a nozzle that dribbles on
their head, then go get one of those. If
you want something that slices an orange, then go get one of those. That
should be your choice as a consumer.
But we find ourselves in this endless
game of whack-a-mole in Washington,
D.C., because bureaucrats create problems and then solve them like they
have done something meritorious for
the country. It is total BS.
This bill is quite simple: It restores
the definition of a showerhead to what
Congress originally intended in 1975. It
was a law for 32 years before the problem was created by the Obama administration. Then they solved the problem.
The President is absolutely right not
just on showerheads but on home appliances. The Democrats want to talk
about energy costs. For a second, by
the way, I think it is really rich coming from them because I think eight of
the top ten States with the highest energy costs are blue States that are run
by Democrat State legislators and
Democrat governors. They want to
talk about the rising cost of energy. It
disproportionately affects blue States.
Why? Because they have terrible policies.
This bill is quite simple: It restores
the definition that Congress originally
intended. If an administration, any future administration, wants to change
policy, rather than that coming from
the bureaucrats, it should come before
Congress. Congress set the efficiency
standards in 1975, and if Congress wants
to address those, that is Congress’ prerogative, not some unelected, unaccountable bureaucrat in Washington,
D.C.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from New
Jersey (Mr. MENENDEZ), a member of
our committee.
Mr. MENENDEZ. Mr. Speaker, I
thank my friend and colleague, Ranking Member PALLONE, for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, House Republicans
ended 2025 by failing to extend Affordable Care Act tax credits causing
healthcare costs to skyrocket for millions of Americans.
Since President Trump took office,
electricity prices have gone up by 13
percent nationwide and 20 percent in
New Jersey, leaving over 80 million
Americans struggling to pay their utility bills. Instead of addressing the affordability crisis that they have ignored, that President Trump has called
a hoax, the Republicans’ priority on
day one is showerheads.
It is obscene that with all the work
we need to do to uplift American families, to give them a fair shot at the
American Dream, the Republican majority would choose instead to focus on
showerheads. Why? Because it is important to one person and one person
only, Donald Trump.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.056

H07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H130

Not once, at any of the townhalls I
have had, has anyone said that their
showerhead pressure is their top concern. Housing, yes. Healthcare, yes.
Childcare, yes. Not once did they say
showerheads was their primary concern.
If my colleagues were serious about
governing, we would be voting on protecting healthcare, lowering costs, and
addressing the real issues that working
families are facing. We would not be
here today talking about showerheads.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my Republican
colleagues to get serious and focus on
the priorities our constituents sent us
here to address. For all these reasons
and so many more, I strongly oppose
this bill.
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Ohio
(Mr. RULLI), my good friend and member of the Energy and Commerce Committee.
Mr. RULLI. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
in support of Congressman FRY’s
SHOWER Act.
I am not going to pull a NANCY
PELOSI, Mr. Speaker. I am not going to
rip up the speech that I had written,
but I am not going to give that speech.
I have to talk about the opposition
party, and I have to talk about their
complete lack of interaction with the
blue-collar Joe Bag of Donuts, which is
Youngstown and Akron and Canton and
Cleveland and Pittsburgh. These are
working people that they have forgotten.
They bring up electricity, sir, but
they do not allow us to address power
plants. They shut down coal plants.
They put regulations on gas-powered
generated plants, but then they say
there is an electricity problem.
Let’s talk about prices. In my district right now, eggs are $1.29. We have
chicken breast at 99 cents. In Trumbull
County, we have gas at $1.99. I have
45,000 jobs that I cannot fill.
We are on the ground. We are listening to the people. You guys are promoting the Ford Lightning, which nobody who is a working person even
gives a crap about. They want to have
Silverados and they want to have their
Mopar and they want to have gas-powered engines inside of those cars, but
yet they say they have it. All they
work on is the narrative, Mr. Speaker.
That is what they do.
I will tell you how I came to Congressman FRY’s bill and how I got interested in it. We were replacing a
showerhead at my mom’s house, and I
said to my plumber, Marty: What is
going on with these showerheads? He
said: You tell me. The people in Washington messed this up. Nobody can
have a darn good shower in the last 10
years.
Why does that matter? What did they
say? They say we are worried about
showerheads. We are worried about the
working man. We are worried about the
standard of living that they have taken
away from them. They have taxed
them to death. They play this game

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

with
healthcare.
They
created
ObamaCare. They never had a solution.
It was never a permanent fix.
b 1850
Mr. Speaker, the Democrats kicked
it down the road, and then they said to
just extend it without even dealing
with it. What my Democrat colleagues
are doing to the American people is
wrong.
When a person goes on vacation, they
go to a motel and take a shower. It is
the worst shower they have ever had. It
is cold. It is dripping out there. The
working man cannot even enjoy his
daily life. That is what they have
missed.
We want to talk about how grand
their philosophy is. When we look at
the mayor of New York City, he wants
to have government-owned grocery
stores. People will be able to choose
about 400 or 500 items instead of the
30,000 or 40,000 items they could choose
today, all in consideration of the bluecollar Joe Bag of Doughnuts, the forgotten worker.
This is why Donald Trump was elected. We care about the forgotten worker. We are going to fix healthcare. We
are going to fix affordability. Gas
prices are already coming down. Grocery prices are coming down. Wait
until that tax cut hits in 2026.
Mr. Speaker, I urge support of H.R.
4593 and so should you.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Florida (Ms. FRANKEL).
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida. Mr.
Speaker, my, my, my. I rise today,
amazed that with the healthcare crisis
unfolding, the Republican priority before us is plumbing.
At a time when families are already
being squeezed by the rising cost of living, from groceries to rent to utilities,
President Trump is focused on renaming the Kennedy Center, building a
ballroom, running a foreign country,
and the water pressure in his showers.
Republicans in Congress, instead of
focusing on lowering healthcare costs,
are
debating
the
definition
of
showerheads. Really? Millions of Americans are losing their healthcare coverage after Republicans allowed the Affordable Care Act tax credits to expire.
The nightmare of families having to
choose between taking their child to
the doctor or paying their rent is now
a reality, hitting my home State of
Florida especially hard. In Florida,
more than 4 million people rely on the
ACA and face premiums that are doubling or tripling.
A self-employed mom recovering
from cancer in Lake Worth Beach is
dropping her coverage as her premium
tripled overnight. A 62-year-old waiter
in West Palm Beach is going without
insurance because it now costs more
than his rent.
Here is a fact. When people lose
health insurance, the consequences are
real, and they are devastating. Medical
debt piles up. Families drain their savings. They face bankruptcy.

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Untreated illnesses force workers out
of their jobs. When people lose their
coverage, it affects all of us. Hospitals
are strained. Businesses are hurt. Costs
rise for everyone.
Here is a solution. I urge my colleagues to support the 3-year extension
of the ACA tax credits and stop millions of hardworking families from losing their coverage. Fix the pressure
where it matters the most. Lower
healthcare costs.
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from New
York (Mr. RILEY).
Mr. RILEY of New York. Mr. Speaker, my kids are little. The other day
they asked why daddy has to go back
to D.C. I said that it is for work. They
seemed sad about that. My wife chimed
in, and she said that it is really important work. It is work that is going to
help make people’s lives better.
Now here we are, back at work. The
first thing on the agenda in 2026 is not
to lower the soaring utility bills. It is
not to lower the insurance premiums.
It is not to make housing more affordable. It is showerheads. We are out here
talking about showerheads.
Not a single person in upstate New
York has ever told me they want Congress focused on showerheads. The
owner of the tattoo shop in Ithaca told
me she will go uninsured this year because she can’t afford the premiums.
There is a grandma in Endicott who
is cutting back on the groceries because NYSEG is jacking up the rates
and sending all her money to Spain.
There is a couple in their twenties.
They are both young nurses. They
can’t save up for a home because Wall
Street is gobbling up all the inventory.
Here
we
are,
talking
about
showerheads. We wonder why people
look at this place and see it as a selfserving, out of touch, dysfunctional
mess. We don’t need new ballrooms. We
don’t need new showerheads. We don’t
need a new name for the Kennedy Center. We need lower costs, better jobs,
and a square deal.
At the appropriate time, I will offer a
motion to recommit this bill back to
committee. If the House rules had allowed it, I would have offered a motion
with an amendment to lower costs for
hardworking families in upstate New
York.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of my amendment into the RECORD immediately
prior to the vote on the motion to recommit. The SPEAKER pro tempore.
Is there objection to the request of the
gentleman from New York? There was
no objection.
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. PALLONE. I yield 4 minutes to
the gentlewoman from New Mexico
(Ms. STANSBURY).
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, there
are days, increasingly so, when I cannot believe my eyes and my ears in this

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.058

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Chamber. It is about 7 p.m. East Coast
time. It has been a long day. I just
came from the Oversight Committee
where we just subpoenaed additional
witnesses in the Epstein investigation
including potential co-conspirators in
the crimes of Jeffrey Epstein.
We spent several hours today getting
a classified briefing on what happened
in the unauthorized invasion of Venezuela by this administration and the
capture of a foreign leader, as our
President and his administration are
threatening to invade other foreign
countries and have failed the most
basic constitutional duty of seeking
the consent of Congress and advising
Members of Congress.
Today, we forced a vote on this floor,
forcing all of my colleagues to ensure
that we vote to save the Affordable
Care Act so millions of Americans
could have healthcare.
Mr. Speaker, we have to understand
how absolutely inane and bizarre it is
to come to the floor at 7 p.m. for the
first real bill of this Congress this year
and it is on showerheads.
When I heard that we were going to
vote on showerheads, I literally had to
google and look up what this was all
about. I was actually genuinely
shocked that the President, of course,
had signed an executive order in April,
demanding that we change the efficiency standards for showerheads.
As I often do, I went down a rabbit
hole. In fact, I pulled up pictures of the
kinds of showerheads we are talking
about. It was fascinating to me, Mr.
Speaker, to hear the impassioned pleas
for regular working people to take
high-pressure showers in motels because that is not why Donald Trump
signed an executive order on this issue.
No, Donald Trump likes his big,
fancy showers with multiple heads. We
are talking about showers for rich people. These aren’t even everyday showers.
Mr. Speaker, my question is: Why on
God’s green Earth on the first full day
that this Congress is back in 2026 are
the Republicans using their floor time
in the midst of armed conflict and
daily corruption by this administration
to run a bill on rich people’s showers
for Donald Trump? It is just absolutely
amazing.
Mr. Speaker, I have a little less than
a minute left in my time. I would ask
my colleague across the aisle one simple question: Did Mr. Donald Trump
ask him to run a showerhead bill today
on the House floor? If my colleague
across the aisle cannot answer a simple
question about why we are running legislation on the United States House
floor on showerheads, I think we rest
our case.
b 1900
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I am
prepared to close, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume to
answer the question of the gentlewoman.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:45 Jan 08, 2026

H131

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, no, he did not ask to do
this bill on the floor today. I know the
President is very interested in this
issue, but not on this floor today.
Mr. Speaker, what I have tried to ask
and nobody has answered is: The enhanced tax credits, the COVID-era tax
credits, were set to expire in the Inflation Reduction Act, which was a bill
under the reconciliation process. It was
solely the Democratic Party who put
that in place, and the question I have
always asked is: Why did they set them
to expire?
They may say it was the reconciliation process. There were issues in that
bill that they made permanent, but
they chose to have the enhanced tax
credits expire.
What happens when the enhanced tax
credits expire? They are enhanced, so
we go back to the basic law. The basic
law we are operating under is the Affordable Care Act.
Why is the Affordable Care Act not
saving people money?
I remember when this first came out.
I was speaking to a Rotary Club, and a
person said to me at the end that I was
talking so negatively on the Affordable
Care Act.
I said to him: You know, I really
hope that people will keep the doctor
they want to keep, have the choices
they can have in healthcare, and their
premiums will go down. If that happens, I will eat my words. I hope I can
eat my words because there is no joy in
having a bill pass and see people lose
their doctors of choice, lose choice in
health plans because it is consolidating, lose choices in healthcare because it is consolidating, and see their
premiums skyrocketing.
Talking about how much the premiums are skyrocketing, do you know
why? What is the underlying law? The
underlying law is the Affordable Care
Act.
Mr. Speaker, I wish I could answer
the question. I wish I would get an answer to the question of why did they
set them to expire and why is the Affordable Care Act not working.
Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to close,
and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, I have to respond to the
chairman of our committee who, of
course, I respect a great deal.
The Republicans have never supported the Affordable Care Act. When
we passed it—and I was one of the
drafters how many years ago now—I
think there were none—certainly almost no Republican votes.
They were not there when we tried to
expand tax credits because we knew
that in order for people to be able to afford their health insurance, we would
have to reauthorize the tax credits
from time to time or expand them for
certain incomes. They were never
there.
Frankly, I don’t want to go into this
in any great deal or depth today, but
the bottom line is that I and most

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Democrats believe that healthcare is a
basic right and that we, as a Congress,
have a responsibility to make it so
that most people, if not all Americans,
can have health insurance because,
otherwise, they can’t see a doctor.
They end up in the emergency room.
They get sicker, and our society suffers
for it, either financially, healthwise, or
whatever.
I don’t really want to get into this
debate about who, when, and where because the bottom line is that the Republican Party has never supported
any of this. Many of them don’t even
believe, I think, that somehow we
should be helping Americans pay for
their health insurance. In any case,
they have never supported the Affordable Care Act, ObamaCare. They have
never supported the enhanced premium
tax credits, and so talking about when
you did it or didn’t do it, to me, is irrelevant.
The bottom line is that the majority
had the opportunity to extend it during
the reconciliation bill. My colleagues
did not. Republicans had the opportunity right through the end of this
year to extend it before it expired, and
all these double and triple costs per
month for health insurance started on
January 1. My Republican colleagues
didn’t do it and are not doing it now.
We had the debate just a half hour or
1 hour ago about the bill that is finally
coming to the floor, not because of the
Republicans but because every Democrat in this House signed a discharge
petition and we got a handful of Republicans to sign the discharge petition,
overturning the right of the Speaker to
determine what bills come to the floor.
So it will come to the floor tomorrow,
but when I was here for the debate on
the rule, there was only one Republican who got up and said that they
were supportive of extending the tax
credits.
I am going to see tomorrow how
many Republicans come to the floor
and say that they are going to extend
the tax credits or vote to extend the
tax credits. There will be very, very
few, unfortunately, because this is not
what Republicans support.
In any case, I will talk a little bit
about the affordability crisis in general. Across the country, the American
people are trying to find ways to afford
the rising prices of groceries, electricity, and their water bills. We hear
from our constituents—I do every
day—that affordability is their top
concern. As democratically elected
Members of Congress, I think it is our
job to address these concerns—not only
health insurance, but electricity costs,
water costs, and so many things that
deal with affordability.
I see my Republican colleagues only
seem to be interested in fighting the
Trump administration’s latest culture
war on showerheads.
Mr. Speaker, I have tried not to
laugh about this because I think the
issue has a level of seriousness, but it
is incredible that not only are they

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.059

H07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H132

bringing up this bill as their first bill
of the new year, but the fact is that the
bill does nothing to help the American
people.
If the majority was doing something
with showerhead bills to bring down
costs, I would say ‘‘fine,’’ but that is
not the case. This is only being done
because President Trump has been
complaining about efficiency standards
for everything since his first term. I
think he is completely out of touch
with the realities that everyday Americans face.
The truth is simple that efficiency
standards lower costs for Americans. I
have said it before, but it is worth repeating: In 2024 alone, energy and
water conservation standards slashed
$576 off of American utility bills while
cutting our energy and water consumption. Why is that a bad thing? It is a
good thing.
It is totally, in my opinion, kind of
dishonest for Republicans to claim that
the cost of compliance with environmental regulations and efficiency
standards drive up prices. They do not.
It is not conservation that is driving
up prices for Americans. It is Republican policies, and I would particularly
point to Trump’s tariffs that are driving up costs for the average American.
The Republican Party let the Affordable Care Act enhanced premium tax
credit expire without any safety net, so
millions of Americans are going to lose
their health insurance. Some have already decided not to sign up because
they can’t afford it. They are going to
lose their health insurance. We will
have more tomorrow and the next day
and the next day. Until we pass this enhanced tax credit bill, more and more
Americans will have no health insurance and the negative consequences
from that.
Let’s also talk about the big, ugly
bill—Republicans call it the big, beautiful bill—that is projected to increase
electricity prices for American families
by 61 percent. Nearly 1 in 20 American
households are in severe utility debt.
This winter, families are forced to
make the impossible choice of heating
their homes or putting food on the
table.
We have to address this issue, but
somehow that is not enough for my Republican colleagues. They now are trying to pass partisan legislation to increase utility bills, too. That is what
this bill does.
Again, all I can say is that the Republican Party’s priorities are senseless, cruel, and misguided.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘no’’ on this bill, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, my point when I talked
about the Affordable Care Act is that
once it was in place, I wish it had
worked. I wish what was believed to be
in place worked because I think people
with sincere hearts were the ones who
voted for it and put it in place. If we

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:38 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

did have choice and we had more people
provided—we didn’t have consolidation,
and we had cheaper health insurance.
That is what we wanted.
I will tell you that the Energy and
Commerce Committee and the Ways
and Means Committee are going to be
focusing on the cost of health insurance. We talked yesterday and put out
that health insurance executives from
the major health insurance companies,
or CEOs, are going to come before our
committee. We are going to spend this
year to hopefully find ways that we can
work together because the premiums
reflect the cost of healthcare.
We want to understand the premiums, how they devise the premiums,
where the premium is going, who is
getting the money, and what about the
consolidations. We are going to have a
series of hearings, and the first one is
going to be CEOs of major insurance
companies to come before our committees to do the proper oversight to see
why it is going from $14,000 to $22,000
and why are people being affected that
way.
b 1910
That is the answer the American people deserve. That is the work we must
do, and I hope we can do it together.
Mr. Speaker, I urge the support of
the underlying bill, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 977,
the previous question is ordered on the
bill.
Pursuant to clause 1(c) of rule XIX,
further consideration of H.R. 4593 is
postponed.
f

ADJOURNMENT
Mr. GUTHRIE. Mr. Speaker, I move
that the House do now adjourn.
The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 7 o’clock and 10 minutes
p.m.), under its previous order and pursuant to House Resolution 978, the
House adjourned until tomorrow,
Thursday, January 8, 2026, at 10 a.m.
for morning-hour debate and noon for
legislative business, as a further mark
of respect to the memory of the late
Honorable Doug LaMalfa.
Thereupon (at 7 o’clock and 10 minutes p.m.), under its previous order, the
House adjourned until tomorrow,
Thursday, January 8, 2026, at 10 a.m.
for morning-hour debate.
f

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS,
ETC.
Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive
communications were taken from the
Speaker’s table and referred as follows:
EC–2574. A letter from the Secretary, Division of Market Oversight, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, transmitting the
Commission’s Notice of withdrawal of Commission interpretive guidance — Retail Commodity Transactions Involving Certain Digital Assets (RIN: 3038-AF64) received January

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Agriculture.
EC–2575. A letter from the Secretary, Market Participants Division, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, transmitting the
Commission’s final rule — Revisions to Business Conduct and Swap Documentation Requirements for Swap Dealers and Major
Swap Participants (RIN: 3038-AF38) received
January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Agriculture.
EC–2576. A letter from the Director, Office
of Legislative Affairs, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, transmitting the Corporation’s Major final rule — Regulatory Capital
Rule: Modifications to the Enhanced Supplementary Leverage Ratio Standards for U.S.
Global Systemically Important Bank Holding Companies and Their Subsidiary Depository Institutions; Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity and Long-Term Debt Requirements
for U.S. Global Systemically Important
Bank Holding Companies (RIN: 3064-AG11)
received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Financial
Services.
EC–2577. A letter from the Director, Office
of Legislative Affairs, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, transmitting the Corporation’s final rule — Adjusting and Indexing
Certain Regulatory Thresholds (RIN: 3064AG15) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Financial Services.
EC–2578. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: DDTC 25-102; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2579. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: DDTC 25-088; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2580. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: DDTC 25-081; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2581. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: DDTC 25-036; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2582. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: DDTC 25-028; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2583. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: DDTC 25-080; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2584. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: DDTC 25-090; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2585. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: DDTC 25-079; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
EC–2586. A letter from the Senior Bureau
Official, Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting Department
Notification Number: DDTC 25-076; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.

E:\CR\FM\K07JA7.061

H07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 7, 2026

EC–2587. A letter from the Chief Administrative Officer, U.S. House of Representatives, transmitting Statement of Disbursements of the House of Representatives Covering the period of October 1, 2025 to December 31, 2025 (H. Doc. No. 119—125); to the Committee on House Administration and ordered
to be printed.
EC–2588. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule — Recession of Fee Rates [Docket No.: OSM-20250004; S1D1S SS08011000 SX064A000 256S180110;
S2D2S SS08011000 SX064A000 25XS501520]
(RIN: 1029-AC88) received January 5, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2589. A letter from the Biologist, Office
of Protected Resources, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, transmitting the Administration’s final rule — Takes
of Marine Mammals Incidental to Specified
Activities; Taking Marine Mammals Incidental to Military Readiness Activities in
the Hawaii-California Training and Testing
Study Area [Docket No.: 251211-0182] (RIN:
0648-BN44) received January 5, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Natural Resources.
EC–2590. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
Scope of Federal Regulations Implementing
the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation
Act of 1977 [Docket No.: OSM-2025-0021;
S1D1S SS08011000 SX064A000 256S180110;
S2D2S SS08011000SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN:
1029-AD02) received January 5, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Natural Resources.
EC–2591. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
General Reclamation Requirements [Docket
No.:
OSM-2025-0015;
S1D1S
SS08011000
SX064A000 256S180110; S2D2S SS08011000
SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN: 1029-AC99) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2592. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule — Rescission of Portions of Permanent Program
Performance Standards Related to Siltation
Structures [Docket No.: OSM-2025-0010;
S1D1S SS08011000 SX064A000 256S180110;
S2D2S SS08011000 SX064A000 25XS501520]
(RIN: 1029-AC92) received January 5, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2593. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule — Applicability of Federal Regulations Implementing the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act of 1977 [Docket ID.: OSM2025-0024;
S1D1S
SS08011000
SX064A000
256S180110; S2D2S SS08011000 SX064A000
25XS501520] (RIN: 1029-AD04) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2594. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
Prior Balance Replacement Funds [Docket

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:38 Jan 08, 2026

H133

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

No.:
OSM-2025-0016;
S1D1S
SS08011000
SX064A000 256S180110; S2D2S SS08011000
SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN: 1029-AD00) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2595. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
Certification and Noncoal Reclamation
[Docket
No.:
OSM-2025-0020;
S1D1S
SS08011000 SX064A000 256S180110; S2D2S
SS08011000 SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN: 1029AC97) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2596. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
Prior Balance Replacement Funds [Docket
No.:
OSM-2025-0013;
S1D1S
SS08011000
SX064A000 256S180110; S2D2S SS08011000
SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN: 1029-AC93) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2597. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
Backfilling and Grading [Docket ID.: OSM2025-0025;
S1D1S
SS08011000
SX064A000
256S180110; S2D2S SS08011000 SX064A000
25XS501520] (RIN: 1029-AD03) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2598. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
Minimum Program Make Up Funds [Docket
No.:
OSM-2025-0014;
S1D1S
SS08011000
SX064A000 256S180110; S2D2S SS08011000
SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN: 1029-AC98) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2599. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
Prior Balance Replacement Funds [Docket
No.:
OSM-2025-0012;
S1D1S
SS08011000
SX064A000
256S180110;
S2D2S
S08011000
SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN: 1029-AC95) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2600. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
Prior Balance Replacement Funds [Docket
No.:
OSM-2025-0011;
S1D1S
SS08011000
SX064A000
256S180110;
S2D2S
S08011000
SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN: 1029-AC94) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2601. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule — Rescission of Portions of Permanent Program
Performance Standards Regulating Subsidence Controls for Underground Mines [Docket No.: OSM-2025-0009; S1D1S SS08011000
SX064A000 256S180110; S2D2S SS08011000
SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN: 1029-AC91) re-

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ceived January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2602. A letter from the Director, Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Department of the Interior, transmitting the Department’s direct final rule —
Grants for Certified States and Indian Tribes
[Docket
No.:
OSM-2025-0019;
S1D1S
SS08011000 SX064A000 256S180110; S2D2S
SS08011000 SX064A000 25XS501520] (RIN: 1029AC96) received January 5, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Natural Resources.
f

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES ON
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XIII, reports of
committees were delivered to the Clerk
for printing and reference to the proper
calendar, as follows:
Mrs. HOUCHIN: Committee on Rules. H.
Res. 977. A resolution providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 4593) to amend the Energy Policy and Conservation Act to revise
the definition of showerhead; providing for
consideration of the bill (H.R. 5184) to prohibit the Secretary of Energy from enforcing
energy efficiency standards applicable to
manufactured housing, and for other purposes; and providing for consideration of the
bill (H.R. 6938) making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes (Rept.
119–424). Referred to the House Calendar.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri: Committee on
Ways and Means. H.R. 227. A bill to allow a
period in which members of the clergy may
revoke their exemption from Social Security
coverage, and for other purposes; with an
amendment (Rept. 119–425). Referred to the
Committee of the Whole House on the state
of the Union.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri: Committee on
Ways and Means. H.R. 2716. A bill to improve
coordination between Federal and State
agencies and the Do Not Pay working system, with an amendment (Rept. 119–426). Referred to the Committee of the Whole House
on the state of the Union.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri: Committee on
Ways and Means. H.R. 6495. A bill to amend
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide
for specific taxpayer notice when information is sought from third parties, with an
amendment (Rept. 119–427). Referred to the
Committee of the Whole House on the state
of the Union.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri: Committee on
Ways and Means. H.R. 6506. A bill to amend
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to suspend
the period of limitations on filing a claim for
credit or refund during collection action proceedings, to prohibit the crediting of overpayments against disputed tax liability during such proceedings, and to expand the jurisdiction of the Tax Court, with an amendment (Rept. 119–428). Referred to the Committee of the Whole House on the state of
the Union.
f

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following
titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\L07JA7.000

By Mr. HILL of Arkansas (for himself,
Mr. BARR, Mr. HUIZENGA, Mr. LUCAS,
Mr. SESSIONS, Mrs. WAGNER, Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas, Mr. EMMER, Mr.
LOUDERMILK, Mr. DAVIDSON, Mr.

H07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H134

ROSE, Mr. STEIL, Mr. TIMMONS, Mr.
STUTZMAN, Mr. NORMAN, Mr. MEUSER,
Mr.
DONALDS,
Mr.
Mrs.
KIM,
GARBARINO, Mr. FITZGERALD, Mr.
FLOOD, Mr. LAWLER, Ms. DE LA CRUZ,
Mr. OGLES, Mr. NUNN of Iowa, Mrs.
MCCLAIN, Ms. SALAZAR, Mr. DOWNING,
Mr. HARIDOPOLOS, and Mr. MOORE of
North Carolina):
H.R. 6955. A bill to make improvements to
the Federal banking laws, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. SCHNEIDER (for himself and
Mr. YAKYM):
H.R. 6956. A bill to require electronically
prepared tax returns to include scannable
code when submitted on paper, and to require the use of optical character recognition technology for paper documents received by the Internal Revenue Service; to
the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Ms. BARRAGÁN (for herself and
Mr. OBERNOLTE):
H.R. 6957. A bill to provide technical assistance and grants for faith-based organizations, institutions of higher education, and
local governments to increase the supply of
affordable rental housing, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. CISNEROS (for himself and Mr.
CARBAJAL):
H.R. 6958. A bill to amend the Immigration
and Nationality Act to require the Secretary
of Homeland Security to parole into the
United States certain relatives of current
and former members of the Armed Forces,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
the Judiciary.
By Mr. CRANE:
H.R. 6959. A bill to award a Congressional
Gold Medal to Nick Shirley, in recognition
of exemplary investigative journalism that
uncovered waste, fraud, and abuse perpetrated against American taxpayers; to the
Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. DELUZIO (for himself and Mr.
LALOTA):
H.R. 6960. A bill to require the Secretary of
Labor, in coordination with the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs, to develop a notice detailing benefits available to veterans, and to require employers to display such notice, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Education and Workforce, and in addition to
the Committees on Veterans’ Affairs, House
Administration, and Oversight and Government Reform, for a period to be subsequently
determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. GARBARINO:
H.R. 6961. A bill to support the athletic
programs of the United States Merchant Marine Academy; to the Committee on Armed
Services.
By Mr. HARRIGAN (for himself and
Mr. RILEY of New York):
H.R. 6962. A bill to strengthen and standardize ‘‘first look’’ protections for covered
properties to ensure families and communities have priority access to foreclosed
homes, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. HIGGINS of Louisiana (for himself, Mr. JOHNSON of Louisiana, Mr.
SCALISE, Ms. LETLOW, Mr. FIELDS,
and Mr. CARTER of Louisiana):
H.R. 6963. A bill to designate the community-based outpatient clinic of the Department of Veterans Affairs in Lafayette, Louisiana, as the ‘‘Rodney C. Hamilton Sr. VA
Clinic’’; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. JAMES (for himself and Mr.
RYAN):

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:38 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

H.R. 6964. A bill to amend the National Security Act of 1947 to include school security
as an element of the National Security
Strategy, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Education and Workforce, and
in addition to the Committee on Armed
Services, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. JAMES (for himself and Ms.
KAPTUR):
H.R. 6965. A bill to encourage local educational agencies to inform parents about
gun safety, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition to the Committees on the Judiciary,
and Education and Workforce, for a period to
be subsequently determined by the Speaker,
in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ (for herself and Ms. STANSBURY):
H.R. 6966. A bill to provide additional funds
to States for administration of certain nutrition programs; to the Committee on Agriculture.
By Mr. LUCAS (for himself and Ms.
PETTERSEN):
H.R. 6967. A bill to amend the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 to establish within the
Securities and Exchange Commission the
Public Company Advisory Committee, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. MANNION (for himself and Mr.
EVANS of Colorado):
H.R. 6968. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Labor to carry out a competitive grant program to support community colleges and
area career and technical education centers
in developing immersive technology education and training services programs for
workforce development, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Education and
Workforce.
By Mr. RILEY of New York (for himself and Mr. LAWLER):
H.R. 6969. A bill to amend the Food Security Act of 1985 to establish a program that
provides payments to producers for carrying
out conservation practices in selected eligible watersheds, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Agriculture.
By Mr. ROGERS of Alabama:
H.R. 6970. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to exclude from gross income the earnings from certain overseas deployments of members of the Armed Forces;
to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mr. ROGERS of Alabama:
H.R. 6971. A bill to require congressional
approval of major Executive Orders and
major rules, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition
to the Committees on Rules, the Budget, and
Oversight and Government Reform, for a period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. SMUCKER (for himself, Mrs.
BIGGS of South Carolina, Mr. GILL of
Texas, Mr. HIGGINS of Louisiana, Mr.
GOSAR, Ms. TENNEY, Mr. JOYCE of
Pennsylvania, Mr. BOST, Mr. WEBER
of Texas, and Mr. ROSE):
H.R. 6972. A bill to amend title X of the
Public Health Service Act to require grant
recipients to comply with all applicable
State and local laws requiring notification
or reporting of child abuse, child molestation, sexual abuse, rape, incest, intimate
partner violence, or human trafficking, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

By Mr. SUBRAMANYAM (for himself,
Mr. VAN DREW, Mr. WALKINSHAW, and
Mr. HERNÁNDEZ):
H.R. 6973. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Education to collect and report information
on the treatment of Advanced Placement
and International Baccalaureate course credits at institutions of higher education, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Education and Workforce.
By Ms. MALLIOTAKIS:
H.J. Res. 137. A joint resolution commending Sail250 for its advancement of goodwill among nations, its dedication to continuing the legacy of commemorating the
history of the United States, and its effort to
educate the next generation of Americans
about the Nation’s maritime heritage; to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, and in addition to the Committee
on Foreign Affairs, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Mr. MCGOVERN (for himself and
Mr. MASSIE):
H. Con. Res. 68. Concurrent resolution to
direct the removal of United States Armed
Forces from hostilities within or against
Venezuela that have not been authorized by
Congress; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. CALVERT:
H. Res. 978. A resolution expressing the
profound sorrow of the House of Representatives on the death of the Honorable Doug
LaMalfa; considered and agreed to.
By Mrs. HOUCHIN:
H. Res. 979. A resolution electing a Member
to a certain standing committee of the
House of Representatives; considered and
agreed to.
By Ms. CHU (for herself, Mr. SHERMAN,
Mr. AGUILAR, Ms. BARRAGÁN, Mr.
BERA, Ms. BROWNLEY, Mr. CARBAJAL,
Mr. CISNEROS, Mr. CORREA, Mr.
COSTA, Mr. DESAULNIER, Ms. FRIEDMAN, Mr. GARAMENDI, Mr. GARCIA of
California, Mr. GOMEZ, Mr. HARDER of
California, Mr. HUFFMAN, Ms. JACOBS,
Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE, Mr. KHANNA,
Mr. LEVIN, Mr. LICCARDO, Mr. LIEU,
Ms. LOFGREN, Ms. MATSUI, Mr. MIN,
Mr. MULLIN, Mr. PANETTA, Ms.
PELOSI, Mr. PETERS, Ms. RIVAS, Mr.
RUIZ, Ms. SÁNCHEZ, Ms. SIMON, Mr.
SWALWELL, Mr. TAKANO, Mr. THOMPSON of California, Mrs. TORRES of
California, Mr. TRAN, Mr. VARGAS,
Ms. WATERS, Mr. WHITESIDES, and
Mr. GRAY):
H. Res. 980. A resolution a resolution observing the 1-year anniversary of the 2025
Southern California wildfires; to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
By Mr. HUIZENGA (for himself, Mr.
PETERS, Mr. SMUCKER, Mr. QUIGLEY,
Mr. ARRINGTON, Mr. CASE, Mr.
WOMACK, Mr. PANETTA, Mrs. HOUCHIN,
Ms. PEREZ, Mr. MOORE of Utah, Ms.
HOULAHAN, Mr. JOHNSON of South Dakota, Mr. GOLDEN of Maine, and Mr.
ESTES):
H. Res. 981. A resolution expressing the
sense of the House of Representatives that
the United States should reduce and maintain the Federal unified budget deficit at or
below 3 percent of gross domestic product; to
the Committee on the Budget, and in addition to the Committees on Ways and Means,
and Rules, for a period to be subsequently
determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.

E:\CR\FM\L07JA7.100

H07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers
granted to Congress in the Constitution to enact the accompanying bill or
joint resolution.
By Mr. HILL of Arkansas:
H.R. 6955.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8 of the Constitution
By Mr. SCHNEIDER:
H.R. 6956.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. BARRAGÁN:
H.R. 6957.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 3 of the US
Constitution
By Mr. CISNEROS:
H.R. 6958.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. CRANE:
H.R. 6959.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 of the U.S.
Constitution
By Mr. DELUZIO:
H.R. 6960.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 18
By Mr. GARBARINO:
H.R. 6961.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Clause 18 of section 8 of article I of the
Constitution.
By Mr. HARRIGAN:
H.R. 6962.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 3
By Mr. HIGGINS of Louisiana:
H.R. 6963.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution
By Mr. JAMES:
H.R. 6964.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution.
By Mr. JAMES:
H.R. 6965.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution.
By Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ:
H.R. 6966.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 1 (the Spending
Clause) along with Article I, Section 8,
Clause 18 (the Necessary and Proper Clause)
By Mr. LUCAS:
H.R. 6967.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
By Mr. MANNION:
H.R. 6968.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:38 Jan 08, 2026

H135

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Section 8 of article I of the Constitution
By Mr. RILEY of New York:
H.R. 6969.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
article 1 section 8
By Mr. ROGERS of Alabama:
H.R. 6970.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. ROGERS of Alabama:
H.R. 6971.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. SMUCKER:
H.R. 6972.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Section VIII of Article I of the U.S. Constitution
By Mr. SUBRAMANYAM:
H.R. 6973.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution
By Ms. MALLIOTAKIS:
H.J. Res. 137.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Section 8 of Article I of the Constitution
f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H.R. 136: Mr. TONKO.
H.R. 138: Mr. TONKO.
H.R. 309: Mr. KNOTT.
H.R. 429: Mr. BERA, Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ
of Texas, and Mr. FLEISCHMANN.
H.R. 492: Mr. CASTEN.
H.R. 507: Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 628: Mr. POCAN.
H.R. 637: Mrs. HAYES.
H.R. 718: Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN.
H.R. 740: Mr. MCCORMICK.
H.R. 929: Mr. CASE.
H.R. 987: Mr. JACK.
H.R. 994: Ms. RANDALL.
H.R. 1004: Mr. MENENDEZ.
H.R. 1011: Ms. PEREZ.
H.R. 1094: Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas.
H.R. 1197: Mr. FROST.
H.R. 1227: Mr. MCGUIRE.
H.R. 1232: Mr. JACK and Mr. HUNT.
H.R. 1266: Ms. PEREZ.
H.R. 1329: Mr. WIED, Mr. MCCORMICK, Ms.
DAVIDS of Kansas, Ms. MORRISON, Ms. JOHNSON of Texas, and Ms. HOYLE of Oregon.
H.R. 1355: Mr. MIN.
H.R. 1406: Mr. TONKO.
H.R. 1410: Mrs. MCBATH and Mr. MULLIN.
H.R. 1517: Ms. GILLEN.
H.R. 1529: Ms. SIMON, Mr. VAN ORDEN, Mr.
PAPPAS, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania, and Mr.
FROST.
H.R. 1566: Mr. HARDER of California.
H.R. 1614: Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia.
H.R. 1616: Mr. STEUBE.
H.R. 1657: Mr. LATIMER.
H.R. 1661: Ms. OCASIO-CORTEZ.
H.R. 1665: Mr. LANDSMAN.
H.R. 1732: Ms. CHU and Mr. MIN.
H.R. 1761: Mr. BARR.
H.R. 1799: Mr. ROGERS of Alabama.
H.R. 1810: Mr. PALLONE.
H.R. 1870: Mr. WILLIAMS of Texas.
H.R. 1939: Mr. GREEN of Texas and Ms. DEXTER.
H.R. 1987: Mr. KEATING and Mr. PETERS.
H.R. 1991: Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 2028: Ms. GILLEN.
H.R. 2029: Mr. CISNEROS.

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

H.R. 2048: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 2089: Mr. GUTHRIE.
H.R. 2094: Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 2160: Ms. PEREZ.
H.R. 2172: Mrs. TRAHAN.
H.R. 2192: Ms. GILLEN.
H.R. 2199: Mr. STAUBER and Mr. PAPPAS.
H.R. 2222: Mr. SMITH of Nebraska.
H.R. 2231: Mr. HARIDOPOLOS.
H.R. 2368: Mr. DOGGETT, Mr. CONAWAY, and
Ms. JACOBS.
H.R. 2398: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 2486: Mr. MIN.
H.R. 2495: Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ and Ms.
BALINT.
H.R. 2518: Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 2736: Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 2743: Ms. CROCKETT.
H.R. 2766: Ms. RANDALL.
H.R. 2821: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 2837: Ms. ANSARI.
H.R. 2891: Ms. HOULAHAN, Mr. FITZPATRICK,
and Mr. JOHNSON of South Dakota.
H.R. 2902: Mr. CLEAVER, Mr. ROGERS of Alabama, and Ms. ADAMS.
H.R. 2940: Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas.
H.R. 3006: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 3028: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 3105: Mr. BOYLE of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 3115: Mr. FIGURES.
H.R. 3178: Ms. BUDZINSKI.
H.R. 3184: Mr. LARSON of Connecticut.
H.R. 3226: Mr. RUTHERFORD.
H.R. 3277: Mr. CRENSHAW, Ms. GILLEN, Mr.
Mr.
COHEN,
and
Mr.
SUBRAMANYAM,
THANEDAR.
H.R. 3335: Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin.
H.R. 3367: Mr. MENENDEZ and Mr. CASTEN.
H.R. 3389: Mr. TONKO.
H.R. 3449: Ms. BALINT.
H.R. 3491: Mr. POCAN.
H.R. 3501: Ms. PINGREE and Ms. SALAZAR.
H.R. 3505: Ms. ESCOBAR.
H.R. 3514: Mr. MCGUIRE.
H.R. 3591: Mr. RESCHENTHALER.
H.R. 3698: Mr. POCAN.
H.R. 3699: Mr. FINE.
H.R. 3701: Ms. TOKUDA.
H.R. 3714: Mr. FOSTER.
H.R. 3757: Mr. AGUILAR, Mr. KEATING, Mr.
Ms.
VELÁZQUEZ,
and
Ms.
SWALWELL,
STANSBURY.
H.R. 3811: Ms. TITUS.
H.R. 3861: Mr. FINE.
and
Mr.
H.R.
3946:
Mr.
CLINE
RESCHENTHALER.
H.R. 3954: Mr. AMO.
H.R. 4017: Ms. ROSS.
H.R. 4032: Mr. LUCAS.
H.R. 4060: Mr. MIN.
and
Mr.
H.R.
4153:
Mr.
EDWARDS
SUBRAMANYAM.
H.R. 4167: Mr. GARBARINO and Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 4231: Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 4253: Mr. MIN.
H.R. 4282: Mr. BACON.
H.R. 4307: Mr. NORCROSS.
H.R. 4319: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 4343: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 4356: Ms. LOFGREN.
H.R. 4391: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 4456: Mr. TONKO.
H.R. 4621: Mr. FITZPATRICK, Ms. MCDONALD
RIVET, and Mr. PALMER.
H.R. 4640: Ms. OCASIO-CORTEZ and Ms.
CRAIG.
H.R. 4669: Mr. YAKYM.
H.R. 4731: Mr. CASTEN and Ms. ADAMS.
H.R. 4840: Mr. LIEU.
H.R. 4876: Mrs. MCIVER.
H.R. 4936: Mr. LUCAS.
H.R. 4940: Mr. TRAN.
H.R. 4966: Ms. BUDZINSKI.
H.R. 5010: Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 5091: Mr. BEGICH.
H.R. 5106: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM.
H.R. 5116: Mr. EVANS of Colorado.

E:\CR\FM\A07JA7.014

H07JAPT1

H136

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H.R. 5126: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas.
H.R. 5133: Mr. WESTERMAN.
H.R. 5134: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM and Mr.
FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5142: Ms. POU.
H.R. 5145: Mr. WHITESIDES and Ms.
GOODLANDER.
H.R. 5198: Ms. KAPTUR.
H.R. 5222: Mr. FOSTER and Mr. MENENDEZ.
H.R. 5267: Mr. FINE.
H.R. 5269: Mr. WITTMAN, Mr. POCAN, Ms.
LEE of Florida, and Mr. RULLI.
H.R. 5309: Ms. RANDALL, Mr. LEVIN, and Ms.
DEGETTE.
H.R. 5334: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM.
H.R. 5351: Mr. HARIDOPOLOS.
H.R. 5355: Mrs. DINGELL.
H.R. 5415: Mr. CAREY and Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 5428: Mr. WITTMAN.
H.R. 5434: Mr. SWALWELL and Mr. GREEN of
Texas.
H.R. 5435: Ms. SCHRIER.
H.R. 5437: Mr. FINSTAD.
H.R. 5438: Ms. LEE of Florida.
H.R. 5486: Ms. MATSUI.
H.R. 5496: Ms. KAPTUR.
H.R. 5509: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas.
H.R. 5536: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas.
H.R. 5543: Ms. KAPTUR.
H.R. 5623: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5746: Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS.
H.R. 5791: Mr. FIGURES.
H.R. 5800: Mr. YAKYM and Mr. KNOTT.
H.R. 5835: Ms. POU.
H.R. 5862: Mrs. HAYES.
H.R. 5880: Ms. KAPTUR.
H.R. 5930: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5936: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 5940: Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 5966: Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia
and Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 5968: Mr. CARTER of Georgia.
H.R. 6001: Mrs. HARSHBARGER.
H.R. 6009: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6017: Ms. POU.
H.R. 6020: Mrs. MILLER of Illinois.
H.R. 6053: Mr. KENNEDY of New York and
Ms. MCDONALD RIVET.
H.R. 6085: Ms. CROCKETT, Ms. ANSARI, Mr.
FROST, and Ms. TLAIB.
H.R. 6086: Mr. BRESNAHAN and Mr. JOHNSON
of Georgia.
H.R. 6089: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 6096: Ms. SEWELL, Mr. WITTMAN, and
Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6124: Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania, Ms.
SIMON, and Ms. FRIEDMAN.
H.R. 6126: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6130: Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 6161: Mr. GARBARINO.
H.R. 6169: Mr. MCGOVERN.
H.R. 6170: Mrs. HARSHBARGER.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:38 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

H.R. 6181: Ms. MATSUI.
H.R. 6184: Mr. LEVIN.
H.R. 6204: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6207: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6219: Mr. SMITH of Nebraska and Mr.
MOORE of West Virginia.
H.R. 6224: Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 6225: Mrs. HARSHBARGER.
H.R. 6290: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 6318: Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania, Ms.
ANDALL
, Mrs. RAMIREZ, and Ms. SIMON.
R
H.R. 6338: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6340: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6358: Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 6359: Mr. BOST.
H.R. 6361: Mr. COSTA and Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 6375: Ms. STANSBURY.
H.R. 6383: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6389: Mrs. HAYES.
H.R. 6416: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6423: Mr. PANETTA, Mr. GOTTHEIMER,
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina, Ms. SALAZAR,
and Ms. STEVENS.
H.R. 6428: Mr. OLSZEWSKI and Ms. MCBRIDE.
H.R. 6434: Mr. WIED.
H.R. 6440: Ms. BUDZINSKI and Ms. CRAIG.
H.R. 6446: Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia.
H.R. 6469: Mr. SELF and Mr. COSTA.
H.R. 6476: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6490: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6497: Mr. LATIMER.
H.R. 6513: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 6521: Mr. LATIMER.
H.R. 6528: Mr. GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 6536: Mr. MOORE of North Carolina.
H.R. 6540: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6552: Mr. MOORE of North Carolina.
H.R. 6565: Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 6579: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas and Mr.
GARCÍA of Illinois.
H.R. 6582: Mr. MCDOWELL.
H.R. 6592: Mr. GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 6601: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 6609: Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia,
Mr. FLEISCHMANN, Mr. ROGERS of Kentucky,
Ms.
MALOY,
and
Mr.
Mr.
FULCHER,
MCGARVEY.
H.R. 6610: Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia,
Mr. FLEISCHMANN, Mr. ROGERS of Kentucky,
Ms. MALOY, and Mr. MCGARVEY.
H.R. 6659: Mr. MCDOWELL.
H.R. 6670: Mr. BACON and Mr. CORREA.
H.R. 6685: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6686: Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 6687: Mrs. WAGNER.
H.R. 6702: Mr. HUFFMAN.
H.R. 6730: Mr. HARDER of California.
H.R. 6731: Mr. KENNEDY of New York, Mr.
FOSTER, Mrs. RAMIREZ, Mrs. FOUSHEE, Mr.
RASKIN, Mr. SUBRAMANYAM, and Ms. SCANLON.
H.R. 6735: Mr. VINDMAN.

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

H.R. 6756: Ms. TLAIB.
H.R. 6757: Ms. TLAIB.
H.R. 6758: Ms. SIMON.
H.R. 6766: Mr. YAKYM.
H.R. 6779: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 6783: Mr. DESAULNIER.
H.R. 6785: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 6796: Mr. GOTTHEIMER and Mrs.
MCCLAIN DELANEY.
H.R. 6819: Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY.
H.R. 6854: Mr. BARR.
H.R. 6857: Mr. LALOTA and Ms. MENG.
H.R. 6867: Ms. NORTON, Mr. TONKO, Ms.
STANSBURY, Mr. CASTEN, Ms. MCCLELLAN,
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin, and Mr. POCAN.
H.R. 6874: Mr. OBERNOLTE.
H.R. 6875: Mr. MCCAUL.
H.R. 6876: Mr. BOST.
H.R. 6879: Mr. MCGOVERN and Ms. JOHNSON
of Texas.
H.R. 6900: Mr. COURTNEY.
H.R. 6915: Mr. COURTNEY, Mr. GARAMENDI,
Ms. JOHNSON of Texas, Mr. SORENSEN, Mr.
DOGGETT, Mr. THOMPSON of California, and
Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6925: Ms. JAYAPAL.
H.R. 6926: Ms. JAYAPAL.
H.R. 6945: Mr. STEUBE.
H.J. Res. 122: Ms. CRAIG.
H.J. Res. 132: Mr. WALKINSHAW and Mr.
TORRES of New York.
H.J. Res. 136: Mr. LIEU.
H. Con. Res. 51: Ms. SIMON.
H. Res. 116: Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin, Mrs.
HAYES, Mr. CONAWAY, Mr. WALKINSHAW, Mr.
BISHOP, Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida, Mr.
KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mr. QUIGLEY, and Mr.
EVANS of Pennsylvania.
H. Res. 120: Mr. STANTON.
H. Res. 564: Mr. WILSON of South Carolina
and Mr. STANTON.
H. Res. 577: Ms. RANDALL.
H. Res. 578: Ms. SIMON and Mr. CARTER of
Louisiana.
H. Res. 732: Ms. MCDONALD RIVET.
H. Res. 850: Mr. CARSON.
H. Res. 915: Mr. VINDMAN, Mr. WILSON of
South Carolina, Mr. GOTTHEIMER, and Mr.
LAWLER.
H. Res. 920: Mr. LAWLER.
H. Res. 929: Mr. TORRES of New York.
H. Res. 930: Mr. MEEKS.
H. Res. 937: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H. Res. 942: Ms. MCDONALD RIVET.
H. Res. 956: Mr. LIEU, Mr. COURTNEY, Mr.
SWALWELL, Mr. WALBERG, Ms. BROWN, Ms.
SCHRIER, and Mr. AMO.
H. Res. 963: Mr. LAWLER and Ms. SCHRIER.
H. Res. 967: Mr. EDWARDS.
H. Res. 971: Mr. WILSON of South Carolina.
H. Res. 973: Mr. NEAL, Ms. LOFGREN, and
Ms. SCANLON.

E:\CR\FM\A07JA7.019

H07JAPT1

UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 7, 2026

No. 4

Senate
The Senate met at 11:15 a.m. and was
called to order by the President pro
tempore (Mr. GRASSLEY).
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
Our Lord and Ruler, Your Name is
great, and we see Your glory in the
earth, sea, and sky. We are grateful for
this Nation and for the deliberative
process of lawmaking, with its challenges, setbacks, and opportunities. As
our Senators debate the issues that are
vital to our liberty, give them wisdom,
integrity, and courage for the living of
these days. Lord, inspire them to be
fully persuaded about the course that
will bless our people, Nation, and
world. Give our legislators respect for
honest differences as they remember
their accountability to you. Bless and
keep them now and always.
We pray in Your sovereign Name.
Amen.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The President pro tempore led the
Pledge of Allegiance, as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SHEEHY). Under the previous order, the
leadership time is reserved.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

MORNING BUSINESS
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate will be
in a period of morning business, with
Senators permitted to speak therein
for up to 10 minutes each.
The President pro tempore.

250TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE
DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
Mr. GRASSLEY. At the start of this
new year, one of the dates is coming up
that we always honor, but this is a special honor of that day because, on July
4 of this year, the United States of
America will celebrate the 250th anniversary of our Nation’s founding.
Throughout our history, Americans
from all walks of life have shaped our
story, including, and most importantly, the 56 colonists who signed the
Declaration of Independence. These
men—if it were happening today, there
would be women in that group. These
men reflected profiles in courage,
pledging their lives, their fortunes, and
their sacred honor on a piece of parchment paper. As benefactors of their
bold commitment to freedom, we must
never take for granted the remarkable
risk and providential promise that
they embraced.
Since July 4, 1776, Americans can
trace a shared heritage—a heritage of
freedom—to that founding document
proclaiming our unalienable rights and
self-evident truths: equality, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
The Declaration of Independence
launched the American experiment
that continues from one generation to
the next. This experiment is unique in
the 6,000-year history of humans.
Earlier this week, the Washington
Monument, here on our National Mall,
was illuminated to mark keystones in
American history: discovery, independence, westward expansion, the Industrial Revolution, innovation, and the
future.
Last August, the yearlong Great
American State Fair was launched at
the Iowa State Fair in Des Moines, IA.
On this Fourth of July, fair exhibits
from all 50 States will be featured on
the National Mall, right here in Washington, DC. I encourage Americans of
all walks of life to participate in local
celebrations across our beautiful country.

I am grateful to celebrate 250 years of
freedom and honor all those who served
in uniform to keep us free for generations yet to come.
I yield the floor.
f

RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY
LEADER
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority leader is recognized.
f

RURAL HEALTH
TRANSFORMATION PROGRAM
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, as someone who grew up in rural South Dakota, in the town of Murdo, which has
a population of roughly 500—and that
would be rounding up—I know firsthand the joys of living in a rural community. I also know some of the challenges.
Everything from package delivery to
internet reliability can be more difficult when you live far outside a major
city, and access to healthcare can
sometimes be a real challenge. More
than 100 rural hospitals have closed
over the past two decades, and doctors
can be few and far between in rural
areas.
But thanks to the working families
tax cut legislation, however, help is on
the way. Republicans’ legislation created a $50 billion Rural Health Transformation Program to address the
rural healthcare crisis. Instead of a
top-down,
Washington-dictated
approach, we are giving States the resources and the freedom to find solutions for the particular challenges in
their State and to find sustainable
ways of ensuring rural healthcare access in their communities going forward.
The response has been robust. Every
State in the Union—red and blue,
alike—has applied for and been approved for funding from this program.
States have big plans.
The Texas Tribune reports:

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S63

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A07JA6.000

S07JAPT1

S64

The state’s health care agency said it will
use the funds to strengthen rural health care
clinics in a variety of ways, including: creating wellness and nutrition programs to
rural providers; educating and attracting
health care professionals to work in rural
areas; and modernizing resources and technology in rural centers.
More specifically, it plans to ‘‘add more
than a thousand rural health care’’ positions
with the additional funds.

Another news article reports on Ohio,
noting that ‘‘the state’s proposal focuses
on
addressing
barriers
to
healthcare by building on existing
state investments to expand access to
care, strengthen the rural health workforce and modernize facilities and technology.’’
Georgia will be using Rural Health
Transformation funding to upgrade
technology and invest in its rural
workforce. North Carolina will use the
fund to, among other things, support
more than 400 rural health facilities.
The list goes on.
My own State of South Dakota will
be using its funding to invest in a number of priorities, including a major investment in telehealth, which can be a
key way to access healthcare for those
in rural areas.
South Dakota will also be using its
funding to create regional hubs for
emergency services and to improve access to maternal and infant health, to
ensure delivery of essential medical
care.
Back in June, a few months before
Democrats tried to repeal the Rural
Health Transformation fund, the Democrat leader said:
This little fund to help reimburse rural
hospitals is just a fraud.

He should tell that to his State,
which applied for the program and received a $212 million grant. And that is
for 2026 alone. When the State announced its application, the Office of
New York State Mental Health Commissioner, Dr. Ann Sullivan, stated:
Expanding access to services in underserved communities is an important part of
our effort to strengthen mental health care
statewide. The Rural Health Transformation
Grant will help New York State explore new
partnerships, build our health care workforce, and pursue innovative opportunities to
expand care in these areas.

Let me repeat that.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

The Rural Health Transformation Grant
will help New York State explore new partnerships, build our health care workforce,
and pursue innovative opportunities to expand care in these areas.

That doesn’t sound like fraud to me.
Perhaps the Democratic leader would
have preferred his State to miss out on
these resources.
Perhaps he would disagree with the
Democrat Governor of Hawaii, who
said:
As a relatively small State, this will help
us a lot to keep our hospitals open, to make
sure there are providers available to have
telehealth available.

Mr. President, the Democrat leader
can spread all the disinformation he
wants. The Rural Health Trans-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

formation Program is in effect, and
every State in the Union is benefiting.
Republicans will continue to work to
make healthcare more comfortable and
accessible for American families.
I want to thank Dr. Oz and his team
at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for their tireless work to
get this program up and running on an
expedited timeline. I look forward to
seeing all the ways this program will
help transform healthcare in rural
America.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

VENEZUELA
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I rise
today having just come out of a secure
briefing about the arrest of Nicolas
Maduro.
Our country has carried out one of
the boldest law enforcement operations
in decades, and we should be very
proud. We should celebrate it and be
proud of the men and women in uniform who made sure this was successful. This administration had the courage to do what was right, what needed
to be done; and America, Venezuela,
and the world are much safer as a result of it.
Operation Absolute Resolve was conducted for one reason: to bring to justice a murderous dictator and an indicted drug trafficker. Maduro is an
outlaw, and he is now in custody. The
Trump administration indicted him in
2020 on drug trafficking charges. President Trump put a $15 million bounty
on him. The Biden administration
agreed, and they actually increased
that amount to $25 million. Neither the
first Trump administration, nor the
Biden administration, nor the current
administration recognized Maduro as
the legitimate leader of Venezuela.
Now, we are not alone in that view.
Many of our allies around the world
have taken the same position, hold the
same belief. Yet only America had the
resolve and the resources to bring
Maduro to justice. No American lives
were lost, as we learned in our briefing
and as we have seen, and it was a textbook example and demonstration of
peace through strength. The message
to the entire world is clear: If you poison and kill the American people, you
are going to be held accountable.
Arresting Maduro also advances
America’s national security. Maduro’s
allies and enablers are united in their
commitment to undermine our Nation:
China, Russia, Iran, Cuba, even
Hezbollah. Communist China was buying half a million barrels a day of oil
from Venezuela—day after day, after

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

day. In exchange for that oil, the Chinese Communist Party loaned Venezuela over $100 billion. Just hours before his arrest, Maduro was meeting in
Caracas with officials of the Chinese
Communist Party. This axis of aggression is weaker now because President
Trump has taken decisive action, and
our men and women in uniform were
able to carry it out.
All around the world, people are seeing dictatorships failing. That is why
Venezuelans are celebrating in the
streets today. It is also why Iranians
are uniting today across their country
to protest the suppressive dictatorship.
They have good reasons to demand
their freedom.
Yet, today, there are Democrats in
this Chamber—some may come to the
floor later today—who are using the arrest of Nicolas Maduro not to advance
American interests, no. They are using
it to attack President Trump. This
week, they are going to force a vote on
another War Powers Resolution to tie
the hands of the President. Let me be
clear about what that resolution does
and what it does not do. It does not reassert Congress’s powers. It does not
make America stronger. It makes
America weaker and less safe. It will
weaken the President’s legitimate constitutional authority.
This body, the U.S. Senate, is being
asked whether the President of the
United States has the authority to arrest indicted criminals. Of course he
does. Democrats want to weaken the
President’s ability to enforce the law
of the land. That is the wrong message
to send to hardened drug traffickers
and to dictators.
It is interesting because, for years,
Democrats were for holding Maduro accountable. Senator CHRIS MURPHY, a
Democrat from Connecticut, tweeted in
2019 that ‘‘getting rid of Maduro is
good for the United States.’’ That is
one of the Democrats who are opposing
what the President of the United
States has done. He called for it in the
past.
Senator CHUCK SCHUMER, the Democratic leader, who will be on this floor
in a few minutes, came to this very
floor in 2020 and complained about
President Trump, saying President
Trump ‘‘hasn’t brought an end to the
Maduro regime.’’
Senator CHRIS VAN HOLLEN from the
Foreign Relations Committee, a Democrat from Maryland, told MSNBC just
last year—he said:
[T]he United States needs to work with its
partners and allies in the region to ratchet
up the pressure [on Venezuela].

Democrats know absolutely that
President Trump did the absolute right
thing. They won’t admit it on this
floor. They prefer to play politics instead. Within the last several days,
Senator SCHUMER called arresting
Maduro ‘‘reckless.’’ What a change and
reversal in tune. Senator VAN HOLLEN
said it was an illegal ‘‘act of war,’’ a
complete reversal of his previous positions.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.002

S07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

Senator MURPHY told CNN on Sunday
that Venezuela, he said, is ‘‘not a security threat’’ to the United States. He
sure viewed it differently in the past.
Evidently, they were all for it before
they were against it. That is what we
see with these Democrats: something
they are for, President Trump does it,
and now they are against it.
The question I have for Democrats is,
Do they no longer think that arresting
Maduro is a good thing? They supported it in the past—every one of
them.
Arresting Maduro was not partisan or
political. It was a professionally executed law enforcement action conducted by a superb team of dedicated
military professionals, and I congratulate each and every one of them. Every
parent in this country should be happy
today about this arrest because now
their children will be safer from poisoning and death. This arrest will save
thousands of American lives—lives
that would have been lost due to
Maduro’s drug trafficking.
And what are the numbers? Was it
80,000 American lives lost since 2020 as
a result of the poison that Maduro has
forced into this country? On Saturday,
President Trump took bold action, and
he took action to protect the citizens
of this great country.
We should celebrate the success in
Venezuela. We should take great pride
in the brave men and women who carried out the successful mission. Republicans are going to continue to stand
on the side of safety, security, and
America peace through strength.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

HEALTHCARE
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, this
month, January 2026, marks a new era
for Medicare. After decades of empty
promises about lowering the cost of
prescription drugs, the prices of the 10
most expensive drugs under Medicare
will finally fall.
Starting this year, 2026, seniors who
rely on medications to treat blood
clots, diabetes, heart disease, and certain cancers will see discounts of up to
79 percent for these essential drugs.
There are 9 million American seniors
who will save a total of $1.5 billion in
annual out-of-pocket costs, including
nearly 300,000 seniors in Illinois who
take 1 of those 10 drugs.
Why did it take so darned long to
lower these prices? Politicians have
been talking about it for years. For
years, Medicare was blocked from negotiating the price of drugs by the
pharmaceutical companies. They didn’t

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

S65

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

want to cut into their profits. That
changed when Democrats passed the
Inflation Reduction Act in 2022 under
the Biden administration. This law empowered Medicare to bargain for fair
prices for medications used by seniors.
Not one single Republican voted for
this bill in 2022. Let me say that again.
Democrats overcame the objections of
congressional Republicans and Big
Pharma, who were complaining about
how negotiating drug prices was socialism—socialism. Now seniors will be
saving hundreds of dollars a month because Democrats rolled up our sleeves
to deliver price cuts on prescription
drugs.
What has President Trump done to
make healthcare more affordable?
Nothing. Instead, he decided to slash
Medicaid by $1 trillion with the passage of the so-called big beautiful
budget bill.
Because of this law, many hospitals
across Illinois and across the country,
especially in rural areas, may not survive. Rural hospitals are the backbone
of communities in my State and in
many others. They are the anchors of
the local economy. Several hospitals
that are barely squeaking by today
have told me they will fall into the red
because of the Republican healthcare
cuts in this law. Recently, I surveyed
all of the hospitals in Illinois, and 129
responded to my survey. They wrote to
me to say they will struggle greatly
with these cuts from the big beautiful
budget bill of the Trump administration. These hospitals will face longer
emergency room wait times. They will
be forced to cut services, including behavioral health and maternity care.
They will have to lay off doctors and
nurses, which is exactly the opposite of
what we need in rural America.
My Republican colleagues know exactly how devastating these Medicaid
cuts will be. That is why they attempted to remedy the situation by including a $50 billion rural health transformation grant in their Big Beautiful
Bill. Let’s do some math here. They are
cutting $1 trillion out of Medicaid, and
they are trying to fill that gap with $50
billion. I am a liberal arts major, but I
think I can do basic math. What they
are talking about doing is restoring 5
percent of the $1 trillion they are cutting from Medicaid—5 percent.
In addition to cutting $1 trillion from
Medicaid, congressional Republicans
refused to extend the Affordable Care
Act enhanced premium tax credits
under Trump’s Big Beautiful Bill. Last
year, 22 million Americans relied on
these credits to afford their healthcare,
but now they have expired. Despite
pressure from patients, physicians, and
providers, congressional Republicans
refused to extend them.
What is the impact of refusing to extend this program that makes health
insurance more affordable? I am afraid
it is obvious. During the 2026 open enrollment period, millions of people decided to drop their health insurance
coverage. Others are being forced to

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

make impossible choices between food,
car payments, and housing costs. If we
fail to immediately solve these problems, millions of people will become
uninsured in this country, and those
who will retain coverage will pay double or triple for their healthcare plans.
It is not too late to do something
even though we are hopelessly divided
on most of the issues facing us. Let’s
hope that health insurance will be the
exception. Congress can extend the tax
credits and reopen the signup period
before the worst impact is felt.
At least some of my Republican colleagues recognize the pain their refusal
to negotiate has caused. Last month,
four Senate Republicans—four—broke
ranks to vote with Democrats to extend the enhanced premium tax credits
and help people pay for their health insurance—four Republicans. In the
House, four House Republicans signed a
discharge petition to force a vote later
this week to extend the tax credits. We
must be ready to act when the bill arrives in the Senate.
Americans do not have time for Congress to litigate the entirety of the
U.S. healthcare system, but we do need
to triage now. Let’s do something to
help these people keep their health insurance. I have spoken with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle and
have made it clear we want to help
Americans pay for these bills. I want to
join them. It should be done on a bipartisan basis, and we should waste no
time.
f

VENEZUELA
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, it is a
heady experience to go through a classified briefing at the highest levels of
our government, and virtually every
U.S. Senator of both political parties
had that opportunity this morning. I
took advantage of it. It is rare and important. It was an explanation by our
leaders in the Cabinet and the administration of what happened in Venezuela
just a few days ago when Mr. Maduro
was removed from power and brought
to the United States to be held accountable for his actions in narcotics
terrorism.
This is not a new issue to me. In 2018,
I took a trip to Caracas and met with
President Maduro, his First Lady, and
members of his administration. It was
clear to me that Venezuela was in trouble. You could see it on the streets.
People were literally starving, and hospitals were going without medicine. It
was pretty clear to me that Maduro
was ruling not by democratic appeal
but by the force of his power in office.
He was facing an election in just a
few weeks, and I told him at that time
that, if he did not have international
observers at his election to verify that
it was an honest election, the world
would not believe the results. He ignored my advice, which was no surprise. He went ahead with the election
and had a disputed result. He claimed
victory, which others said didn’t happen, and he did it again a few years

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.003

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S66

later. So he discredited himself in the
eyes of the world community, and his
country continued to suffer.
Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of Venezuelans abandoned Venezuela, saying it was impossible to live
there under his authoritarian rule
without the basics of life: food, medicine, and shelter. So this decision to
remove him is not one that causes
tears in my household. We believe he
was unfit for office. He was defeated in
the election, and he had to pay a price
for it. I am glad that he is not in power
today.
During the course of our briefing this
morning, our military leaders and others spelled out the details of how he
was physically removed from office
just a few days ago. He still is going to
be held accountable in the courts of
law in the United States—that is for
sure—but there is also discussion about
where we go from here.
If you remove the President of a
country, what happens next?
Under their constitution, a woman
named Delcy Rodriguez, the Vice President, was sworn in as his successor. I
met her during my visit there. She is a
hard-liner when it comes to the politics
of the region and her brother even
more so. We spoke for a period of time,
and I became convinced that they
would be difficult to deal with, although that is the reality of the moment.
Here is the point I want to make: I
understand why our administration
was very careful in disclosing information about the removal of Maduro from
office. The lives and futures of the men
and women in uniform from the United
States were on the line, and we should
not compromise their safety in any
way to achieve our goal; but there
comes a point—and that point should
be immediately—when this administration decides to trust the American people and tell them the whole story. I believe there are things that can be said
which will not compromise the safety
of the United States or our friends but
that explains to the American people
what is at stake here.
What happened in that raid to remove Maduro from office?
Most of the details are an amazing
display of military superiority, which
the United States enjoys, but there
were other questions that were raised,
too, during the course of this.
In addition, the question is, Where do
we go from here? What is going to happen to Venezuela’s future? What is our
responsibility? What are we accepting?
The American people need to be in on
that conversation. It is easy, I learned
in my time in the House and Senate, to
get into a war but that it is far more
difficult to get out of one. I worry that,
many times, we have blundered into a
situation which looks so simple in
terms of nation building, and it turned
out to be so complex. Then the war
went on for years and years and years
at the expense of not only American
taxpayers but, more importantly,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

American lives. It is time for the
American people to be part of that conversation. Why do I think so? Because
the Constitution explicitly says it.
The Constitution says that the power
to declare war in the United States resides in this Chamber and in the House
of Representatives. Congress has the
only authority to declare war. This
President, like many others of both
parties, has ignored that requirement
and, I think, at his own peril. They are
engaging us in a long-term conflict
which could cost us dearly, and they
are not engaging the American people
in the discussion and rationale of our
ultimate goals in the region.
This briefing this morning was a
good one. Senator TIM KAINE of Virginia asked a question, and I think it
was the right question: When are we
going to trust the American people
enough to tell them exactly what happened in Venezuela leading up to the
removal of Maduro and what is likely
to follow? It is an important, critical
question. It will be costly in terms of
the future of the United States of
America if we are not explicit and honest with the people of this country.
Now is the time for that honesty.
I yield the floor.
f

RECOGNITION OF THE MINORITY
LEADER
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
RICKETTS). The Democratic leader is
recognized.
f

VENEZUELA
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I just
got back from an all-Senators briefing
with senior administration officials
about what is going on in Venezuela.
Again, another briefing. Again, no answers.
As before, we walked out of the room
with far more questions than answers.
It is not just the Senators and Congressmen in the SCIF, a classified
room, who deserve answers, it is the
American people who deserve answers.
The American people want to know:
How much is this going to cost us at a
time when we are seeing our costs rise
for things like housing and groceries
and healthcare? They want to know
what kind of troops—how many troops
are going to be needed there?
It is clear that the leadership’s succession plan that the administration
envisions now that Maduro—the awful
person that he is—is gone, the people
who are replacing him are just as
untrustworthy, just as corrupt, just as
bad as he is.
How is Trump going to run the country with these people as his underlings?
So the public deserves answers at
this crucial moment because the American people are asking: What the hell is
going on in Venezuela? And why is this
President, who campaigned on ‘‘America First,’’ now spending all his time
and energy on escapades overseas?
What is going to happen next? The
public is totally in the dark.

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

We need to know how long an involvement in Venezuela is going to
last. Trump has said it is going to take
some time. What does that mean? Iraq
was more than a decade.
How many troops are we talking
about?
How much money and what guardrails are in place?
The American people want to know,
is there a place where you say no
more? Nobody knows. On something as
risky and as different as this—differently bad as this—people need real
answers. That is how our system is set
up, but this administration is totally—
totally—opaque and, frankly, dishonest
with the American people when it
comes to Venezuela.
We discussed so many things in the
room. And in the room, there was a bipartisan sense of concern with America
simply plunging into other countries. I
did not get adequate answers.
Are we planning on going into Greenland? Are we planning on going into
Colombia? Mexico?
The answers were very unsatisfying.
So this escapade is fraught with huge
peril that history teaches us we should
avoid. There is chaos in the streets of
Caracas right now. Organized gangs are
patrolling the streets, oppressing the
rights of citizens. At any moment, the
interim government’s grip on power
could deteriorate. The Vice President—
former Vice President under Maduro,
who is now the President—is totally
unreliable, is corrupt, and hates America. That is whom we are relying on.
What kind of plan is this?
Again, it is not enough for Senators
to walk into a classified briefing and
hear the administration’s sales pitch.
The public has to hear it. I am certain
that the public, once they hear it, is
going to be as angry, as skeptical, as
unconvinced as we are.
The American people need answers
and facts presented in public.
My Republican colleagues: Don’t you
have an obligation to hold hearings—
public hearings—and bring Hegseth and
Rubio before you and ask these tough
questions, not in the closed quarters of
a SCIF, where no one is allowed to repeat what they say, but in public?
Where are our chairs of the relevant
committees? Not to hold a hearing on
something as momentous and potentially destructive as this—where are
our Republican colleagues?
We need administration officials to
come testify and to answer the tough
questions in public. That is what this
Republic is all about. That is why we
have three branches of government.
That is why the Founding Fathers said
the war power, as important a decision
as going to war is, should be in the
hands of the Congress, a public institution, not in the hands of just an Executive.
And yet, right now, it is in the hands
of an Executive because our Republican
colleagues are supine. They just aren’t
demanding hearings, aren’t demanding
that the President come clean in terms
of talking to the American people.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.005

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

Looming over all of this, the American people are asking: What the heck
does this have to do with ‘‘America
First?’’ How does spending years and
potentially billions of taxpayer dollars
in Venezuela help families pay their
rent, their mortgages, their grocery
bills,
their
electric
bills,
their
healthcare bills?
It has nothing to do with it. In fact,
it takes money; it takes attention
away; it diverts attention away from
the No. 1 thing the American people
care about: affordability, costs of living, being able to pay the bills of
things you very much need.
Bombing Caracas and bragging about
oilfields are not going to lower people’s
rents. Even in this cockamamie plan
they have, the money would go back to
Venezuela. The American people are
saying: That is ‘‘America First?’’
Spend all this time, effort, and dollars
getting rid of Maduro and then sending
all this oil money back to Venezuela
when America needs help?
Threatening Greenland is not going
to make groceries cheaper. Military
threats against NATO are not going to
help families pay the bills. The American people did not sign up for this
kind of military adventurism when
they voted for Donald Trump, and Republicans who go along will be betraying the American people.
Donald Trump doesn’t realize any of
this. Why? He is focused on his Big Oil
buddies and personal vanity projects
like renaming the Kennedy Center and
choosing which marble armrests to install.
Just listen to what Donald Trump
said yesterday at the Kennedy Center
to House Republicans. Once again, he
showed everyone he is trapped in a billionaire’s bubble. Donald Trump told
Republicans, ‘‘I wish you could explain
to me what the hell is going on with
the mind of the public,’’ because he
can’t understand why people are souring on his agenda. He can’t understand
that when you can’t pay the groceries
or your car breaks down and you can’t
afford to get it fixed and you can’t get
to work, that troubles people? He can’t
understand that?
He doesn’t have a clue. He talks to
his limited circle of rich friends. They
don’t have to worry about the things 95
percent of Americans worry about. He
is in a bubble, and when Presidents are
in bubbles, it is the American people
who get hurt.
He cannot wrap his mind around the
fact that his very own policies have
made life worse for ordinary people.
But the average citizen knows it. That
is why his numbers are plummeting.
Again,
yesterday
morning,
he
slammed ‘‘affordability’’ as a buzzword
and said no one knows what it means.
Well, he doesn’t know what it means
because he has enough money to pay
for all the things he needs.
Donald Trump, ‘‘affordability’’ is not
a buzzword. It is not a con job, and it
is not a mystery concept to most people. ‘‘Affordability’’ means you can af-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

S67

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

ford to make trips to the doctor when
you or your child is sick. It means you
can go to the grocery store and not
have to worry: Well, should I buy eggs
or cheese or milk? I can’t afford all of
them.
It means you can pay the rent, pay
your mortgage.
What ‘‘affordability’’ doesn’t mean is
sending helicopters over Caracas and
saying we have the right to attack
NATO allies. It doesn’t mean bailing
out Argentine farmers. It doesn’t mean
giving away critical chips to China so
that they can use them against us.
Now, if Donald Trump and Republicans won’t focus on lowering the cost
of living, Democrats are happy to do it
for them. Later today, I am joining
with Senators WARREN, SMITH, and
KLOBUCHAR and housing experts from
around the country to talk about this
horrible housing crisis, one of the
worst manifestations of rising costs.
Today’s housing roundtable is a kickoff event for our Senate Democrats and
our cost initiative, which will be our
North Star for the year and beyond. We
are going to be focused like a laser on
the increased costs Americans face to
pay the necessary bills that they must
pay to live a decent life.
And just as we talked about for
months, about helping people to afford
healthcare, we are going to continue to
focus on helping people pay the rent,
keep up with their mortgage, and be
able to afford a home for the first time.
In the coming weeks, Senate Democrats are going to lay out the many
things Congress could do right now, if
only the Republicans were serious
about lowering costs, when it comes to
food, childcare, energy, home ownership, healthcare, childcare, and more.
These are things the American people
care about: paying the bills, buying a
new car, going on one vacation a year
with your family—not invading Venezuela, not invading Colombia, not
thinking about invading Greenland.
Donald Trump doesn’t get it. He admits he doesn’t get it. He doesn’t understand why the American people are
mad at him when it is as plain as could
be.
But Democrats get it. We are going
to focus like a laser on costs today,
next week, next month, and all year
long. The Republicans and Donald
Trump will be hearing plenty more
from us.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Texas.
f

TRUMP ADMINISTRATION
Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, we are
back for a short workweek, following
the holidays, and, boy, is our plate full.
But I think it is appropriate to take
just a few minutes to reflect on the incredible progress we have made last
year under the leadership of President
Trump, Senate Majority Leader THUNE,
and Speaker MIKE JOHNSON.
Of course, one of the most important
things we had to do in the Senate was

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

to confirm the President’s Cabinet and
various nominees. Of course, our Democratic colleagues resisted at every
turn, requiring that we actually
change some of the rules of confirmation to allow the President to fulfill his
mandate following his election and to
get his team on the field. Democrats
not only were sore losers when it came
to the election of President Trump, but
they wanted to deny him the team he
needed in order to actually do what the
American people elected him to do.
The most important piece of legislation we passed—actually, there are a
couple that come to mind, but one is
the working family tax cuts act. I
heard the Democratic leader talk about
all sorts of ‘‘affordability’’ issues, and,
of course, that has now become the
buzzword. Affordability is really nothing new in politics, as the Presiding Officer knows. It is all about kitchen
table issues. That is what people care
the most about. And there are a lot of
things that we have already done,
without any Democratic help, to try to
make life more affordable for working
families in Texas, in Nebraska, and
across the Nation.
But, obviously, we have a lot of work
left to do. First, we have to finish a full
year of government funding. Democrats have prevented us from passing
normal appropriations bills, which
have caused us to lurch from potential
shutdown to shutdown. And, indeed,
they ultimately pulled that trigger to
the detriment of the American people
and shut down the government for a
historically long period of time.
And for what effect? Well, a lot of
people got hurt. A lot of people got inconvenienced. Many people didn’t get
paid.
And what did the Democrats get? A
talking point about healthcare. That is
all they care about. They did not care
about solving any of these problems,
working together in a bipartisan way,
which is what I believe we should do,
but rather to try to score political
points and try to embarrass the Trump
administration and Republicans.
But we have to finish that full year
of funding because we do have another
short-term continuing resolution deadline that expires on January 30. But I
know Senator COLLINS, chair of the
Senate Appropriations Committee, and
Senator MURRAY and their counterparts in the House have been working
very diligently to try to get the first
tranche of appropriations bills across
the floor so we can avoid staring another government shutdown in the face
on January 30.
Can you imagine how much actual
work we could get done if we didn’t exhaust ourselves in the fights over shutdowns and lurching from one deadline
to the next? Well, maybe that is something we ought to think about, and
that is the opportunity cost of going
from shutdown to shutdown and all the
spending cliffs.
I would hope our Democratic colleagues have learned a lesson from

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.006

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S68

their last misadventure, which resulted
in the shutdown, and I hope they will
spare the American people and a lot of
folks who didn’t get paid, who were inconvenienced, and for no real reason
other than to provide them a talking
point in the upcoming election.
Again, we are happy to solve problems—that is why we serve here—and
even on a bipartisan basis, but we are
not interested in government shutdowns, which do nothing but try to advantage the Democratic Party in pursuing a talking point leading to the
midterm elections.
We have a lot of things to do between
now and November of 2026. On the
healthcare front, we offered an alternative to the disaster known as
ObamaCare. There is incredible fraud
against
U.S.
taxpayers
in
the
ObamaCare subsidy regime and, particularly, the enhanced subsidies that
were bumped up during the Inflation
Reduction Act as part of the COVID
era.
But, unfortunately, insurance companies got rich, and the American people
were not well served when it came to
access to their healthcare. And the taxpayers were positively gouged by the
fraud and mischief that occurred under
the ObamaCare enhanced subsidy regime.
We offered an alternative. President
Trump said the money shouldn’t go to
insurance companies; it ought to go to
the consumer, because who knows better than the consumer what they actually need in terms of their health insurance coverage.
But, of course, our Democratic colleagues wouldn’t countenance that.
They don’t actually believe in consumer choice. They don’t believe in
free enterprise. What they believe in is
more government, more expensive government, and we know that is not the
answer to the challenges that face
working families when it comes to access to healthcare.
Having choice to make a decision,
not making young people subsidize old
people, not making people buy something they don’t need, and not foisting
the bill on taxpayers by extravagant
subsidies which do nothing but enrich
insurance companies.
Well, we know we have got a lot of
work to do in that area, and we stand
ready to work in good faith to come up
with a workable bipartisan solution
that will lower the cost of healthcare
in the long term, if our Democratic colleagues are willing.
Suffice it to say, we have our work
cut out for us, though, in the Senate.
While this year has barely started,
President Trump has lost no time in
defining the year with his usual
strength and decisiveness.
You know, back in the Federalist Papers, they debated what the Office of
President should look like. And one of
the things they talked about is the
need for an energetic President and
head of the executive branch. And, I
must say, that is exactly what we got

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

with the election of Donald J. Trump
to his second term of office—a President who does what he says and is willing and has the courage to act decisively in the face of various threats.
And, of course, the one that is now
looming large is Operation Absolute
Resolve. This past weekend, in the
middle of the night, in Caracas, Venezuela, our brave servicemembers successfully accompanied law enforcement
personnel in detaining the illegitimate
President of Venezuela, someone who
had become the head of a drug cartel
and who was working with our most
concerning adversaries all around the
world, whether it is Cuba, whether it is
Iran, whether it is Russia or China.
And, in fact, Venezuela had become a
hub for illegal drug trafficking, along
with everything else that goes with
that. And it also had become a foothold
for Iranian terrorist organizations like
Hezbollah and was using the money
they were able to raise from illicit drug
trafficking to then send it to terrorist
organizations in the Middle East and to
threaten peace around the world.
I want to say that what we saw demonstrated by the U.S. military, working in cooperation with the intelligence community and the Department of Justice and law enforcement
personnel, was nothing short of magnificent. It gives me a great deal of
pride to know that only the United
States could have pulled off such an operation and brought someone so despicable as Nicolas Maduro to justice in
a Federal court in Manhattan.
I wanted to thank all of our personnel who participated in the operation. I hope and wish and pray for the
speedy recovery of the handful who
were injured, and I think it is a proud
day for the United States.
It was a challenging decision, I am
sure, to make, and there will be many
hard days ahead as Venezuela has to
correct its course of actions. And under
President Rodriguez, hopefully, with
the levers that are available to the
Trump administration and our friends
and allies, they will learn from some of
their mistakes and allow a transitional
government, which will then be able to
represent the hopes and the dreams and
the aspirations of the Venezuelan people.
President Trump’s New Year’s message to friends and enemies could not
be more clear. American strength is
back, and we will stop at nothing to
ensure that the American people are
safe from foreign threats and especially here in our own hemisphere.
Walter Russell Meade put it well
when he recently wrote:
The operation was a dazzling and magnificent act, and the competence and resolve
that it demonstrated will do more to shore
up American power and world peace than all
the best speeches President Obama ever
made.

President Trump has made it clear to
dictators around the world that if they
try their hands at making mischief,
there will be consequences. And I can

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

guarantee that the illegitimate heads
of the governments of Nicaragua, Cuba,
and others in the region took note of
what the U.S. Government is capable of
doing if it is determined to do so under
the leadership of a decisive, energetic
President like President Trump.
And I think it sends an enormous
message of deterrence to adversaries
around the world and potential adversaries like China, North Korea, Iran,
Russia. When they see a demonstration
of competence and professionalism
that is really second to none in the
world, I think it sends an enormous
message of deterrence and helps make
our country safer and helps keep the
peace.
But, of course, this represents a stark
contrast with the status quo under the
previous administration. I think that
is one of the things that makes this so
startling to so many people. After all
the words with no action, all the
breast-beating about America under
President Biden, to see what President
Trump is able to do, with the incredible contributions made by the intelligence community, our military, and
law enforcement, has got to get the attention of our adversaries around the
world. We know, during the Biden administration, the world had become a
much more dangerous place because
when our adversaries sense weakness,
it is actually an incentive for them to
act.
I think it has been said before, and I
think it is true, that Putin would not
have invaded Ukraine again if President Trump had been in office. But
with President Biden and then previously with President Obama in office,
he knew that paper tigers weren’t
going to hold them accountable, and so
they kept coming and taking whatever
they could grab. That makes the world
a much more dangerous place.
From the first year of his Presidency,
President Biden signaled weakness and
incompetence on the world stage, especially with his disastrous withdrawal
from Afghanistan. His failure to secure
the southern border in Texas and in
New Mexico and California and Arizona
invited the drug trafficking crisis that
is continuing to have downstream effects in our country even today. Hundreds of thousands of Americans have
lost their lives to the illegal drug trafficking coming across our southern
border.
And these failures, of course, do not
happen in a vacuum. Our friends and
enemies around the world are watching—our friends to see whether they
can rely on the United States and our
enemies to see whether we will stand
up for ourselves and defend our interest
and our values. And, of course, that
shapes their actions and their decisions.
In February 2022, Russia invaded
Ukraine, escalating a war that had
started back in 2014 and continues
today with massive casualty figures on
both sides now ranging into the millions. October 7, 2023, Hamas terrorists,

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.008

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

who are Iranian proxies, launched the
deadliest attack in history against the
nation of Israel.
And all the while, China prepares for
war. They have actually threatened to
forcibly take Taiwan. President Xi has
ordered the People’s Liberation Army
to be ready to do so by 2027, of course,
escalating tensions in the Indo-Pacific
and engaging in provocative joint military exercises with Russia.
Notwithstanding the chaos around
the world, America was suffering direct
consequences from the drug war, as I
alluded to a moment ago. Cartels in
Mexico and Latin America took advantage of President Biden’s open border
policies and refusal to act where action
was required. Of course, they made untold millions of dollars selling these
drugs and transporting them beyond
their borders into the United States,
taking countless lives and inflicting
untold misery.
Now the Department of Justice has
charged Maduro and his coconspirators
with transporting tons of cocaine into
the United States by moving the drug
under the protection of Venezuelan officialdom, including the law enforcement and their military, by providing
diplomatic passports to drug traffickers and facilitating diplomatic
cover from planes to move drug proceeds from Mexico to Venezuela.
Iran, through its proxy Hezbollah—
which operates primarily in Lebanon,
north of Israel—they were embedded in
Venezuela working with the Maduro
administration and helped collaborate
to provide those elaborate trafficking
networks. And, of course, Hezbollah
used the drug trafficking proceeds to
finance their own nefarious activities
around the world.
Back in 2022, Venezuela signed a 20year economic cooperation agreement
with Iran, the No. 1 state sponsor of
international terrorism, an agreement
between two of the most heavily sanctioned regimes in the world, all designed to defy the United States and
expand their criminal enterprise.
In a hearing before the Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control
that I chaired late last year, one of our
witnesses described Venezuela as playing a very important role in what they
called the ‘‘axis of evasion,’’ a global
sanctions-defying network that also includes Russia, China, Iran, and North
Korea.
And, of course, Maduro was an important part of that within this ‘‘axis of
evasion’’ because he is the one that
gave them a foothold in our backyard
in the Western Hemisphere.
And, of course, all of this went on
during the Biden administration and
right under their nose, but they did
nothing—virtually nothing—about it.
President
Biden
and
Secretary
Mayorkas turned a blind eye, allowing
these illicit happenings to continue
while drugs poured into the United
States and totalitarian dictators and
terrorists enriched themselves and
spread their misery.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

S69

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

But President Trump has now begun
to turn the tide. He began on day one
of his administration with an aggressive immigration enforcement, rounding up and deporting members of MS–
13, one of the most dangerous gangs in
the world; Tren de Aragua, another
dangerous Venezuelan gang; and other
criminal networks who had set up shop
here in the United States in our neighborhoods and in our communities.
Given the vast networks of these
international gangs, it became clear to
President Trump that it was not
enough to simply send them back from
where they came so they could regroup
and reorganize. President Trump and
Secretary
Rubio
and
President
Trump’s administration, rightly, determined that further action was necessary. And, of course, that began,
most notably, with a series of strikes
on drug boats in the Caribbean designed to deter the cartels and disrupt
their evil trade.
Now, by capturing Maduro, by enforcing an indictment made by a U.S.
grand jury in a Federal court in Manhattan, President Trump has shown,
without a doubt, that he means business.
Of course, the radical left is losing
their mind, as they usually do every
time President Trump acts decisively
and with boldness. Protestors outside
the courthouse held signs reading
‘‘Free President Nicolas Maduro’’ and
‘‘Hands Off Venezuela.’’
I guess any jurisdiction that would
elect a new mayor like a democratic
socialist, Mamdani, that is probably
what you would expect. So I don’t
think anyone was surprised.
But the message of Operation Absolute Resolve to our allies and adversaries around the world could not be
more clear: America is back. The
Trump administration will act with
boldness and decisiveness. And if you
threaten the American people with
drugs or terrorism or any other sort of
criminal or military attack, you better
watch your back because you could be
next.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. COTTON. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

VENEZUELA
Mr. COTTON. Mr. President, today is
a great day in America. Nicolas
Maduro—an indicted drug trafficker,
an illegitimate communist dictator
who has the blood of hundreds of Arkansans and thousands of Americans
on his hands—is behind bars in a prison
in New York. Again, he was an illegitimate communist dictator, in league
with all of America’s enemies around
the world.

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

With the Venezuelan people crushed
underneath his iron fist for years,
Maduro turned the country into a
crossroads and a playground for the
likes of communist China, Cuba, Iran,
Russia, and even Islamic terrorists like
Hezbollah.
I want to take this opportunity to
commend the exceptional skill and
bravery of our troops, CIA officers, and
FBI agents for executing such an amazing military and intelligence operation
that brought Maduro’s reign to an abrupt end. It is impossible to overstate
the complexity of this mission. But for
our troops and our intelligence officers—whose skill, professionalism, and
bravery are unmatched in the world—
‘‘impossible’’ isn’t in their vocabulary.
I also commend President Trump for
having the courage to take bold, decisive, and audacious action against
Nicolas Maduro. This action was well
within the President’s constitutional
authority. The operation was in keeping with President Bush’s operation to
arrest the drug lord and Panamanian
President Manuel Noriega, in 1989. If
anything, Maduro was much worse
than Noriega, and Venezuela now is
even more vital strategically than Panama was then.
Additionally, this operation did not
violate the War Powers Resolution.
Even if you believe the War Powers
Resolution is constitutional, these
troops were in and out of Venezuela in
a couple of hours.
Only the United States could execute
such a dangerous and difficult mission
without the loss of a single American
life.
But
instead
of
celebrating
Maduro’s ouster and America’s success,
our Democratic colleagues are determined to condemn the operation, all
because President Trump ordered it.
Consider that, in 2020, Senator SCHUMER criticized President Trump for
bragging ‘‘about his Venezuela policy’’
but failing to bring ‘‘an end to the
Maduro regime.’’ It sounds like a call
for regime change to me, just like Joe
Biden’s decision to increase the bounty
on Maduro’s head seems like a call for
Maduro to be apprehended and brought
to justice. Yet when President Trump
did exactly that last weekend, Senator
SCHUMER said this is ‘‘reckless.’’
Also, consider Senator MURPHY, who
said, in 2019:
Getting rid of Maduro is good for the
United States.

I agree. Unfortunately, he has
changed his tune lately. The day after
Maduro’s capture, Senator MURPHY
said:
The invasion of Venezuela has nothing to
do with American security.

Nothing.
He further said:
Venezuela is not a security threat to the
[United States].

I disagree. I think it has more than a
little to do with our national security
and our safety. I have heard from too
many Arkansas mothers and fathers
whose children have died because of a

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.009

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S70

drug overdose. This operation was
about protecting those families and
families like them, anyone who struggles with or who has lost a loved one to
addiction.
Again, Nicolas Maduro was an indicted drug trafficker and narcoterrorist. He was in league with the very
drug traffickers who are in the business of killing our kids for profit. He
didn’t just tolerate drug traffickers in
Venezuela or lose control of his territory and allow them to run wild; he
was a drug trafficker.
I didn’t conclude that alone. That
was not President Trump’s sole decision or even President Biden’s decision.
That was the finding of a grand jury
made up of normal Americans, on more
than one occasion.
As for the future of Venezuela, well,
of course, it is ultimately up to the
Venezuelans. The interim authorities
in charge in Venezuela today know
what we expect of them: Stop the drug
trafficking and the weapons trafficking. Accept the return of their refugees and migrants. Release political
prisoners. Expel the Iranians, the Cubans, the Islamic terrorists, like
Hezbollah operatives, who have turned
Venezuela into a launching pad for regional instability and threats to America’s interests.
It will be a difficult road. Our best
source of leverage, though, over the interim authorities is the quarantine
that we have imposed on their black
market oil, which the Maduro regime
used to enrich itself—not just the regime but the senior leaders of the regime as well, if you know anything
about their spending habits or their
tastes.
Yet this resolution—this very resolution we are debating—might very well
require the removal of our Navy ships
from the Caribbean that are enforcing
the quarantine. Is that what our Democratic friends really want—to let these
Chavistas in control of the interim authorities start exporting black market
oil again, to keep themselves in power,
unaccountable not only to their own
people but to America’s vital national
security interests?
I will say I don’t think so. I don’t
think our Democratic colleagues want
to let Venezuela start exporting black
market oil again. I believe they were
genuine years ago, when they called for
Maduro’s ouster. I believe they are genuine, now, when they condemn Maduro
as an illegitimate dictator and a drug
trafficker, someone who repressed his
own people, even if they then immediately want to eat their cake and have
it too by saying that President Trump
still shouldn’t have removed him. I
think it is just that they are so blinded
by their hatred of President Trump
that they feel they have to condemn
this action in some way.
Instead, why don’t we just, as I said
at the beginning, celebrate the removal
of a virulently anti-American, illegitimate communist dictator who was
trafficking drugs into our country and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

then help the Venezuelan people build
a bright future that restores the glories of their past, turning a nation that
was the most dangerous, anti-American country in our backyard into the
most stable and prosperous pro-American country in our backyard.
So I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote against this
resolution.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Mississippi.
f

TRIBUTE TO JOHN KEAST
Mr. WICKER. Mr. President, this
week, we began a new year’s work here
in the Congress. But as we open this
chapter, I have a bittersweet task of
helping to close another.
Beside me sits John Patrick Keast,
my longtime adviser and friend. In a
few short days, John will conclude
nearly two decades of service to my office, to the people of Mississippi, and to
the United States of America. The U.S.
Senate and the people we represent are
better off because of John Keast and
his work.
For years, John has been beside me,
through hearings, briefings, and meetings, at campaigns and community
events, and during negotiations, decisions, and celebrations. Through it all,
he has been a wise and steady presence.
So, for a few minutes today, I want to
commend his remarkable record of
service.
More than 30 years ago, a very young
but wise John Keast came to work for
an upstart who was running to represent Mississippi’s First Congressional
District. I hired John Keast to be my
campaign manager. As he would do
time and time again, John rose to the
challenge and then some. Not only did
we win the election that year, but John
began absorbing in encyclopedic detail
the ins and outs of Mississippi. This
knowledge enabled him to serve our
people well.
Name a town in the First Congressional District of Mississippi, and John
can tell you where to find the precinct
boxes. List a few local issues, and John
could tell you what he has done to help
alleviate problems there. It is fitting
that John will soon be settling down in
the First Congressional District of Mississippi in Oxford.
I mentioned John’s outstanding recall and knowledge because John would
never do that. And it is that combination of intelligence and humility that
has proven so dynamic. John often told
me that he likes to hire staff who are
smarter than he is. I can say that for
myself. It is easier for me to find staff
that are smarter than I am. It is a little bit difficult and a tall order for
John. He has the command of the
nitty-gritty and of the big picture. He
can go toe-to-toe with the best of the
policy wonks, but he also knows what
he doesn’t know. He understands when
to defer to the experts. That selfawareness is just what you want in an
adviser.

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

When John and I got to Washington,
we were determined to make a difference. It was 1994, the first Republican majority in the House in 40 years,
the famous Republican Revolution. We
were excited to fulfill our contract
with America, as it was called. I remember it well, and so does John. We
stayed in session for 93 days, managing
to vote on every Contract with America item before the 100-day milestone.
Somehow, I became president of the
freshman class, and John was there
every step of the way—brainstorming
with me at Bullfeathers restaurant
during new Member orientation, building an all-star team for the office, and
advancing my priorities for north Mississippi. And what teams he has assembled over the years—there may be some
of them in earshot of me today. That
constitutes a network of John Keast
friends and alumni, and they are accomplishing great things across this
body, across this city, and in this country.
I expect if we were to send each of
them a pop quiz, most would be able to
answer one question in particular, and
that would be: What are the ‘‘Four Ps
of Success in Washington’’? When John
gives staffers guidance in DC, he tells
them to focus on four areas. They
should understand policy, process, politics, and people—policy, process, politics, and people, the four dynamics at
work on Capitol Hill and in this city.
John has earned every right to give
his advice because he has been the embodiment of it. John is fluent in policy.
John knows that we come to Washington to make good legislation and
provide good oversight that benefits
the American people. Name a portfolio,
and John Keast has influenced it.
In our days in the House, John was
especially vital in my efforts to improve our energy resources, our roadways, and our national defense assets.
Together, we fought to create jobs and
commerce for hard-working Americans.
The world has changed a lot in 30
years. We no longer use the IBM
Selectric correcting typewriters my office inherited when John and I were
setting up shop in the House. The world
continues to evolve rapidly. John has
shaped policy that has and will maintain American leadership through all
this change. Nowhere is this truer than
in his leadership of my Commerce
Committee staff and my Armed Services Committee staff.
It is difficult to summarize John’s
success as staff director on these committees. He fought for legislation that
brought well over $1 billion in infrastructure and broadband funding to our
State of Mississippi and across the
country. His work on the CHIPS and
Science Act, which I was proud to vote
for, invested in the universities of
America’s heartland. Actions like
these will help supercharge Mississippi’s growth and development for
decades, and you can say that for the
entire heartland of our country.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.010

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

We have had lofty goals on the Senate Armed Services Committee. We are
charging ahead on America’s military
rebuild and on transformational acquisition reform and working toward the
success of the AUKUS partnership, and
we are helping Ukraine and Taiwan
stand up to tyrants. We are making
great strides on each of these efforts.
John Keast has been integral to every
one.
We had another lofty goal in the
Armed Services Committee: to build a
member-driven National Defense Authorization Act and work it through
the Senate in regular order and in the
light of day. It takes a master of Senate process to accomplish that goal,
and John has done so. He can cite Senate rules by chapter and verse. He can
anticipate and maneuver through this
body’s complicated idiosyncratic process. That knowledge bore fruit in
countless backstage victories. But for
one prominent example, take this
year’s success in the Senate NDAA. We
saw a remarkably efficient markup followed by primetime—daylight—floor
votes. Unusual in this body.
John pairs his procedural dexterity
with 20/20 political vision. He understands that political realities shape
what any individual Member can accomplish in Congress. John knows
when to push in a negotiation and
when to make difficult compromises.
And that must take place in this bipartisan body. He has earned trust on both
sides of the aisle. Both my colleagues
and his fellow staffers know John to be
a man of his word.
John understands these first three
dynamics—policy, process, politics—
because at the end of the day, he understands the final ‘‘p’’—people. John
has formed strong relationships with
the mayors, alderman, and city councilmen of north Mississippi, with industry leaders and entrepreneurs across
the Nation, with lawmakers, Hill staff,
administration officials, and most personally with all those fortunate enough
to have worked with him on Team
Wicker.
His team members have been devoted
and for good reason. John knows how
to nurture talent. He takes time to
show staff their skills and inspire them
to greater heights. He sets a high bar
and expects his team to meet it. When
he hires someone, he gets out of the
way and lets them excel. Those people
skills have paid off. The policy results
speak for themselves—the 30 years of
policy results. But so does the outpouring of support John has received
since announcing his departure. Many
are here now and will be at future celebrations to honor him.
As I speak about John today, I do not
speak only for myself. My wife Gayle
and I both will always be grateful for
John Keast. My children will be grateful for the influence of John Keast. At
so many pivotal moments, he has been
a trusted and faithful friend, as well as
a public servant. I know he will remain
so. We look forward to seeing him often

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

S71

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

in Mississippi—I mentioned in Oxford,
where he will reunite with his wife Virginia and their children Patrick,
Grace, and Anna Kate.
Until then, we remain and always
will be grateful for this hero of public
service, this great American patriot,
John Keast.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SHEEHY). The Senator from Tennessee.
f

FRAUD ACCOUNTABILITY ACT
Mrs. BLACKBURN. Mr. President, I
think we are all pleased to be back
with a new year and hard at work.
One of the things that has really captured the attention of the American
people in this new year is the amount
of fraud that has been uncovered in
Minnesota. What we have learned is
that now the total has climbed to $9
billion—still rising. It is important to
note that is all stolen taxpayer money.
It is so interesting that this big theft
was uncovered by a young independent
journalist who really blew the story
open when he started visiting childcare
centers following a lead, visiting these
childcare centers in Minneapolis.
Despite these centers having pulled
in tens of millions of taxpayer dollars,
the childcare centers were actually
empty. There were no children; there
were no cars in the parking lot. Usually—not even any staff to come answer the door. These were visits that
were made during the day when one
would assume that children and their
caretakers would be present in the facility.
We know and what we are learning is
that this childcare fraud scheme is just
one part of a widespread fraud operation taking place in Minnesota. Under
State Democrats, billions of taxpayer
dollars were stolen by front groups
that pretended they were providing social services. But they padded their
pockets. They basically took this
money from vulnerable individuals—
programs that were intended for children, for the elderly, for individuals
with autism. So basically, they were
robbing the taxpayer, padding their
pockets, pocketing all of this money
that was intended for vulnerable citizens.
The Trump administration has targeted this fraud network, and they
have been working on this for several
months. They are bringing dozen of
criminal indictments, and the list of
these alleged crimes is staggering. I
think the list grows every day, and
that is one thing that is shocking to
people.
But what you have is tens of millions
of dollars that were stolen through
Minnesota’s Medicaid Housing Stabilization
Services
Program.
The
money was appropriated. The money
was sent from the Federal Government
to the State of Minnesota, and poof, it
has gone into pockets, not into programs. The Housing Stabilization Services Program was meant to help people

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

with disabilities, yet what you had was
these scammers come in and take most
of that money.
Millions more were stolen through
the State’s Feeding Our Future Program. Here, the fraudsters claimed
that they were providing thousands of
meals every day to needy children. Instead, what we are learning is they
weren’t providing those thousands of
meals; they were spending your hardearned tax dollars on luxury vehicles
and on pricey real estate.
And yet millions more were stolen by
a single woman who paid parents to enroll their children in her fraudulent autism therapy program even though
most of those children had never been
diagnosed with autism.
I know that Tennesseans and, indeed,
I am sure, many Americans across the
country are wondering, How in the
world could this possibly happen?
One of the things I have heard from
Tennesseans most on is this fraud issue
because they can’t believe nobody ever
noticed. We are talking $9 billion in
fraud—and climbing—in one State.
Well, we know the answer to this, from
what we are learning, is that most of
this fraud was committed by members
of Minnesota’s Somali community and
that that community is closely tied to
the State’s Democratic machine. It appears that there were some Democrats
who chose to look the other way, and
they allowed this to happen. Meanwhile, the Biden administration poured
gas on the fire by eliminating safeguards that were meant to stop the
waste, fraud, and abuse of your hardearned taxpayer dollars.
In 2024, the Joe Biden administration
scrapped a rule that required childcare
centers to verify that kids actually attended their facilities in order to receive Federal funding. Think about
this: They removed the provision that
says you have got to tell us you are actually enrolling children in your
childcare center. So what does that do?
That invites fraud. In total, his administration paid out more than $19 billion
to daycare centers without having any
verification that that childcare center
had children—$19 billion to daycare
centers.
Thankfully, President Trump and his
administration are working to ensure
that these fraudsters face justice and
that something like this can never happen again.
Right now, you have Federal authorities on the ground in Minnesota who
are working to identify and arrest
these criminals who have defrauded the
Federal Government and the U.S. taxpayer. President Trump has also frozen
more than $10 billion in Federal funding for social services programs to
Minnesota and to other States—California, Colorado, Illinois, and New
York—where there are fraud investigations.
The President’s message is quite
clear: If these States want to see a
dime of Federal taxpayer dollars, they
must prove that they have put in place

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.011

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S72

some safeguards to prevent fraud. It is
common sense. If you are going to take
this Federal money for your State, for
goodness’ sake, put some safeguards in
place so you know whoever is receiving
the money is going to use the money as
intended, that they will meet the deliverable, that they will show their outcomes.
I think it is so interesting in Minnesota, with the spotlight on that
State, that Governor Tim Walz has announced he is not going to seek reelection for that job, that he is dropping
out of the race. Minnesotans deserve an
immediate resignation from him, and
we are hearing that he will not do that.
We know that this issue goes far beyond Minnesota. Just last month, California’s nonpartisan auditor found that
eight State agencies have a high risk of
waste, fraud, and abuse. Yet they have
taken zero corrective action—no corrective action. Across the board, the
State is at risk of losing billions to
fraud in food assistance, unemployment benefits, and in the State’s Medicaid Program.
In New York, Republican lawmakers
are calling for an independent audit of
the State’s spending following several
fraud scandals. In one case, scammers
in Brooklyn used two adult daycare facilities to steal—get this—$68 million
in taxpayer money from the State’s
Medicaid home care program. A State
comptroller’s office also revealed that
the State provided more than $500 million in Medicaid benefits to out-ofState residents.
If you live in New York and you are
getting benefits through the Medicaid
program and you find out that a half a
billion dollars has been used to provide
benefits for people who are not even
residents of the State, you ought to be
asking questions.
In Illinois, the State’s auditor general found that the government paid
out more than $5 billion in fraudulent
unemployment insurance. Well, do you
know what? They didn’t do a thing
about it.
Last month, the Trump administration indicted two men outside Chicago
who submitted nearly $300 million in
fraudulent claims to Medicare and
Medicaid as well as to private insurers.
Then, this week, in Mississippi, a
trial started for a man who faces
charges from the Justice Department
for allegedly participating in a scheme
to steal $77 million in Federal aid intended for needy families. Instead, the
scammers spent the money on luxury
vehicles, investments, private schools,
and more.
While President Trump works to end
this abuse of taxpayer dollars, Congress should do everything possible to
support his efforts.
This week, I am introducing the
Fraud Accountability Act, which would
amend the Immigration and Nationality Act to explicitly make clear that
fraud is a deportable offense. If you
come to our country to steal from the
American people, you ought to be de-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

03:20 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

ported; and if you have somehow
gained American citizenship, you
should be stripped of it. Every single
Member of this Chamber should support this legislation.
The era of rampant fraud is over.
Under President Trump, we are going
to continue to put the American people
first.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Rhode Island.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONGRESSIONAL
DISAPPROVAL UNDER CHAPTER
8 OF TITLE 5, UNITED STATES
CODE, OF THE RULE SUBMITTED
BY THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY RELATING TO
‘‘AIR PLAN APPROVAL; SOUTH
DAKOTA; REGIONAL HAZE PLAN
FOR THE SECOND IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD’’—Motion to Proceed
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President, I
move to proceed to Calendar No. 290,
S.J. Res. 86.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the motion.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
Motion to proceed to Calendar No. 290, S.J.
Res. 86, providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5, United
States Code, of the rule submitted by the Environmental Protection Agency relating to
‘‘Air Plan Approval; South Dakota; Regional
Haze Plan for the Second Implementation
Period’’.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Rhode Island.
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President,
coal is America’s dirtiest energy
source. Coal pollution from powerplants befouls our air, pollutes our
water, and leaches into our food. Coal
pollution causes acid rain. Coal pollution causes severe health issues, even
death.
Between 1990 and 2020, pollution from
coal-fired powerplants killed 460,000
Americans—23,000 deaths per year on
average. Despite how massive that
death toll is, the trend has been in a
good direction. Coal plant-caused death
rates have decreased in the last 15
years as more and more coal plants
have either shut down in favor of
cleaner and cheaper energy sources
or—often in answer to Clean Air Act
programs—adopted broadly available
pollution reduction technologies which
significantly reduce but do not eliminate the health-harming emissions and
pollution.
One such Clean Air Act program, the
Regional Haze Program, addresses haze
and visibility impairment in national
parks
and
wilderness
areas.
Unsurprisingly, coal plants are the Nation’s most significant source of haze.
The same coal pollutants that drive severe health issues and deaths nationwide, including particulate matter, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, and volatile organic compounds, also drive haze
formation. Haze is a pollution marker.
The Clean Air Act’s regional haze provision requires States to reduce emissions
from
haze-causing
sources

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

through controls or retirements where
necessary to make reasonable progress
toward natural visibility conditions.
The EPA provides guidance regulations that help States develop appropriate regional haze plans which are
due every 10 to 15 years. The Clean Air
Act presumes that additional controls
or retirements will be necessary for
reasonable progress. They are thus required each time new haze plans are
due unless the State can demonstrate
that no action would be the reasonable
course.
South Dakota took no action in its
latest regional haze plan to address
haze pollution over the long term. It
made no updates to significantly outof-date controls at its three major
emitters—a coal plant, a cement plant,
and a lime plant—and it failed to demonstrate that that inaction was reasonable. The Trump EPA approved the
plan anyway.
The resulting pollution will blow
downwind toward Midwestern and
Eastern States. The EPA’s approval
puts forward a reading of the Clean Air
Act that is blatantly at odds with the
text, the context, and the purpose of
the act, and that encourages the spread
of harm to the downwind States from
these polluting plants. Well, there is
something we can do about it here.
In 1996, Congress enacted the Congressional Review Act to give Congress
the opportunity to vote on administrative regulations. During the Biden administration, Republicans in the Senate forced 35 rollcall votes to try to
kill rules that sought to protect consumers’ public health and public
lands—35 to 0. It was an astonishing
record. Now that the Trump administration is in power, it has engaged at
breakneck speed to tear down the protections of Americans’ health and safety and our environment.
I know it is an uphill struggle in our
polluter-funded Congress and particularly with this polluter-controlled
Trump administration, but I nevertheless urge support for this commonsense
Congressional Review Act resolution
and hope that we can make it a brighter day as well as a clearer day for the
downwind States.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from North Carolina.
VENEZUELA

Mr. TILLIS. Mr. President, I appreciate the opportunity to come to the
floor and talk about a couple of things.
Earlier today, we had a classified
briefing on the situation in Venezuela.
I have to say that I am very impressed
and thankful for the expertise, the resources, and the work that was done by
the men and women on the ground. It
was truly an extraordinary operation
that couldn’t have been done by any
other nation other than the United
States.
As for those who were injured, I understand they are recovering and that
some have been released from the hospital. I hope they heal up safely and

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.020

S07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

that they know that we are eternally
grateful
for
their
bringing
a
transnational criminal to justice—
hopefully so—as he goes through our
court system.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

NATO

Mr. President, I am also here to talk
about what I think is amateurish behavior with respect to the treatment of
our NATO allies. It has to start with an
interview that I saw with one of the
President’s senior policy advisers, Stephen Miller, on CNN, a couple of nights
ago.
Mr. Miller said that the U.S. Government—‘‘obviously, Greenland should be
part of the United States.’’
That is absurd. We have to go back
and take a look at the relationship to
Greenland.
Why am I coming to the floor, a Senator from North Carolina? Because
since 2018, I have been the Republican
leader for the Senate NATO Observer
Group. I have gone to every NATO conference. I have gone to the security
conference. I have met with almost all
of the leaders of the countries that are
part of the 32-nation coalition known
as NATO, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
Now, let’s talk about why I think it
was an amateurish comment and something that a Deputy Chief of Staff and
senior policy adviser should not have
taken the position on.
No. 1, he doesn’t speak for the U.S.
Government. He speaks for the President of the United States, and on that
basis, he can. But when he says that
the U.S. Government thinks that
Greenland should be a part of NATO,
he should talk to people like me who
have an election certificate and a vote
in the U.S. Senate, because I know
what he either doesn’t know or he
should know, and if he did know, I
can’t imagine why he would make the
comments that he did the other night
in a television interview.
Let me give you some facts about
Denmark, for example. Denmark,
which has responsibility for Greenland—although, Greenland is an autonomous territory under NATO. It is a
part of the Kingdom of Denmark.
But let’s talk about Denmark for a
minute. Denmark was one of NATO’s
most disproportionately high contributors in Afghanistan, relative to its population, size, and force structure.
What do I mean there? There has
been one time in the 75-year history of
NATO that the NATO allies responded
to the article 5 commitment, which
means when one of our NATO allies is
attacked, we go there to defend them.
It has been exercised one time in the
history of the alliance to come to the
aid of the United States and the War
on Terror in Afghanistan.
Since their first mission began, more
than 18,000 Danish soldiers have deployed to Afghanistan with American
and British forces. Throughout their
deployments in Afghanistan, 43 of their
soldiers lost their lives fighting alongside American soldiers, defending our

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:45 Jan 08, 2026

S73

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

freedom and holding the Taliban and
al-Qaida responsible for the events of
September 11.
Forty-three soldiers losing their
lives—there are only about five or six
NATO countries who lost more. And
what is remarkable about this is this is
a country of about 6 million people. On
a per capita basis, Denmark suffered
over six times the fatality rate of Germany and more than three times the
fatality rate of France, matching or exceeding the losses of much larger allies
with far greater resources.
So despite its small military, Denmark has deployed forces to some of
the most dangerous, kinetic combat
zones, particularly Helmand Province,
fighting alongside UK units at the
height of the insurgency. Danish forces
accepted frontline combat roles—some
lost their lives as a result of it—not
low-risk symbolic missions.
For a small democracy, sustaining
this level of risk over more than a decade reflects a serious commitment to
NATO and a serious commitment to
the safety and security of the United
States.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that this specific language and the
list of NATO countries who came to
the aid of our U.S. Marines be printed
in the RECORD.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
Key takeaway: Denmark was one of
NATO’s most disproportionate contributors
to Afghanistan relative to its size, population, and force structure.
Since their first mission began, more than
18,000 Danish soldiers have deployed to Afghanistan with American and British Forces.
Throughout their deployments in Afghanistan, 43 soldiers were killed in action.
That is among the highest per-capita
losses in the Alliance (second only to Estonia).
On a per-capita basis, Denmark suffered
over six times the fatality rate of Germany
and more than three times that of France,
matching or exceeding losses of much larger
Allies with far greater resources.
Despite its small military, Denmark deployed forces to some of the most kinetic
combat zones, particularly Helmand Province, fighting alongside UK units at the
height of the insurgency. Danish forces accepted front-line combat roles, not low-risk
or symbolic missions.
For a small democracy, sustaining this
level of risk over more than a decade reflects
serious Alliance resolve.
Casualties (by current NATO members):
United States: 2,461; United Kingdom: 457;
Canada: 159; France: 90; Germany: 62; Italy:
53; Poland: 44; Denmark: 43; Spain: 35; Romania: 27; Netherlands: 25; Turkey: 15; Czech
Republic: 14; Norway: 10; Estonia: 9; Hungary: 7; Sweden: 5 (partner at the time); Latvia: 4; Slovakia: 3; Finland: 2 (partner at the
time); Portugal: 2; Albania: 2; Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Lithuania, Montenegro: 1
each; Greece, Iceland, Luxembourg, North
Macedonia, Slovenia: 0 recorded deaths.

Mr. TILLIS. Mr. President, some people around here call me cranky. I have
got a couple of buddies that call me
cranky.
Do you know what makes me
cranky? Stupid. What makes me

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

cranky is when people don’t do their
homework. What makes me cranky is
when we tarnish the extraordinary execution of a mission of fully supporting
Venezuela by turning around and making insane comments about how it is
our right to have territory owned by
the Kingdom of Denmark.
Folks, amateur hour is over. You
don’t speak on behalf of this U.S. Senator or the Congress. You can say it
may be the position of the President of
the United States that Greenland
should be a part of the United States,
but it is not the position of this government because we are a coequal
branch. And if that were to come to
pass, there would be a vote on the floor
to make it real, not this surreal sort of
environment that some Deputy Chief of
Staff thinks was cute to say on TV.
So you want to get me back to
thanking the President for all the good
things he is doing? Then give him good
advice.
One of two things happened with
Greenland. Either, one, the President
came up with the idea that maybe we
should have Greenland as a part of our
assets, and somebody said that is a
great idea, versus saying: Mr. President, take a look at our alliance. Take
a look at the most important alliance
in the history of the United States, the
NATO alliance. This could actually destabilize that, Mr. President. Mr. President, you should know, at one point,
we had 17 military installations in
Greenland, and they would be happy to
have us back. They are not refusing to
allow us to have access to project
power into the Arctic. We could do it
without taking over a NATO country.
That is the sort of advice that should
have been given. So if the President
thought it was a good idea, then he
needs the experts to say: Mr. President,
that is why this is not a good idea.
I would defy you to find any credible
general with a star on his shoulder who
would say that it is because they understand that the NATO alliance is
what has kept this Nation largely—or
this world—largely safe for over 75
years.
The flip side could be that Mr. Miller
or somebody else there said: Hey, this
would be cool. Let’s take over Greenland. It will be like a big aircraft carrier.
Well, that is stupid too. I am sick of
stupid. I want good advice for this
President because I want this President to have a good legacy. This nonsense on what is going on with Greenland is a distraction from the good
work he is doing, and the amateurs
who said it was a good idea should lose
their jobs.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from South Dakota.
S.J. RES. 86

Mr. ROUNDS. Mr. President, I rise in
opposition to S.J. Res. 86. This resolution would repeal the Environmental
Protection Agency’s approval of South
Dakota’s Regional Haze Implementation Plan.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.021

S07JAPT1

S74

South Dakota has made substantial
progress toward meeting EPA’s ambitious 2064 visibility goals and has determined that no additional emissions
goals are needed to make reasonable
progress.
Overturning EPA’s approval would
force the State to adopt unnecessary
pollution control measures, despite
clear evidence that they would not
meaningfully improve visibility. These
requirements would impose significant
costs on South Dakota communities
and businesses for little to no environmental benefit, essentially burning
money without improving outcomes.
This CRA ignores the fact that South
Dakota’s emission sources have a minimal impact on visibility in nearby
class I areas. In recent years, the primary driver of visibility impairment
has been wildfire smoke from Canada
and the western United States, not inState emissions. This resolution substitutes Washington mandates for
State-level expertise, dictating decisions on a State the sponsors do not
represent
and
unnecessarily
constraining South Dakota’s economy.
For these reasons, I urge my colleagues to vote against this resolution.
VOTE ON MOTION

Mr. President, I would ask unanimous consent that the previously
scheduled rollcall vote occur immediately.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The question is on agreeing to the
motion to proceed.
Mr. ROUNDS. I ask for the yeas and
nays.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The clerk will call the roll.
The bill clerk called the roll.
Mr. BARRASSO. The following Senators are necessarily absent: the Senator from Alabama (Mrs. BRITT), the
Senator from South Carolina (Mr. GRAHAM), and the Senator from Missouri
(Mr. SCHMITT).
Mr. DURBIN. I announce that the
Senator from Delaware (Mr. COONS),
the Senator from New York (Mrs.
GILLIBRAND), the Senator from California (Mr. PADILLA), and the Senator
from California (Mr. SCHIFF) are necessarily absent.
The result was announced—yeas 43,
nays 50, as follows:
[Rollcall Vote No. 4 Leg.]
YEAS—43

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Alsobrooks
Baldwin
Bennet
Blumenthal
Blunt Rochester
Booker
Cantwell
Cortez Masto
Duckworth
Durbin
Fetterman
Gallego
Hassan
Heinrich
Hickenlooper

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Hirono
Kaine
Kelly
Kim
King
Klobuchar
Luján
Markey
Merkley
Murphy
Murray
Ossoff
Peters
Reed
Rosen

05:45 Jan 08, 2026

Sanders
Schatz
Schumer
Shaheen
Slotkin
Smith
Van Hollen
Warner
Warnock
Warren
Welch
Whitehouse
Wyden

Jkt 069060

NAYS—50
Banks
Barrasso
Blackburn
Boozman
Budd
Capito
Cassidy
Collins
Cornyn
Cotton
Cramer
Crapo
Cruz
Curtis
Daines
Ernst
Fischer

Grassley
Hagerty
Hawley
Hoeven
Husted
Hyde-Smith
Johnson
Justice
Kennedy
Lankford
Lee
Lummis
Marshall
McConnell
McCormick
Moody
Moran

Moreno
Mullin
Murkowski
Paul
Ricketts
Risch
Rounds
Scott (FL)
Scott (SC)
Sheehy
Sullivan
Thune
Tillis
Tuberville
Wicker
Young

NOT VOTING—7
Britt
Coons
Gillibrand

Graham
Padilla
Schiff

Schmitt

The motion was rejected.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
BANKS). The Senator from Virginia.
S.J. RES. 59

Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, I rise to
speak with other colleagues about my
War Powers Resolution, a bipartisan
resolution cosponsored by Senators
PAUL, SCHUMER, and SCHIFF that will
be called up for a vote tomorrow. A
number of Senators will speak in this
block, most in support of my resolution. I know at least one Senator, my
colleague from South Carolina, is
scheduled to come speak in opposition.
I spoke at length last night about
sort of what I view the big picture of
this—and I don’t intend to speak very
long. It is better now to let others have
a chance to speak. But what I wanted
to focus on, just briefly, was the fact
that we did have a briefing by administration officials in the SCIF this morning, the classified setting, and I am not
at liberty to discuss the matters in
that setting.
I will say what I said last night. I
think it is important on matters of
this importance, especially war, when
200 combatants have been killed—and
that number is climbing—when U.S.
troops have been injured—two still in
the hospital—when U.S. assets are
arrayed around Venezuela, and when
there is now a commitment for the
United States to essentially manage
and control the Venezuelan economy
and even civil governmental services
for some significant time, I think it is
time for us to get this debate out of the
SCIF and into the public.
So I am hoping that the Senate committees with jurisdiction, including the
Armed Services Committee, on which I
sit, the Foreign Relations Committee,
and to the extent this was a law enforcement operation, the Judiciary
Committee, will finally start to have
the first public hearings where administration officials can be questioned in
full view of the public so that the
American public knows what is at
stake.
I will say one additional thing. I
made my Democratic caucus mad early
on when I came to the Senate because
I challenged President Obama in 2013,
his proposed use of the U.S. military in
Syria to punish a bad dictator, Bashar

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Assad, for using chemical weapons
against civilians.
Now, he was a President of my own
party and Bashar Assad was a horrible
dictator. But despite that, I challenged
President Obama’s ability to act and
deploy U.S. military against Assad,
even to punish Assad for bad behavior,
without Congress.
I remember the first time I really got
shouted out in a Democratic caucus
meeting, it was standing against President Obama’s ability to do that unilaterally without us.
I tried to maintain that consistent
standard under President Obama and
then President Trump, term one, President Biden, and President Trump, term
two.
Even in an instance—even in an instance—where military action may be
a good idea—and I might have voted for
use of military action to punish Bashar
Assad for using chemical weapons—it
should not be done on a Presidential
say-so without a vote of Congress.
So the vote tomorrow on the War
Powers Resolution is not about whether we like Nicolas Maduro, whether he
is a good guy. He is a bad guy. He is a
dictator. He has wreaked havoc on
Venezuela’s economy and on human
rights within Venezuela.
It is, instead, whether the United
States should engage in military action against Venezuela on a Presidential say-so without a vote of Congress. I believe the Constitution is
clear, and I believe the equities, in
terms of the respect we owe to our
troops, if we are going deploy them,
gives life to the constitutional provision and really explains why it is there.
The last thing I will say before I
yield to my colleague from Kentucky is
one of the arguments that is being
made—and this is not out of the classified setting because it is being made
publicly by the administration—is this
was not a military action; it was a law
enforcement operation.
I think that argument is specious. I
think it is—it kind of doesn’t really
pass the laugh test. Now, it might be
an argument you would make if there
were a covert operation to go into Venezuela in the dead of night and extract
an indicted criminal, Nicolas Maduro—
not a criminal until he is prosecuted
but an indicted person—to bring back
to the United States and face justice.
If it were just the execution of an arrest, you might make the argument,
maybe that is just law enforcement.
And you might make it even if the
military was somewhat needed to carry
out the arrest warrant.
This is far different than that. The
boat strikes against Venezuelans in
international waters, the amassing of
20 percent of the American Navy
around Venezuela, the use of 150 aircraft deployed from 20 bases throughout the Western Hemisphere to carry
out this operation, the arrest and deposition of Nicolas Maduro and his wife,
but then also the U.S. decision to occupy and control the Venezuelan economy, its oil reserves, the indication

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.019

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

from the administration that this is
not a few days or a few weeks; it is
likely a few years of U.S. occupation
and involvement in this country with a
military blockade stopping commerce
into and out of Venezuela—this is not
an arrest warrant. This is far bigger
than that, and it is the kind of hostilities that Congress specifically had
in mind when they wrote the War Powers Resolution of 1973.
I urge my colleagues to cast a vote
for their own relevance. Cast a vote for
your own relevance by saying that
power that the Constitution gives to
Congress, that it is the only body that
should declare war. If you vote for me
tomorrow, you reserve your right to
vote for war, if you think it is a bad
idea or a good idea.
But if you vote for the resolution, all
you are voting for is the proposition
that the Nation should not be at war
with an end run around you but should
only be at war if you have had the opportunity to debate and vote and put
our thumbprint on the validity of the
mission, and your thumbprint should
be necessary if we are going to send our
troops into harm’s way to potentially
be injured or killed.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Kentucky.
Mr. PAUL. Mr. President, I want to
thank the Senator from Virginia for
leading this effort. There is likely no
issue more important that confronts us
as a nation, as a people, as a Congress,
than whether or not to send our young
men and women to war.
I take a backseat to no one in my
disdain and loathing of state-sponsored
socialism. In fact, I wrote a book, ‘‘The
Case Against Socialism,’’ describing
the historic link between socialism and
state-sponsored violence.
I wish the people of Venezuela well
and sincerely hope that they will not
repeat the mistake of electing socialists that have plagued the nation since
the 1970s.
Whether or not socialism is evil,
however, is not the debate today. The
debate today is about one question and
one question only: Does the Constitution allow one man or one woman to
take the Nation to war without the approval of Congress? Full stop.
That question is bigger than regime
change in Venezuela, bigger than the
claims that the ends justify the means,
bigger even than the depredations and
evils that multiple socialist autocrats
have perpetrated upon the once great
country of Venezuela.
Even those who celebrate the demise
of the socialist, authoritarian regime
in Venezuela, as I do, should give pause
to granting the power to initiate war
to one man. The power to initiate war
is so vast a power that it must be confined by checks and balances.
The debate today would not be happening if our leaders read and understood the Federalist Papers. The constitutional power to initiate war is
placed squarely on the shoulders of
Congress.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:45 Jan 08, 2026

S75

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Current congressional leaders squirm
and would like to shift the burden of
initiating the war to the President.
Less than courageous Members of Congress fall all over themselves to avoid
taking responsibility to avoid the momentous vote of declaring war.
But make no mistake, bombing another nation’s capital and removing
their President is an act of war, plain
and simple. No provision in the Constitution provides such power to the
Presidency.
No Supreme Court has allowed the
Congress to abdicate its role in the decisions of war and peace, and no Congressman of any self-respect will argue
otherwise.
Our leaders debated fully whether or
not to grant this power to the President. To a man, from Jefferson to Hamilton, the spectrum of our Founding
Fathers, they all agreed with the words
that Madison wrote that the executive
is the branch most prone to war, and,
therefore, the Constitution, with studied care, vested that power—vested the
power to declare war in the legislature.
Founding-era arguments in support
of ratifying the Constitution demonstrate that our government does not
entrust the decision to go to war to
just one person. At the Constitutional
Convention, Charles Pinckney argued
that uniting the war powers under a
single Executive would grant to the
President monarchical powers.
It would make him like a King. They
did not want a King. They were tired of
the endless wars of Europe. They took
that power and placed it with the people’s representatives. They didn’t want
to make it easy to go to war. They
wanted to make it hard to go to war.
Some will argue—they will say that
Congress is so feckless. They will never
declare war.
Well, guess what, when we have been
attacked, we have been virtually unanimous. When we were attacked on 9/11,
the vote was virtually unanimous to go
after the people who attacked us. When
we were attacked at Pearl Harbor, once
again, the vote was virtually unanimous to go to war.
James Wilson, one of the Founders,
assured Americans at the Pennsylvania
Ratifying Convention that the proposed Constitution would not allow one
man or even one body of men to initiate hostilities.
In Federalist 69, Alexander Hamilton
stated the Constitution gave the Presidency fewer war powers than those of
the British Monarch and that the
American President would be restricted to conducting the operations
of the Armies and Navy. In other
words, the Constitution, the declaration of war, that power would remain
with the legislature. The execution of
the war—how many troops are stationed here; how many battleships are
stationed here—that would be the prerogative of the President.
The beginning of the war, the initiation of the war, the declaration of the
war would reside with the people and

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

their representatives to make it less
likely that we go to war.
The founding generation was largely
united in the opinion that the American President would not be endowed
with the monarchial powers to initiate
war unilaterally. These Founders were
not just engaged in a sales pitch; they
were accurately representing the Constitutional Convention’s decision on
how to divide the war powers. Initiation, declaration of war, would be the
prerogative of Congress; execution,
fighting the war, would be the prerogative of the President.
An early draft of the Constitution
gave Congress the power to ‘‘make
war’’ rather than to ‘‘declare war.’’
This was debated, and during the debate over this, South Carolina’s Pierce
Butler rose to defend the proposition
that the new American Government
should vest the war-making powers
with the President.
So this one man from South Carolina
rose and said, not only should the
President execute the war, he should
initiate the war also.
But others stood up. Elbridge Gerry,
a delegate from Massachusetts, was so
aghast by Butler’s suggestion that he
rose to say that he ‘‘never expected to
hear in a republic a motion to empower
the Executive alone to declare war.’’
And in response to Butler’s proposal
to vest all the war powers with the
President, Gerry joined with James
Madison
to
successfully
propose
amending the draft of the Constitution
to give Congress the power to ‘‘declare
war.’’ They specified that Congress
would have the power to initiate or declare war, but the execution of a war
would be the President’s power.
But they wanted to make sure that
the President would be able to defend
the country against foreign attack
without awaiting congressional action.
This comes up all the time about:
What if we are being attacked? What if
it is an emergency? Can the President
act without Congress?
Of course, he can. No one has disputed that. Military action in defense
from another military attack has always been the prerogative of the President.
People say: Well, this had to be a secret.
Well, guess what. It was no secret
that we had an entire armada lined up
outside and across the coast from Venezuela. They knew we were there. They
knew it was a possibility that we were
coming in. Had we voted to declare
war, yes, they might have been chastened even more. They might have
even decided to negotiate before, had
the entire Congress said: We are declaring war.
So in some ways, a declaration of war
actually is more potent if you are trying to effect diplomacy. But, instead,
we didn’t vote. People said: Oh, they
wouldn’t be surprised.
If we had voted to declare war, the
President still doesn’t have to divulge
the time or place of the war. Those secrets can still exist.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.022

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S76

And, in fact, it is even more justified
for the President not to tell us anything about the attack until afterward,
if we have already given him permission to initiate a war.
And people say: Oh, this is just a
technicality. Why should we care?
Well, if you have sons or daughters,
you should care, because if we have unlimited war, if we have no limitations
on the war-making power of one person, what happens when you get someone who will run amok with war?
I am not even talking about this
President. I am talking about ‘‘what
if.’’
That is why the rules are in place.
The rules are in place to prevent a
President, at one point in time, from
running amok and having millions of
our soldiers strewn around the world.
Does anybody remember the Battle
of the Somme? A million soldiers died
over an 18-day period in World War I.
Now, that war was authorized, and it
was still awful. But can you imagine a
million soldiers dying without a declaration?
And people say: Well, what are you
talking about? They are already gone.
No one is in Venezuela.
What we are talking about is taking
a country to war. We aren’t just talking about Venezuela. We are talking
about the power of a President to have
a million soldiers die in an 18-day war.
People say: We are not talking about
that.
Then we would declare war. You have
to declare war at the beginning.
And then people say: Well, it is not a
war. All it was was an arrest warrant.
It was just a drug crime.
Oh, he was guilty of possessing machineguns. That sounds like that is
being made up as humor.
In 1934, we passed a law in our country saying you can’t own machineguns.
It is an American law. Does anybody in
their right mind—does any sane individual who can read in our country—
believe that it applies to the security
forces of a foreign dictator or a foreign
President; that if their guards have
machineguns, they are guilty of
breaching a 1934 U.S. law? What kind of
world would we live in if we could accuse people around the world and simply go arrest them and send the military to quiet down all of their defense
systems so we could arrest them?
We had intelligence reports in our
country that reported that, per our intelligence, the leader of Saudi Arabia
was guilty of or was involved with killing an American journalist. What if a
President decided they wanted to arrest him? Can they do that without a
congressional vote or permission?
There are arguments that the current President of Brazil has unfairly
imprisoned the previous President of
Brazil. Now, you can have an argument
on both sides. You can listen to the
facts, but would you want your President to be allowed to go to Brazil, free
the former President, and put the current President in jail without a vote of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

your representatives? What kind of
world would that be? Who could be for
that?
The Constitution empowers the
President to defend the country
against sudden attacks initiated by
any foreign power. The initiation of
hostilities by the United States that
requires deliberation and authorization
must be voted upon in Congress.
Our Founders’ intent was not a close
call open to equivocation. Pundits
argue that Presidents have been ignoring this restriction for decades. That is
true. But that is not an argument.
That is just an excuse, and a lame one
at that.
The Constitution is clear: Only Congress can declare war. The power to declare war was too important to be left
to the competence of one man. As Jefferson wrote, ‘‘in questions of power
then, let no more be heard of confidence in man, but bind him down
from mischief by the chains of the constitution.’’
See, the Constitution isn’t chains on
the people; it is chains on your representatives so they don’t usurp the
power, so your representatives don’t
take you to war without careful deliberation.
Our Founding Fathers were explicit,
and yet they still worried that a
branch of government might resist the
chains of the Constitution. So in pondering how they would enforce these
checks and balances, they took to
heart Montesquieu’s maxim that if the
powers of the Executive and the legislature, if they are combined—if there is
no difference between the legislature
and the Executive, if they are combined together—there can be no liberty. Those are strong words. They felt
liberty would be endangered or imperiled if all the power resided in one person.
Madison wrote that by dividing the
powers, by separating the powers within the Constitution, within the
branches of government, that would pit
‘‘ambition against ambition.’’ The ambitions of a President to usurp power
would be pitted against the natural
ambitions of the legislature to keep
power. The natural allure of power
would be checked by each branch jealously guarding the prerogative of
power.
Who among the Framers would have
ever guessed or conceived of a time
when Congress would lack any ambition—any ambition at all? Who would
have predicted a time when Congress
would be so feckless as to simply and
obediently abandon all pretense of responsibility and any semblance of duty
so as to cede the war power so completely to the President?
It is as if a magical dust of soma has
descended through the ventilation systems of the congressional office buildings. Vague faces, permanent smiles,
and obedient applause indicate the degree that the majority party has lost
its grip and become eunuchs in the
thrall of Presidential domination.

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

A President is never truly checked by
the minority party, other than through
elections. Meaningful checks and balances require the President’s party to
stand up and resist unconstitutional
usurpations of power. Until that happens, the dangerous precedent of unlimited war-making power will continue to be abused by Presidents of
both parties.
I recommend a ‘‘yes’’ vote on this
resolution.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Connecticut.
Mr. MURPHY. Mr. President, I come
down to the floor in support of the resolution, but I am hoping to use my few
minutes to step back from the dizzying
torrent of news that we have been delivered, often contradicting sources of
news from the President and his advisers, and just ask some basic questions
about the wisdom of this extraordinary
military endeavor and the administration’s future plans in Venezuela.
I think the basic question that people
are asking in my State—and, I imagine, the same is true all over the country—is, Why did we invade Venezuela?
Why is our entire national conversation today seized by this question of
Venezuela? Why does Senator KAINE
have to come to the floor and offer a
very simple resolution to clarify that
the President doesn’t have the authority, unilaterally, to take military action overseas without the consent of
the people? Because for people in Connecticut, they haven’t been spending a
lot of time, over the last 12 months,
thinking or talking about Venezuela.
Venezuela isn’t terribly relevant for
the people I represent, who are worried
about an economy that seems to be
stagnant; healthcare premiums that
are doubling, tripling for many people
in my State; prices that are going up
on all the stuff that you need to afford
to live. And, all of a sudden, the President is talking only about Venezuela.
So why did we invade Venezuela?
Why are we still talking about Venezuela?
Well, let’s rule out the reasons we
know don’t hold water. It is not because Venezuela presents a security
threat to the United States.
There was a reason we went into Afghanistan. However badly that occupation ended, there was a reason we went
into Afghanistan. They were harboring
a terrorist group that had attacked the
United States.
Venezuela is not harboring any
nonstate actors that have plans to attack the United States. The Venezuelan Government is not a security
threat to the United States of America.
So you can cross off that reason. It is
not because Venezuela is a security
threat to the United States, and everybody basically understands and knows
that.
Now, the administration spent a lot
of time talking about drugs. Their initial forays with respect to military
intervention in and around Venezuela
were targeting these boats that they

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.024

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

claimed were carrying drugs. And, you
know, that makes a little bit more
sense to the American people because
there are thousands of Americans that
are dying every year due to overdose.
But those overdoses, as people know,
are mainly from a drug called fentanyl.
Well, Venezuela doesn’t produce any
fentanyl. What Venezuela produces and
ships is cocaine.
Now, cocaine can kill you. But that
cocaine isn’t even coming to the
United States. Reports are that 90 percent of that cocaine is going to Europe.
So to the extent we were targeting
drug boats off the coast of Venezuela,
to the extent that any of the rationale
for the action against Maduro had to
do with the drug trade, that drug trade
doesn’t really have anything to do with
the American epidemic of overdoses.
That will continue unabated, no matter what we are doing in Venezuela.
And, then, it doesn’t have anything
to do, apparently, with the restoration
of democracy in Venezuela or the best
interests of the people of Venezuela,
because immediately after the action
was taken against Maduro, the Trump
administration
lined
up
behind
Maduro’s second in command, who is,
as we speak, ramping up the repression
of political speech and political activities in Venezuela. All the bad actors in
the Maduro regime, with the exception
of Maduro and his wife, are still there,
running a kleptocracy, stealing from
the Venezuelan people, shipping drugs
out of the country, while continuing to
destroy the Venezuelan people’s ability
to protest.
So this doesn’t have to do with a security threat to the United States. It
doesn’t have to do with the flow of
drugs to the United States. It doesn’t
have to do with restoring democracy
inside Venezuela.
And so, in those moments and days
after the invasion of Venezuela, we
were left to wonder: What is it all
about?
And Donald Trump basically told
you. I mean, he did tell you. He said it
was about oil. He said that he wants
access to Venezuela’s oil. He wants the
companies that are close to him to
have access to Venezuelan oil.
Remember, there was this meeting in
Florida in which the oil companies
came down to see him during the 2024
campaign, and they told him—this is a
report. This is not an allegation. This
is a mainstream media report. The oil
companies said they would give him a
billion dollars for his campaign in exchange for favorable treatment when
he became President.
Now, he has already given them a lot
of favorable treatment, but, boy, this
would be a coup—the oil industry having full access to the world’s largest
petroleum reserves.
But, today, this morning, in our
briefing, we did learn that there is another objective.
Yes, Trump wants control of the oil
for his friends. But today in our briefing—and also in public remarks so

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:45 Jan 08, 2026

S77

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

there is no issue with me sharing this
with you—the administration made
clear that there is another purpose for
seizing the oil, and that is nation
building.
This is the business we thought we
were getting out of. Donald Trump
promised the country that he wasn’t
going to repeat the mistakes that we
made in the past in which we tried to
impose our will on a foreign country
through military intervention or the
threat of military intervention. But
what they are proposing to do is exactly that.
It comes in a slightly different form
than what we did in Afghanistan and
Iraq, but it is from the same playbook.
Here is their plan: They are going to
seize control of Venezuelan oil under
the threat of gunpoint, and then they
are going to use that oil as leverage to
micromanage the Government and
economy of Venezuela. Let me say it
again: We are going to seize Venezuelan oil by gunpoint. We are going
to use control of that oil to micromanage the country.
That is nation building. That is nation building.
And as much as it should worry you
that there is not a good national security justification and the only justification for this invasion is to get
control of their oil, it should worry you
more that now the plan is not just to
seize the oil for the purposes of enriching Wall Street and the oil industry,
the purpose is to seize the oil so the
United States can manage and run the
country of Venezuela.
Why should regular Americans care
about that?
Well, first, it is this perpetuation of
the same Bush-Cheney fantasy that
America can impose its will on a foreign nation through the power of
American military force.
Now, for now, this looks and feels different than Iraq or Afghanistan because there aren’t hundreds of thousands of troops inside Venezuela, but
let’s make it clear. This is just a different kind of military force because
the only way that we get the oil is
through a military blockade—that is
absolutely an act of war—and the
threat of another invasion if the leader—whomever it turns out to be; today
it is Delcy Rodriguez, who knows who
it will be tomorrow—doesn’t comply
with our wishes. So we are essentially
encircling Venezuela with the American military and telling them that if
they don’t to do what we want, we are
going to stop and board their ships. We
are going to attack their country
again.
And, again, this is not speculation.
Donald Trump has said this is the plan;
that if they don’t do what we want, we
will be right back inside Venezuela.
This doesn’t work. It has never
worked in the past. It is the essence of
the quagmire that we got ourselves in,
in Iraq and Afghanistan; the belief, this
myopic belief that neocons, that hawks
have, that warmongers have, that the

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

United States can use its military to
impose our will on a foreign country.
And let me tell you, every country is
unique and difficult to micromanage
from afar, but Venezuela is a complicated country. We are talking about
30 million people. We are talking about
active, armed insurgency groups. What
happens when you try this Iraq-Afghanistan strategy is that, in the short
term, it breeds resentment and extremism. That is what we saw with the
growth of ISIS and the regrowth and
reconstitution of the Taliban.
And in the long run, the country essentially just decides to wait you out.
They knew in Afghanistan we were
going to tire at some point and leave.
So will the kleptocrats in Venezuela.
They will play ball with us, but at
some point the warships are going to
leave. At some point, America can’t devote one-third of its Navy to the
waters around Venezuela. And as soon
as we leave, the kleptocrats and the
corrupt leaders will be right back in
charge. If they don’t want to change
their country from within, if there
isn’t a viable mechanism to do that domestically, it is almost impossible to
impose that from the outside.
The second reason that Americans
should care is that it is illegal, and
that is the subject of the resolution. It
is illegal. An embargo is an act of war.
Repeated military strikes followed on
by invasion is an act of war.
And this engagement is not just a
hostile act against Venezuela, it will
inevitably draw increased frictions
with Russia and China. Now, we
shouldn’t be afraid of friction with
Russia and China as a principle. They
are our adversaries.
But the reason that the Constitution
says the people should be in charge of
the decision as to whether to enter into
military activity in a far-off nation—
no matter whether it is a big nation or
a small nation—is because there are
often spillover impacts and affects.
And if we are going to run a long-term
naval blockade of Venezuela, if we are
going to be running the economy of
Venezuela from the White House, the
American people have to have a say in
that. The Founders, in fact, required
that.
And lastly, the reason that the American people should care about this new
plan, the nation building of Venezuela
through the threat of military force, is
because it is an enormous distraction
from what actually matters to the people of this country, and so I will just
end where I began. Nobody in the State
of Connecticut was asking me for an
invasion of Venezuela prior to the
Christmas break. Everybody in my
State knows that this has nothing to
do with their interests.
Lives are going to be lost in this
country when millions of people lose
their insurance in the coming weeks.
There are kids who are going hungry,
who are being fed lunch and dinner but
not breakfast or just dinner and not

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.025

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S78

lunch and breakfast because of the nutrition cuts that have been imposed by
Republicans.
The problems that Americans are
facing require a White House that is intent on running the United States of
America. But this White House, under
the plan that they have revealed today,
is going to be running the country of
Venezuela. And it is just true that
when we were involved in the quagmires in Iraq and Afghanistan, it occupied an enormous amount of time at
that White House. The amount of time
that the President and his team spent
worrying about Baghdad and worrying
about Kabul—it was a distraction from
the job of running the United States.
And so maybe more than any of the
other reasons that people should care
about this plan to nation-build in Venezuela is that it is just even more reason to doubt that this President is sincere at all about doing what he said he
was going to do, which is lower costs
for people.
Costs are going up. Healthcare insurance is disappearing. And the President
is telling you that, for the foreseeable
future, he is going to be spending just
as much time thinking about running
Venezuela as he is about running the
United States.
Finally, I will just say, if the Energy
Department bill does make it to the
floor of the Senate—it is being debated
this week in the House—I will offer an
amendment to that bill to prohibit the
requisition of Venezuelan oil for the
purposes of nation building.
That will, of course, be an endeavor
that the Energy Department will be involved in. They will likely have to
spend millions of dollars, enormous
amounts of resources, to take control
of that oil to sell it on the open market. That is a disastrous plan, as I have
outlined, for America and the world.
And so I will just tell you that we will
have a chance to debate this plan if
that appropriations measure reaches
the Senate, and I would commend my
colleagues to take a look at it and support it.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon.
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, Donald Trump has taken us back to the era
of gunboat diplomacy over the last 4
months, back to that era when a powerful nation would station its gunships
off the coast of another nation in order
to compel them to do what we wanted
to enable us to have access to their resources, to force them to enable our
corporations to take over their economy. It is a deeply powerfully resented
strategy for nations to say: Hey, that
militarily powerful other nation came
and threatened us with their gunboats
in order to take our resources and profit the more powerful nation—gunboat
diplomacy. And yet here we are.
This is hot off the press from CNN.
Two senior White House officials told
the CNN reporters: ‘‘During conversations led by US Secretary of State
Marco Rubio, the Trump administra-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

tion told Venezuela’s interim president
Delcy Rodriguez that the country must
cut ties with China, Iran, Russia and
Cuba, and agree to partner exclusively
with the US on oil production.’’ And
that ‘‘Rodriguez,’’ the Acting President, of Venezuela, ‘‘must also agree to
favor the Trump administration and
US oil companies for future oil sales.’’
Gunboats off the coast. Threats to
say we will keep grabbing your oil
tankers to prevent you from selling
your resource on the international
market unless we, the United States,
take control of your oil. Sorry, Venezuela.
Well, this certainly wasn’t about the
future of a better Venezuela for Venezuelans. You know, just 18 months
ago, the people of Venezuela voted in a
Presidential election, and they voted
for a man named Gonzalez, who was a
stand-in for the champion of democracy, Maria Machado, who just received the Nobel Peace Prize for her
work. They voted, according to the estimates of monitors, about a ratio of 2
to 1—2 to 1—for democracy.
No, Venezuela is no stranger to democracy. They had a democracy for
three decades, and they lost it to the
internal corrosion of the separation of
powers and the checks and balances of
a democracy. And certainly that led to
the current tyranny, the authoritarian
state that they live in now.
But did the Trump administration
say: We want to help Venezuelans reclaim their country? No. They said: We
like dictatorships. We just want a pliable dictatorship. So they said: We are
leaving in place this entire structure of
corrupted military and government officials with massive corruption, and
yet we will have a new Acting President, who has assured us that she will
do what we want.
And what do we want? We want your
oil. We want it under the control only
of U.S. corporations.
That is hardly a message that helps
the United States in our standing or
our interests in the world. First of all,
it produces enormous hostility from
countries that faced that type of coercion in the past. They well remember
the United States using its economic
might, its military might, to try to exploit their resources through our U.S.
corporations. So it undermines our collaboration around the world.
You know a second thing it does, it
undermines the respect we are held
in—or used to be held in—for advancing
the vision of democracy, of government
by and for the people, kind of the light
that we brought to the world to say:
The world shouldn’t be in a situation
where citizens are ruled by powerful
people for their own gain. No, they
should be able to make their own decisions for their own future, for their
own better future.
But you didn’t hear any discussion
about honoring the will of the Venezuelan people who voted 18 months
ago, 2 to 1, for democracy.
So now we are looking at a situation
where we see other challenges that

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

flow from this, this continuation of a
dictatorship by Delcy Rodriguez, the
Vice President, who Secretary Rubio
has said is more pliable, more manipulatable, will more service our interest
than the predecessor, and yet all the
corruption of that authoritarian government, all of the repression left fully
in place.
President Trump said:
If she doesn’t do what’s right, she is going
to pay a very big price, probably bigger than
Maduro.

Leave the dictatorship in place. Put
a person in charge we think is more
going to bend to our pressure, and
threaten her—the President of the
United States threatened her with
something worse than what he did to
Maduro.
Trump’s goal is clear: He doesn’t
mind if there is a dictatorship, as long
as it is our dictatorship, serving us, the
American corporations, and the Trump
administration, rather than the Venezuelan people.
The people of Venezuela deserve free
and fair elections.
And then let’s talk about how this
entire setup for this gunboat diplomacy was based on a massive lie to the
American people. The Trump administration said: This is about stopping
drugs coming into the United States
that have done so much damage to our
families.
Well, we are all very sympathetic to
stopping every bit of drugs that come
into our country. We have cocaine. We
have fentanyl. We have meth.
But here is the story: On the Venezuelan exports of cocaine, expert after
expert says, overwhelmingly, that is
the path of drugs to Europe, not the
United States.
And then the Trump administration
said: But—wait, wait, wait—there must
be fentanyl down in Venezuela. We are
stopping fentanyl from coming into the
United States.
But that, too, was another lie. The
fentanyl comes from Mexico. It comes
across our southern border. It is made
with precursors from China. We are
pressing China to end their distribution or their importation or exportation of those precursors into Mexico,
and we are working with the Mexican
Government to stop the flow into the
United States, doing everything we can
to find those places where the fentanyl
is made. We need to stop fentanyl in
every possible way, but Venezuela is
not the source of the fentanyl problem.
I think about how it was the case
with George W. Bush that he created a
fake story about weapons of mass destruction to lead us into a massive regime-change strategy and nation-building strategy in Iraq. Huge amounts of
American treasure and lives paid the
price. Four thousand U.S. servicemembers died, and $2 trillion of our American treasure that could have built our
schools,
could
have
built
our
healthcare system, could have built
our infrastructure was wasted because
of a big lie told to the American people.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.026

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

And now we have the Trump administration with this big lie that this was
about drugs, when it turns out that it
is about regime change and it is about
oil.
What bothers me is a lot, but it is the
fact that the administration directly
lied to the American people and lied in
the classified hearings that they held
up here on Capitol Hill, saying: Nope,
no plans for regime change.
Well, it turns out those plans had
been developing over a very significant
period of time.
So if it was about drugs, by the way,
the President wouldn’t have pardoned
Juan Orlando Hernandez, a drug kingpin, right in the middle of the process
of saying he is trying to stop drugs.
Here is a guy who was sitting in our
prison because he was the architect of
a cocaine superhighway into the
United States of America, delivering
an estimated 400 tons of cocaine, devastating hundreds of thousands of
American families, and Trump busted
him out of prison while he was saying
he was absolutely trying to stop drugs.
You don’t send a message about stopping drugs by taking a kingpin and setting him free, and yet that is exactly—
exactly—what happened.
And then we have this issue of the
administration saying: Hey, this isn’t a
military operation—no, no, no. It is a
judicial operation.
If it is a judicial operation, then
what we are talking about is an American indictment supported by an
extraterritorial rendition, a fancy term
for going abroad and kidnapping the
person whom we have an indictment
on.
Is that a principle that we abide by
in the law? Are we saying: Hey, Canada, if you have an indictment, come
to the United States of America and
grab an American citizen. We are fine
with that.
I say: Hell, no. We don’t want any
country coming to the United States of
America and grabbing people off our
streets, and yet that is the principle
that Donald Trump just promoted and
exemplified to the world: We are going
to go kidnap somebody we have an indictment for.
And if it was about an indictment,
then it would have ended the moment
that he was on the plane being brought
to the United States. But it doesn’t
end—does it?—because we are hearing
from the administration that it is
about us now running Venezuela.
Obviously, this was a military operation—a military operation not in support of an indictment; a military operation in support of a regime change
and in support of taking oil.
That is why my colleague from Virginia is bringing forth the War Powers
Resolution—because if it is a military
operation, it should go through Congress because our Constitution says so.
If we go back to how the Founders
viewed this situation, we can turn to
James Madison, who wrote to Thomas
Jefferson and said:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:45 Jan 08, 2026

S79

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

The constitution supposes, what the History of all Governments demonstrates, that
the Executive is the branch of power most
interested in war, and most prone to it. It
has accordingly, with studied care, vested
the question of war in the Legislature.

That is our Constitution—vested in
the legislature because issues of war
and peace should never be entrusted to
one person. It is too tempting. That is
why our Founders put it in the responsibility of this Congress.
So to my colleague from Virginia,
thank you for bringing forth this War
Powers Resolution.
Under the leadership of the last year,
the House and the Senate have failed
their article I responsibilities in three
very significant ways. First of all, they
have not defended the power of the
purse placed here with Congress, not
the President. Every time the President shuts down a program and says,
‘‘It is authorized, it is funded, but I am
ending it because it doesn’t align with
the priorities of the administration,’’
that is an authoritarian statement,
breaking our Constitution, and all 100
Senators should be down here on the
floor and saying: Hell, no.
We failed.
Second is in oversight. It has now
been 4 months that the administration
has been preparing their war plan,
striking ships in the Eastern Pacific,
striking boats in the Caribbean. Not a
single oversight hearing—not one. That
is our responsibility, and we failed it.
And now we are failing on the third
key provision, which is that it is Congress that carries the responsibility for
declaring war or authorizing war, not
the President.
So this week, due to the resolution
being brought forth by my colleague
from Virginia Senator KAINE, we have
a chance—all 100 of us—to weigh in and
correct this failure on this third point
and reclaim the responsibilities that
we took on when we took the oath of
office to become a U.S. Senator. That
is our responsibility.
This should pass overwhelmingly to
tell the President: no more military
action in Venezuela unless Congress
provides an authorization for the use of
military force.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Wisconsin.
Ms. BALDWIN. Mr. President, I rise
today in strong support of my colleague from Virginia’s resolution prohibiting the United States from engaging in any further military operations
in Venezuela. And I want to begin by
asking a simple question: Have we
learned nothing?
Nicolas Maduro is, without a doubt, a
horrendous and illegitimate dictator.
He lost the 2024 Venezuelan Presidential election, but through fraud and
force he stayed in power. He is a known
drug trafficker and has been indicted
twice by the Department of Justice on
multiple charges of collaborating with
drug cartels and smuggling drugs into
the United States. And he is a brutal
dictator responsible for murder, tor-

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ture, and systematic repression of the
Venezuelan people.
But the question before us today is
not whether Nicolas Maduro is a brutal
dictator or not. The question is, Have
we learned nothing?
I am so reminded of a similar debate
in Congress before the U.S. invasion of
Iraq. In 2002, as a Member of the House
of Representatives, I spoke out against
President Bush’s intent to invade Iraq.
I believed the Bush administration
dangerously underestimated the potential consequences of a war with Iraq
and did not have a clear path forward
after the initial military operation.
And, lo and behold, I was right. And,
as a result, thousands of brave servicemembers died, taxpayers were forced to
pay hundreds of billions of dollars, and
we got ourselves into a yearslong war
that destabilized the entire Middle
East.
So, again, I am here to ask the question: Have we learned nothing?
I have those same concerns with
President Trump and Venezuela today
as I had with President Bush and Iraq.
The U.S. military operation in Venezuela last week was remarkable.
There is no doubt our military is the
most capable in the world. However,
President Trump’s concept of a plan for
Venezuela and whether the Senate will
allow him to drag our country further
into conflict is much less clear.
Yes, our military operation to capture Maduro last week was a success,
but I would remind my colleagues that
the initial invasion of Iraq in 2003 was
also considered a success. Yet, in both
Iraq and Venezuela, the President did
not have a clear plan about what would
happen next. And that uncertainty
today is dangerous and risks leading
the United States into an all-out war
in Venezuela.
President Trump has openly claimed
that the United States would run Venezuela and mused about deploying U.S.
military troops to the country—in
other words, taking the United States
to war.
President Trump and his administration have offered confusing and contradictory claims regarding their intentions. The President has offered
multiple reasons for last week’s operation: stopping drug trafficking, securing Venezuelan oil, and protecting the
Western Hemisphere from our adversaries. Yet Venezuela is not the center
of drug trafficking into the United
States, and, just last month, Trump
pardoned the former President of Honduras, who had been sentenced to 45
years in prison for running his country
as a narcostate.
Our economy does not depend on access to Venezuelan oil, but President
Trump is after Venezuela’s oil to enrich his Big Oil buddies. And, if anything, our adversaries will only feel
empowered by President Trump’s reckless violations of international law.
Let me be clear: There is no U.S. national interest in Venezuela worth the
lives of my constituents in Wisconsin.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.028

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S80

Wisconsinites want President Trump to
live up to the promise of lowering costs
back home, to live up to his promises
that he made during his campaign.
They do not want him to pull our country into another war that the American people did not choose.
The President does not have the unilateral authority to invade foreign
countries, oust their governments, and
seize their resources. Under the Constitution of the United States, the
power to go to war lies with the people’s branch. It is time for Republicans
and Democrats in Congress to reassert
our constitutional role in authorizing
military force when needed and hold
President Trump accountable before
the United States is engaged in another war that the American people did
not choose.
So, again, I ask my colleagues across
the aisle: Have we learned nothing?
Have we forgotten how dangerous it is
for our country and our constituents
when Presidents recklessly take us
into conflict without a plan to get us
out? Have we forgotten the lessons we
learned from each of the thousands of
Americans killed in Iraq?
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Arizona.
Mr. GALLEGO. Mr. President, 25
years ago, I made the best decision of
my life and became a U.S. marine. I
fought in Lima Company 3/25 alongside
some of the bravest men I have ever
known, and some of my closest friends
didn’t make it back. Coming home,
knowing it was for an illegal war for
oil was devastating, and it is still devastating. And now, 20 years later, here
we are again at that same crossroads.
We cannot blindly go into another illegal war for oil. I know I am not the
only one—not the only veteran seeing
the parallels: the oil, the regime
change, quick declaration of victory
without a long-term plan. And we do
not want our country to go down this
path again.
Of course, we know Venezuela has
different geopolitical realities, and this
won’t go down exactly as what we saw
in Iraq. But what is the same is this:
Trump’s reckless use of military power
without a plan for what comes next or
respect for the men and women who
will be sent to fight this war—will engage in it—is going to cause problems.
He has shown us he could care less
about the Iraq and Afghanistan veterans who are screaming from the rooftops right now not to make this mistake again. If we allow this to continue, I will have to look into the eyes
of young men and women in Arizona—
working-class kids like everywhere in
this country who are disproportionately the ones who serve in our military—and explain what they are risking their lives for.
And I can’t because it is for oil.
The American public does not want
this. They do not want to be the world
police. They don’t want their sons and
daughters from Florida, from Arizona,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

05:45 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

from New Mexico, from New York sent
to fight for Big Oil. They don’t want
another forever war, and that is the
slippery slope we are going down right
now.
When I talk to people in Arizona,
they want their politicians to focus on
healthcare, on housing, on work—so
kids actually have a job when they
graduate college—not these oil companies in Venezuela. That is what Trump
campaigned on. But that is what
Trump is now saying he is going to do,
invest in oil instead of Americans.
Who does this war really benefit? It
is clearly not the American people—
Trump has done little to help them—
but certainly to help Big Oil and to
satisfy trigger-happy neocons like
Marco Rubio. This is exactly the moment that Marco Rubio has been
itching for, and he played Donald
Trump like a puppet. Marco Rubio
came into the Senate and lied straight
to our faces when he said this was not
about regime change. That was not
true.
And now, it is clear to everyone that
regime change was always the goal.
That is exactly why I introduced a War
Powers Resolution last month—because I knew this moment was coming.
The Constitution is clear. Only Congress has the authority to decide when
to go to war. Whatever you call this
something we are in right now—whatever spin Marco Rubio puts on it—at
the end of the day, when people are
shooting, it is war. When the President
deploys the power of the U.S. military,
it is war.
Now, the Trump administration has
to answer to what comes next. They
must tell us who will govern Venezuela
or how this will end. And they just
can’t do that now.
As a veteran, that terrifies me, and it
should terrify you. This is the same
trigger-happy
neocon
logic
that
dragged us into Iraq, into a forever war
killing thousands and thousands of
Americans, many of them my friends.
And the American people have been
clear that we do not want to be in another forever war.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SCHMITT). The Senator from Michigan.
Ms. SLOTKIN. Mr. President, I rise
today in support of the War Powers
Resolution. As a Senator from Michigan, as a former CIA officer who served
three tours alongside the military in
Iraq, I saw conflict up close.
But I think it is important that we
put this decision to go into Venezuela
in context. It is confusing. President
Trump campaigned for nearly 2 years
on staying out of foreign wars. That
was a huge signature part of his campaign. So why do we find ourselves now
‘‘in charge,’’ in his words, of Venezuela?
Let’s put it in context. All fall, the
White House has been attacking boats
in the Caribbean Sea, in the Pacific,
saying that we were at war against
drugs and the flow of drugs, even

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

though no fentanyl is produced in Venezuela. These drugs were cocaine headed towards places like Europe.
Fine, drugs were the reason we were
talking about these strikes.
January 3 comes along. U.S. forces
entered Venezuela, from what I can
tell, in a truly amazing and heroic
military operation, captured President
Maduro and his wife, and brought them
to New York City. Why? Why do we
find ourselves doing this?
I think there are really two reasons,
one unspoken, one spoken. First and
foremost, President Trump is clearly
deciding that he wants to distract the
public from talking about his domestic
failures. Donald Trump, as I said, campaigned on getting out of foreign entanglements. But let’s just review. He
has launched military action in nine
different localities across the world:
seven countries, two seas.
We went back and looked. That is the
single greatest number of countries
with military action that any President has taken in the history of the
United States in their first year. So
the man who said that he wasn’t going
to get us involved has done more
strikes in more countries than any
President and has taken more strikes
in this first year than Joe Biden took
in the entirety of his Presidency. So
the idea that he is trying to keep us
out of things is—I think—should be put
to bed. He has made himself a foreign
policy President.
Why? He doesn’t want to talk about
his domestic agenda. He doesn’t want
to talk about his lack of action on the
things that actually matter to Americans. Most people did not wake up wondering when we could invade Venezuela, when we could take over Venezuela. Most Americans want him to be
attacking—not other countries, but the
things that are holding them back
from living their best and most free
life.
Think about what he promised. On
healthcare, our premiums have gone
up, for many Americans, doubling and
tripling as of January 1; housing
prices, up; energy costs, up; jobs, down
with cuts, particularly in places like
Michigan, in manufacturing. All the
things he said he was going to attack,
he has ignored. And all the things he
has done abroad are for you to think he
is a big tough guy, he is Presidential,
he is in command of something.
I have three brothers. I grew up in a
very active household. If you remember—those of you who got the crap beat
out of you the way I did—when your
brothers say, ‘‘Look over here,’’ ‘‘look
over here’’ and sucker punch you, that
is purposeful to distract you. That is
what Donald Trump is doing with military action in his first year: ‘‘Look
over here.’’ We are talking about Venezuela today and talking about places
like Greenland instead of talking about
the housing emergency or healthcare
emergency. So the unstated goal by the
President is to distract you. And
please, please, please don’t let him do
that.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.029

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

Secondly, the stated goal. The President has been very open. This is not
about drugs. It was never about drugs.
This is about taking over Venezuela
and particularly their oil fields. We
used to make fun of the conspiracy
theories of George Bush taking over
Iraq because of the oil. Donald Trump
just admitted it outright. He is happy
to brag about the fact that he is taking
over the oil fields of another country.
The only problem is, if you talk to
some of the oil executives, as of this
past Saturday, they had zero plan, zero
idea.
The administration had no plan for
the day after this removal of Maduro.
And I have to tell you, as someone who
served in places like Iraq, haven’t we
learned the lesson over and over and
over again? This country always tries
to get into ‘‘limited’’ military engagements. That is what Kennedy said
about Vietnam. That is what Bush said
about Iraq and Afghanistan. We may go
in with intentions of things being very
limited, but the world has a vote on
how things go in these other countries,
and we do not know where Venezuela is
going to go.
Oil companies, despite how they are
portrayed in Hollywood, are very conservative. They have to think in 20year time horizons. They can’t make
willy-nilly moves. They have to make a
profit and think about that over 20
years. It is not a surprise that some of
the early plans earlier this week about
what the Trump administration was
going to have the oil companies do
have now fallen by the wayside.
The President has said we are going
to throw money at this problem. Now,
the President is saying and Marco
Rubio is saying we are going to control
the oil. ‘‘Don’t worry. The U.S. Government is going to move that oil into the
United States, and we are going to help
sell it, and we are going to hopefully
make some profit off of that.’’
The only problem is the oil companies are still extremely, extremely cautious and sort of suspicious of this
plan. These plans to invest in Venezuela would involve them investing a
ton of money upfront and just hoping
that long after Donald Trump leaves,
they are going to make a profit. So it
is not a surprise that he had no plan
and he has no idea where this is going
to go.
You don’t have to imagine instability
in Venezuela. In 2017, we had protests
on the ground. Back in the early 2000s,
the then-government had to fire or
ended up firing 18,000 people in the oil
industry because there was a general
strike. We have no idea and, certainly,
this President has no idea where this is
going to go. He had no plan going in,
but we are all along for the ride.
I think it is just as important to understand the context as we talk about
the legal authority to go into a place
like Venezuela. I would say what we all
need to be cautious of is this idea that
whether you go in trying to do a limited military operation or not, at the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:48 Jan 08, 2026

S81

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

end of the day, it is Americans’ sons
and daughters from places like Michigan that are called up to create calm,
to create stability. You break it; you
buy it.
This administration has been very
open about the fact that they now believe they own Venezuela. I stand here
as a Senator, yes, but also as someone
who has seen this movie in other
places. I call upon the administration
to just be transparent. Just play it
straight. Don’t try to distract us. Don’t
try to sucker punch us. Tell us what
you are doing in foreign countries,
then get back to the work you said you
were going to do. Attack healthcare,
not Venezuela. Get to the domestic
things you promised, and stop leading
us around by our noses.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Hawaii.
Mr. SCHATZ. Mr. President, no regime-change wars.
No regime-change wars.
I heard it from leftists. I heard it
from rightwing people. I heard it from
BERNIE SANDERS. I heard it from Tulsi
Gabbard. I heard it from Donald John
Trump: No regime-change wars. And
yet here we go again.
Almost 25 years ago, George W. Bush
and Dick Cheney cooked up claims of
Saddam Hussein having weapons of
mass destruction to justify going into
Iraq. Last month, just 2 weeks before
ordering the capture of Nicolas
Maduro, Donald Trump designated
fentanyl as a weapon of mass destruction. Fentanyl is terrible. It is not a
weapon of mass destruction.
It was Donald Rumsfeld all those
years ago who falsely claimed there
was ‘‘bulletproof evidence linking Saddam Hussein to al-Qaida.’’ Marco Rubio
has spent the past few months accusing
Maduro of leading a cartel that even
our own DEA doesn’t recognize.
Just like the Bush administration insisted earlier on that oil revenue, not
American taxpayers, would cover the
cost of reconstruction in Iraq, Trump
is hoping people will buy the fantasy
his incursion into Venezuela will be
cost-free. The parallels to Iraq are
alarmingly obvious. In fact, according
to Trump himself, here is the only way
in which the situations are different:
The difference between Iraq and this is
that Bush didn’t keep the oil. We’re going to
keep the oil.

‘‘We’re going to keep the oil.’’ He
could not be any clearer. The Justice
Department can dress this up in
charges of narcoterrorism. Secretary
Rubio can talk about the promise of a
better life of Venezuelans as a secondary effect. But Trump is being very
explicit about the main goal. It is the
oil.
This is the same guy who for 10 years
and over three Presidential runs made
not getting into wars a central premise
of his campaign. It scrambled the political coalitions. It really did. There
were a lot of young veterans who came
back from Iraq and Afghanistan and

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

said, ‘‘What the hell is the Democratic
Party even for if not to be the party of
peace?’’
It doesn’t mean that we are opposed
to the use of force in all situations. But
as Barack Obama used to say:
I’m not opposed to all wars. I’m just opposed to dumb wars.

We got away from that. Donald
Trump seized that opportunity because
he saw those young men and women
who came home who were injured with
physical and mental injuries and who
were trying to reintegrate into society,
and said: What was all that for? We
have to stop regime-change wars.
That is why he beat Hillary Clinton.
But it turns out Trump is basically
George W. Bush but with the corruption ratcheted up. How else do you explain the administration’s talking to
oil companies before the strikes but
not to Congress—talking to oil companies before the strikes but not to Congress?
The Gang of 8, not all of us—I understand 535 of us can’t be briefed on an
ongoing, kinetic, risky military operation. I am an adult here. I don’t think
we have a right to know—all 535 of us—
but there is a thing called the Gang of
8. They are supposed to be trusted with
the most sensitive national security information, and they were not trusted
with the national security information
in realtime. But do you know who was
trusted with that national security information, we think? Oil executives.
This is not an accusation I am making.
This is an assertion that the President
is making, which is that they were in
on it before the kinetic engagement.
There is no reasonable explanation for
this.
We all know how this is likely to end,
and it will not be good for us. We paid
a mighty price for our blunder in Iraq
in the thousands of lives lost, trillions
of dollars spent, and untold new problems in the region and elsewhere. In response, as a country, we said no more—
no more war—but especially not when
our fundamental national interests are
not at stake. Yet Donald Trump is now
knowingly, enthusiastically dragging
us into another conflict again.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from South Carolina.
Mr. GRAHAM. Mr. President, this is
an important debate we are having,
and I will give you my view on how all
of this works.
Under the Constitution, two things
occur: The President of the United
States is designated as the Commander
in Chief of the Armed Forces, not Congress. So the Commander in Chief is
one person, the President. Declaring
war is a duty of the Congress. In the
case of modern times, it requires 535
people to vote.
The question is, Can you use military
force as the Commander in Chief without a declaration of war?
The answer is yes.
There have been five declarations of
war in the history of the country: the

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.031

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S82

Spanish-American War, the MexicanAmerican War, the War of 1812, World
War I, and World War II. Only five
times in the history of our Republic
has the Congress exercised its responsibility and right to declare war—five
times.
Now, does that mean that other actions taken by the Commander in Chief
don’t exist where there were no declarations of war?
The answer is no. They do exist. We
have been able to find 130 examples of
a Commander in Chief using military
force without a declaration of war by
the Congress and also without congressional authorization under the War
Powers Act.
One example is in 1989, when President Bush 41 literally invaded the
country of Panama. He sent ground
forces in, sustaining casualties, to take
down Noriega, who was the leader of
Panama, who was a drug kingpin. Panama was being used as a drug safe
haven when President Bush 41 authorized the military without having congressional approval to go in and take
him down—take him out of Panama
and put him in an American prison. We
used ground forces, and we lost people
in that endeavor.
Things like this, President Clinton
used and threatened military force to
take a military coup in Haiti down and
returned power back to the elected
leader of Haiti.
I could go on and on and on about
how different Presidents have used
military force that has sometimes involved casualties without their having
congressional approval. So I don’t want
to hear anybody tell me that this has
never been done before. It is actually
the norm.
What is odd in America is to declare
war by the Congress. The norm is for
the Commander in Chief to use military force as he or she deems necessary
to protect the national interests.
The 1973 War Powers Act is a congressional statute, not a constitutional
provision, that has a series of reporting
requirements when military force is
used, crescendoing with an approval
process by the Congress, and if that approval is not given, the operations
must cease.
In my view, it is patently unconstitutional. You are creating, through the
War Powers Act, 535 Commanders in
Chief. The Members of Congress sit in
judgment over the Commander in
Chief, and under the War Powers Act,
they have a veto under the law. I think
that violates the constitutional structure that has been around since the
founding of the Republic.
Now, what can Congress do?
If Congress doesn’t like a military
operation, the Constitution says that
it is Congress that appropriates money,
not the President. So, for instance, in
Venezuela, if you don’t want any
American boots on the ground, I think
you could come forward and pass
through the appropriations process a
prohibition of funds to be used to have

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

American ground forces in Venezuela.
If you don’t like the seizing of the oil
for the mutual benefit of Venezuela
and the United States, you could say
that no money could be used on behalf
of the American Government to seize
the oil. We would win the day because
that is the way you check what you
think is an out-of-line action by the
President when it comes to using military force. You can do those two
things.
What we can’t do is substitute our
judgment for the decision itself. We
can’t all sit around up here and say:
You know, I don’t know if we should
use troops here or troops there. I don’t
like the way this thing is shaping up.
That is chaos.
President Trump is well within his
legal rights under article II to use military force to advance the national interest, which is to end the drug trafficking dictatorship of Maduro, which
every Republican and Democrat condemned, and President Trump finally
did something about it. He was flooding our country with drugs, and it was
a safe haven for Hezbollah and other
drug cartels. Everybody said he should
go. Well, President Trump made those
words real. He used military force in
the advancement of a national security
interest of this country: to stop Venezuela from being a safe haven for drug
dealers and international terrorists.
He has a plan to rebuild the country
and eventually transition it, through
an election, to a new regime. Regime
change will come to Venezuela through
the ballot box. In the meantime, he is
threatening military force to people
who want to undercut this effort.
He is taking the oil and selling it and
creating an account for the benefit of
Venezuela, which is basically out of
money. He is telling those people who
are holdovers from the regime: I want
to work with you to get to where we
need to go, which is to rebuild the
country and have a free and fair election, but if you don’t work with me and
you try to undercut what I am doing,
then you can meet the same fate as
Maduro.
Maduro was an indicted drug guy. He
had indictments for being a drug trafficker. The argument is that this operation was to enforce the warrant. It
was more of a law enforcement activity
because he was the President of the
country—not legitimate, by the way,
and everybody pretty much denied that
he was the legitimate President when
he stole the election.
So the bottom line here is—the theory that some of my colleagues are
hanging their hats on is that this is legitimate because it is actually a law
enforcement function. I respect what
you are saying, but I don’t agree. This
is clearly beyond issuing a warrant.
This is clearly beyond using law enforcement power. The game plan is not
only to take the indicted leader of the
country—who is a horrible person—and
put him in jail but to change the country in a way that doesn’t threaten

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

America in the future, in that it will
not, in the future, be a drug haven for
cocaine to be dumped into our country,
and it will not be a safe haven for
Hezbollah and other drug cartels.
That is the goal. Well, that is going
to take a while. That is not about the
warrant; that is about our national security interests.
People ask about ‘‘America First.’’
What does it mean?
Here is what I think it means:
‘‘America First’’ means that we are not
going to tolerate—in Venezuela, Colombia, Cuba—countries in our backyard that are run by international drug
cartel leaders, who are not legitimate
in terms of being elected, to poison this
country; that we are going to clean up
the drug caliphate in our backyard;
and that we are going to use a combination of tools to do that, including
military force.
So there will probably be another one
of these War Powers Act resolutions. I
want to tell my colleagues where I am
going to be on that: If you don’t like
what you see coming about threatening
force in the future to have a transition
to make Venezuela free and fair and if
you don’t like taking the assets of the
country and selling them to prop up a
failing economy, then limit the President’s ability to do that by denying
funding for those operations. That
would be lawful.
The War Powers Act, in my view, is
unconstitutional because you are not
denying funding; you are basically
vetoing the decision of the President to
enact a national interest, and the national interest is far beyond taking
Maduro down and putting him in jail.
It is about transforming the country so
we will never live again with Venezuela
threatening America by dumping cocaine into our country—killing tens of
thousands of people—and being a safe
haven
for
international
terrorist
groups like Hezbollah. They are aligned
with Russia. The goal is to make sure
that it never happens again, and that
will be a process that involves military
force, potentially, and diplomatic engagement.
What the Congress, I fear, is going to
do is to limit the President’s ability to
achieve that national interest by
misapplying the War Powers Act—by
substituting our judgment for his when
it comes to how to change Venezuela.
The bottom line is, if you don’t want
troops on the ground—right now, there
is no need for them—and if you think
that is a bad idea, then let’s pass an appropriations bill that denies funding
for that. If you don’t like taking the
oil, selling it, and putting the money in
an account to get Venezuela back on
its feet and to help pay us for the operations, then say through the appropriations process: No money can be spent
to do that.
That is within our lane.
The idea that we are going to reject
the plan of transforming Venezuela
that has been drafted by the Commander in Chief because you don’t

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.032

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

agree with it means that he is not the
Commander in Chief; we are. So, if a
congressional enactment can veto the
Constitution, then we are really off
script here.
A congressional statute has to give
way to the Constitution. The Constitution names the President as the Commander in Chief—only the President.
The Constitution says that Congress
and only Congress can declare war.
After 250 years, what have we
learned?
There have been five declarations of
war. They are unusual. There have
been over 130 military actions without
congressional authorization that have
used military force to advance the national interests. That is the norm. The
War Powers Act throws that into
chaos.
So I look forward to future debates.
President Trump has all the constitutional authority he needs to execute
the game plan against Venezuela and
to advance our national interests.
Again, if you don’t like what he is
doing, there is a constitutional process
available to you, and that is to cut off
funding. The other process would be
impeachment. If you think he is doing
something
unlawful
under
international law, you can impeach him.
Those are your two options.
So I will be voting against this idea,
and I will be voting against this idea in
a new form in perpetuity because I
think it creates a constitutional imbalance of where the Congress, over time,
becomes the Commander in Chief, not
the President, and we cannot run this
country having 535 Commanders in
Chief.
With that, I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Maryland.
Mr. VAN HOLLEN. Mr. President, I
think the real danger is that over time,
this Congress has conceded and delivered its constitutional responsibilities
to the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue and President Trump and other executives. It is time for Congress to
take seriously its responsibilities, including the constitutional responsibility to decide when to declare war.
Here at home, our fellow Americans
are facing higher costs for virtually everything: for groceries, for electricity,
childcare, healthcare. The list goes on
and on. Folks all over the country are
working nonstop just to make ends
meet.
So you would think that President
Trump would be focused on keeping his
campaign promise to bring down
prices. He said he was going to do that
on day one of his administration, but
that is not what he is doing. He is
doing the opposite.
He and Republicans right here in the
Senate and in Congress are actually
driving up costs, including healthcare
costs across the country. Members of
Congress on the Republican side voted
against extending tax credits to help
middle-class Americans afford their
healthcare. In fact, those tax credits

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

S83

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

expired at midnight on December 31,
and 20 million Americans are seeing
their healthcare costs spike.
President Trump is also breaking another promise. He is breaking his
promise to keep America from being
dragged into costly foreign conflicts.
He is not focused on nation building
here at home. He is focused on nation
building overseas—exactly what he
said he did not want to do.
First of all, he bailed out Argentina,
and now, he says he is running Venezuela. He says he is in charge of Venezuela. In fact, just this morning,
President Trump’s Secretary of Energy
Chris Wright said the United States
would be overseeing the sale of Venezuela’s oil production ‘‘indefinitely.’’
Here is a Washington Post story:
‘‘U.S. vows to control Venezuela oil
sales ‘indefinitely’’’—Energy Secretary
says.
That is what this has been about
from the beginning, grabbing and controlling Venezuela’s oil for the benefit
of Trump’s billionaire buddies. That is
why Wall Street appears to be drooling
at the prospect of making more money
in Venezuela.
So I think we should start by pointing out the fact that the Trump administration has been engaged in a long
campaign of deception and lies to the
American people about the reasons for
this adventure in Venezuela.
They lied to the American people
when they said this was all about stopping the flow of drugs into the United
States. We all support that goal. But
that is not what this has been about. If
this was about stopping the flow of
drugs into our country, the Trump administration would not have proposed
big budget cuts to the Drug Enforcement Administration. They would not
have shuttered the Organized Crime
Drug Enforcement Task Force. They
shut it down.
President Trump talks about deaths
caused by fentanyl in the United
States. He is absolutely right about
that. What he does not tell the American people is that the fentanyl killing
Americans is not originating or even
transiting through Venezuela.
And, of course, if President Trump
was serious about fighting drugs, he
would not, just as he did weeks ago,
have pardoned the former Honduran
President and notorious drug kingpin
Juan Orlando Hernandez.
I should say, even closer to home in
December, we learned President Trump
also pardoned a Baltimore City drug
kingpin whom the DEA called ‘‘one of
the largest cocaine and heroin dealers
to be arrested by the DEA in recent
history.’’
That sends a signal to everybody
that Donald Trump is willing to pardon
people who have been engaged in poisoning our people.
So this has not been about stopping
drugs for Donald Trump. And it certainly wasn’t about removing an illegitimate leader—and Maduro is an illegitimate leader—but Donald Trump

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

cozies up to dictators all over the
world.
Of course, yesterday was the fifth anniversary of Donald Trump’s efforts to
overturn a free and fair election right
here in the United States.
The President himself has made clear
that this is all about the oil. When he
announced the fact that the United
States had seized Maduro, he said:
‘‘We’re going to get back our oil’’ and
‘‘We need total access . . . access to
the oil and to other things in their
country,’’ meaning other natural resources in Venezuela. He uttered the
word ‘‘oil’’ 19 times when he announced
the seizure of Maduro.
Indeed, while President Trump did
not consult or notify Congress about
his plans, as is required, he revealed
that ‘‘the oil companies were absolutely aware that we were thinking
about doing something.’’
So colleagues, Donald Trump wants
to grab the oil, and he wants to do it to
help his billionaire buddies. Case in
point is Paul Singer. He is the billionaire head of Elliott Investment Management and a Trump megadonor. He
recently acquired Citgo, the U.S.-based
subsidiary of Venezuela’s state-run oil
company in November 2025, just a few
months ago. He acquired it for approximately half the company’s estimated
value.
Now, according to the Wall Street
Journal in an article on January 5:
Now Elliott appears poised to reap the rewards of owning Venezuela’s most valuable
foreign oil asset. The regime change could
lead to an increase in Venezuelan oil production, which would likely provide cheap feedstock to Citgo’s Gulf Coast refineries and increase the company’s value, analysts and refining experts said.

So a huge win for one of President
Trump’s biggest donors.
Now, I think we all need to acknowledge and salute our troops who took
part in this operation. They performed
magnificently, flawlessly, bravely. I
want to thank them on behalf of my
fellow Marylanders.
But it is also outrageous that President Trump would put the lives of
American service men and women at
risk to grab Venezuela’s oil to enrich
his friends on Wall Street. At least six
of our American service men and
women were wounded, approximately
80 Venezuelans were killed in this operation, including civilians, not to mention the over 100 people who were on
those boats over the last couple of
months who had been killed.
And while the Trump administration
and congressional Republicans attempt
to bask in the euphoria of Maduro’s removal, the hangover of running Venezuela is still to come. In fact, it has
started.
In recent remarks on Venezuela’s future after Maduro’s capture, President
Trump said:
You know, rebuilding there and regime
change, anything you want to call it, is better than what you have right now. Can’t get
any worse.

Well, actually, colleagues, it can, and
we have seen it before; two decades in

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.033

S07JAPT1

S84

Afghanistan, years in Iraq stand as a
warning: The United States spilled
blood and treasure on state-building
fantasies that failed, undermined
American interests, and left a more
fractured and unstable region in their
wake.
The United States has no mandate to
decide Venezuela’s future. That is up to
the Venezuelan people, not to be imposed through U.S. military regime
change efforts that are really motivated by oil company interests and not
to be dictated by threats of occupation.
This time, President Trump has coopted the U.S. military in service of
those goals, benefiting oil companies
and his billionaire buddies. And in
doing so, he has charted a dangerous
playbook that they say they may employ elsewhere.
As we all know, since seizing Maduro,
President Trump has threatened further action against Cuba, Colombia,
and Greenland. After being asked about
an operation in Greenland, which he
has threatened several times with invasion since beginning his term, he said—
President Trump said:
We need Greenland.

Just yesterday, the White House confirmed in a statement that they are
discussing ‘‘a range of options’’ to acquire Greenland, not excluding military force.
When asked about a U.S. operation
against Colombia, President Trump
said:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

It sounds good to me.

Look, what we have seen is President
Trump resurrecting a policy from a bygone era, one which would be better
left in the dustbin of history, the Monroe Doctrine.
That was encapsulated in his recent
press conference as well when he said
that ‘‘American dominance in the
Western Hemisphere will never be
questioned again.’’
What he means by that is that he will
deploy U.S. forces wherever he wants
for whatever purpose he wants—and,
again, trying to leave Congress out of
the equation. You know, you listen to
our Republican colleagues here who apparently just want to give the Executive a blank check.
If you look at the National Security
Strategy that the Trump administration unveiled a few weeks back, you
will see how serious a change their proposal is because it essentially throws
overboard the idea that the United
States will employ a foreign policy
based on values and principles, that we
will support a rules-based order, human
rights, freedom, and democracy.
However imperfectly we have done
that—and we have been far from perfect—that has been one of the guiding
lights for U.S. foreign policy. And when
you throw that overboard in favor of
this new policy, which says we will essentially reassert a dominance in the
Western Hemisphere, it is clearly a signal to others around the world—or at
least this is the way they will hear it—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

that they get free rein in their neighborhoods, which explains why President Trump has been so weak when it
comes to negotiating with Vladimir
Putin over Ukraine.
We can explain it when we understand that when Donald Trump says
‘‘Ukraine is your neighborhood,’’ you,
Vladimir Putin, get to do what you
want in Ukraine. So he invites Vladimir Putin to a summit in Alaska,
thinks he is going to sweet talk Putin.
As soon as the summit is over, Russia
and Putin escalate their attacks
against Ukraine.
Maybe in Donald Trump’s mind it is
like: Well, you know, Ukraine is in
your neighborhood, none of my business. That is a very dangerous signal to
send.
Of course, President Xi—I mean he is
looking at Taiwan 90 miles away and
saying: Well, that is in my neighborhood.
So Donald Trump has unleashed this
idea that we are going to focus only on
the Western Hemisphere—or mostly on
the Western Hemisphere—and that we
are essentially going to live by the rule
that might is right. When you unleash
that idea around the world, other significant powers will listen and it will
make the world a lot more dangerous
and it will undermine American interests.
So I do want to close where I started,
which is instead of engaging in these
costly foreign adventures that cost billions of dollars and put American lives
at risk, we should be doing what Candidate Trump said he was going to do,
which is focus on making sure we improve the lives of American people
right here at home.
That is not what the President is
doing. That is what we should be doing,
and we should start by saying no to
this foreign, illegal adventure by supporting Senator KAINE’s resolution.
And then we should get about making sure that we work to bring costs
down here in the United States, including, after the House passes later this
week, legislation to restore those tax
credits that help people afford their
healthcare. We should take that up in
the Senate and get it passed.
Let’s focus on helping the American
people here at home rather than putting Americans and their lives at risk
in costly foreign adventures to get our
hands on Venezuela’s oil for the benefit
of Donald Trump’s donors and billionaire buddies.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
HUSTED). The Senator from Colorado.
Mr. BENNET. Mr. President, I want
to thank the Senator from Maryland
for his wise words. I was glad to be here
for the end of his remarks because he is
right about this moment that we are
facing.
Donald Trump has painted himself as
the peace President since 2016, promising that ‘‘we will stop racing to topple foreign regimes that we know nothing about.’’

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

In 2024, he said that ‘‘I’m not going to
start wars, I’m going to stop wars.’’
One year into Donald Trump’s second
term, we know how false those promises were. Just in the last 12 months,
President Trump has ordered military
action against seven countries, blown
up alleged drug boats in the Caribbean
without any authorization, deployed
Federal troops to at least 10 cities in
the United States of America, all without congressional authorization.
Now, he has bombed and invaded
Venezuela to capture its dictator, Nicolas Maduro. I have said over and over
and over again, for years, how illegitimate Maduro was as President of Venezuela, and that is not up for debate.
And by the way, it is also not up for
debate what an excellent job the U.S.
military did in its effort to get him out
of there. It was extraordinary to learn
exactly what they went through to get
there. They did their job. They did
their job. They did it excellently.
And now Congress has the responsibility to do our job here. As we meet
here today, President Trump is blockading Venezuela’s ports from exporting
oil while threatening to collapse their
economy and also to threaten future
military strikes against the country if
they don’t comply with his will.
Despite what the President claimed
on the campaign trail, war and threats
of future wars with Colombia, with
Cuba, with Mexico, and even our NATO
ally Denmark, when it comes to Greenland, are now animating features of his
foreign policy.
The President’s team claims their operation to oust Maduro was a ‘‘law enforcement’’ operation about drugs.
That is the legal pretext for the action
that they have led, but Maduro is now
in jail in New York City and 15,000 U.S.
troops and an American armada are
still hovering off Venezuela’s coast.
We already captured Maduro. He is in
jail. So what are our troops doing down
there? Clearly, this is not about law
enforcement. This is not about democracy. No, as my colleague from Maryland was saying, this is about oil. The
President has made that painfully
clear.
President Trump mentioned oil 20
times in his January 3 press conference
after Maduro was captured. He complained that Venezuela ‘‘stole’’ oil from
the United States, and we must ‘‘run’’
the country to take the oil back.
But the United States doesn’t need
the oil. Even U.S. oil companies didn’t
want this invasion, nor did these U.S.
companies ever own oil or own land in
Venezuela. The Venezuelan Government definitely nationalized its oil industry in the seventies. That is true.
From that point forward—by the way,
that was when I was about 6. I am so
old.
But that did happen in the seventies
when I was about 6. From that point
forward, Venezuela was certainly not
an easy place to do business. I don’t
think anybody here would say that, but
American companies stayed, stayed

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.035

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

there despite the nationalization and
lack of full compensation they should
have had that was ordered by international courts.
In fact, American companies never
pressed for higher compensation during
that initial nationalization. And I
would say failing to reimburse American companies is surely outrageous,
but a decades-old legal dispute over a
compensation is not a legitimate justification for the United States to go
to war. And very few Americans—very
few Americans—would support putting
boots on the ground to secure Venezuela’s oil.
It would be shockingly irresponsible
for the President to send American
troops to ‘‘run’’ Venezuela as he promised this weekend, seemingly, with the
sole goal of accessing that country’s
oil.
Bolivia, Ecuador, Kazakhstan, Nigeria, Mexico, Angola, Peru, and countless other countries have nationalized
some American oil assets in the 21st
and 20th centuries. All of them took
advantage of American companies.
Would the Trump administration
have us invade and occupy and govern
all these countries to reverse that history? Would the President wield our
military as tax-funded security for the
expansion of American oil giants in
these markets?
Remarkably, incredibly, this seems
to be his plan. President Trump has
floated sending American troops to secure U.S. companies to rebuild Venezuela’s oil infrastructure. He has even
said the U.S. Government could subsidize these oil companies. Estimates
suggest it will cost a staggering $110
billion to bring Venezuela’s oil and gas
infrastructure back to peak production
levels and take at least a decade.
I, for one, can think of a lot better
uses for that money. And instead of
‘‘no new wars,’’ this President has
plunged us into a quagmire—paid for
by the American taxpayer—seemingly,
with the primary goal of giving expensive handouts with respect to oil.
Why should the American people foot
the bill for this misadventure? Why
should our tax dollars fund private interests in Venezuela? Why should
American troops risk their lives for
any of this? Perhaps the greatest irony
is that Chevron, America’s only remaining major oil company in Venezuela, was not even asking for any of
this to happen. Instead they simply
asked the Trump administration, as
they had the Biden administration, to
allow their continued operation in Venezuela, which President Trump had restricted during his first term.
Other American oil firms weren’t
asking for this either. Few have much
desire to go back into Venezuela, which
helps explain why Chevron and other
American companies have no plans—no
plans—to spend, as the President says,
‘‘billions and billions of dollars’’ rebuilding Venezuela’s oil industry as the
President has declared.
Despite the President’s promises to
not start new wars nor pursue regime

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

S85

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

change operations abroad, today there
are 15,000 brave U.S. troops and an
American armada off of Venezuela’s
coast all without congressional authorization. And the President is threatening more attacks on more countries,
including every time you turn the TV
on, it is another country: Colombia,
Cuba, Mexico, and Greenland, part of
Denmark, a NATO ally.
Congress has not authorized any of
these dangerous potential operations
which risk destroying alliances and relationships that have long kept the
American people safe. The Trump administration, however, continues to
trample on our Constitution with unauthorized military actions while
threatening others, weakening U.S. democracy, and making the world more
dangerous in the process.
Congress cannot allow this to stand.
I congratulate the Senator from Virginia for his leadership to make sure
the American people’s voices are heard
in this moment, on this floor, in this
Chamber. We must reassert our role to
prevent the President from his continued irresponsible conduct.
And I think it is really important for
us, as I have heard the Senator from
Virginia say—it is critically important
for us to hold public oversight hearings
in which the administration explains
to the American people what they plan
to do with the thousands of U.S. troops
off Venezuela’s coast, with their plan
to ‘‘run’’ Venezuela, and with the regime in Caracas over which they now
claim to have control.
The unusual thing about where we
are right now is this is not some afteraction report where kinetic activities
is already done and now Congress is
complaining that it hasn’t been
brought into the loop. Fifteen thousand troops are off the coast of Venezuela today. The administration
should be here today explaining to the
American people what the plan is for
those troops.
And if it is, in fact, to secure oil assets for the United States of America
in Venezuela, which I don’t believe the
American people will support, I know
the American people will never support
putting boots on the ground. The President said I don’t mind using the words
‘‘boots on the ground.’’ I think the
American people will mind it.
With so many troops and assets still
in the region, this is the opportunity
for Congress to help determine what
our path forward is going to be in our
backyard, right here in this hemisphere.
The American people did not vote to
send U.S. troops on President Trump’s
project to Venezuela, but I don’t think
they voted to dominate the Western
Hemisphere either, which is what
President Trump says his overall mission is.
And as my colleague from Maryland
said, he is willing to twist the Monroe
Doctrine. He is not even following it.
He is twisting the Monroe Doctrine,
which the United States actually used

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

to keep colonial powers out of our
hemisphere, to justify his own colonial
intentions to exploit Venezuelan oil.
That is a complete inversion of what
the Monroe Doctrine is. So I guess the
President has rightly amended it to
call it the ‘‘Donroe’’ version of the
Monroe Doctrine. But in any case, it is
gunboat diplomacy, a 19th century foreign policy we have not seen on this
scale since President McKinley was the
President of the United States. And it
will normalize a world in which ‘‘might
means right,’’ as the White House is
saying today, doing away with the
rules-based international order that we
helped build, that has served the
United States so well since World War
II.
All of this would seem to be part of
the President’s embrace of a ‘‘spheres
of influence’’ arrangement with China
and with Russia. The President seemed
totally fine with allowing China to
dominate Asia and Russia to dominate
Europe, as long as they let us dominate
the Western Hemisphere. That is a 19th
century idea if there ever was a 19th
century idea.
He clearly sees little reason to compete or constrain them as demonstrated by his willingness to accept
the trade deal with China’s Xi Jinping
that
overwhelmingly—overwhelmingly—favored Beijing. He was giving
Xi Jinping stuff that he didn’t even ask
for the minute he was worried that
somehow we were going to get cut off
from his critical minerals.
But as an unrestrained Chinese Middle Kingdom will inevitably expand
outward, as will Russia with its imperial design, history shows us the result
will be a global conflict when these
ambitions collide, as they inevitably
will, a global conflict that ultimately
will implicate the United States and
put America in danger.
This begins to show you how out of
the mainstream this President’s view
of the world is. His constant abandonment of basic principles of international law and order are, again,
going to eventually reverberate against
America’s national interests. The only
question is when.
Indeed, the kind of ‘‘spheres of influence’’ arrangement on which the President seems to be so obsessed or focused
is exactly the arrangement that produced two world wars. It is exactly
why, after World War II, the United
States and our allies established the
rules-based order to peacefully resolve
conflicts, regulate global trade, and ultimately ensure rules-based international exchange. That order was
never perfect.
And the United States often undermined it with our own hubris, particularly the invasion of Iraq—which I opposed. And we need to learn from our
own mistakes, including by avoiding
reckless new wars like the one President Trump has launched.
Nevertheless, the postwar order that
prevented war between the great powers, among the great powers, and for

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.036

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S86

all its flaws, it largely kept the American people safe. And criticizing that
order seems pretty easy, given its imperfections. But the critic’s task becomes harder once they are forced to
compare it with what came before, the
anarchy that preceded the Second
World War and what China and Russia
offer for the future of this world.
This is what President Trump risks
with his 19th century foreign policy,
with his actions in Venezuela, his lawless strikes across the Caribbean and
Pacific, his threats to invade Colombia, Cuba, Greenland, and Mexico.
These actions and threats will have serious implications for U.S. national security today and tomorrow.
In the case of Greenland, the President’s threats risk the unity of NATO,
our most vital alliance, the most successful alliance in world history. They
risk setting precedent for authoritarian regimes all over this world to
intervene militarily under the guise of
going after leaders accused of criminal
conduct or simply to access valuable
natural resources or critical technologies under their control.
Donald Trump, President Trump,
says he wants to dominate ‘‘our hemisphere,’’ he calls it. Surely, China’s Xi
Jinping wants to dominate what he
would describe as his region in Asia,
and Vladimir Putin would like to dominate what he sees as his region in Eurasia. President Trump’s recklessness
risks normalizing such imperial aggression, putting us on a pathway toward a more dangerous world in which
‘‘might means right’’ and the rule of
law is abandoned.
Colorado cannot allow this President
to create such a world for our children,
which is why we need to continue to
fight on a bipartisan basis when possible to prevent another forever war in
Venezuela or beyond and to constrain
the President’s dangerous, dangerous
ambition because our country deserves
better than this administration’s recklessness and our children surely do as
well.
Thank you for allowing me to speak
here today, and I hope this will be a
moment when we come together and
fulfill the demands that our Constitution requires of the people fortunate
enough to serve in this body.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
MORENO). The Senator from Vermont.
Mr. WELCH. Mr. President, I want to
thank my colleague from Colorado, and
I want to thank my colleague from Virginia for their leadership on what is
the very important question before the
U.S. Senate.
In the weeks and months leading up
to the capture of Nicolas Maduro,
President Trump sent 15,000 U.S. military personnel to the Caribbean and
Venezuela,
that
included
Special
Forces, Marines, and specialized units
from all of our branches of government. He sent 13 warships to the Caribbean, including the USS Gerald R. Ford
Carrier Strike Group, and several am-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

phibious assault ships. More than 100
advanced combat aircraft were deployed, including F–35s from the
Vermont National Guard. And we can
estimate that thousands of military
and intelligence personnel were involved in planning and executing the
raid that seized Maduro.
A mobilization of this size costs hundreds of millions of dollars, if not billions. This operation is, and apparently
always has been, about one thing: seizing control of Venezuela’s oil. President Trump and his closest advisers
have made that clear. It is about President Trump using the power that he
has as President, without restraint, to
get the oil that he wants.
This is not my assertion. These are
President Trump’s words:
We built Venezuela’s oil industry with
American talent, drive and skill, and the socialist regime stole it from us . . .
It was the greatest theft in the history of
America. They took . . . away from us.
We’re going to have our very large United
States oil companies, the biggest anywhere
in the world, go in, spend billions of dollars,
fix the badly broken infrastructure, the oil
infrastructure and start making money for
the country. We will be selling large
amounts of oil to other countries.

I think it is a fair question. If that is
the President’s goal, what is in it for
farmers in Vermont? Small business
owners in Ohio? For the elementary
school teacher in Texas? For a truck
mechanic in South Dakota? There is
absolutely nothing in it for everyday
Americans. And we spent hundreds of
millions of dollars on a mission that
can only benefit the oil industry who
didn’t even ask that this be done in the
first place.
So what about this operation is
‘‘America First’’? It might be ‘‘Trump
First’’ or it might be ‘‘Chevron First,’’
but it is not ‘‘America First.’’ And we
just saw the revelation that a major
donor to President Trump bought at
bargain basement prices a Chevron subsidiary and can stand to make literally
billions of dollars. Should our foreign
policy be about pure profits, as opposed
to pure benefit for the American people? About profits that go to big corporations and to the President’s
friends? That is what is going on here.
There is no limit. Within hours of
Maduro’s capture, President Trump
was threatening Greenland; they have
minerals. Colombia, they have resources as well. Cuba and Mexico. Is
this the world that will work for us or
the world that we want where rather
than acting as a defender—actually the
leader—in
maintaining
long-established principles of national sovereignty, we threaten and invade countries to seize their natural resources?
That is the way it was before 1945:
‘‘Might makes right.’’ That is a dangerous world. And is that the world
that the United States wants to leave
to future generations?
There are two questions before the
Senate. One is a policy debate, the wisdom of this attack on Venezuela. There
is no dispute about the evil of Maduro.

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

None. There is enormous respect and
appreciation for the professionalism,
the bravery of our military that did
something that, frankly, seems impossible. But in service of what? This is an
extraordinary military victory, but it
is in service of a neocon dream. We saw
this in Libya. We saw this in Iraq. We
saw this in Afghanistan.
President Trump is now saying we
are going to ‘‘run the country.’’ And
President Trump is heralding that
Maduro is in jail in Manhattan. We all
are. But left behind in Venezuela is
every structure that Maduro put in
place. His hand-picked Vice President
is now the leader. His repressive, brutal, murderous Interior Minister is still
in charge. So, yes, Maduro is gone, but
everything he built remains behind.
What kind of victory is that?
The second question—and I thank
Senator KAINE for being the leader on
this—is one that every person who
serves in the U.S. Senate has to answer: Will we do our job? This is not
optional. Article I of the U.S. Constitution says it is up to Congress to authorize the use of military force in
going to war. It is our job, and it is our
responsibility. And one of the enormous threats to our democracy right
now is the capitulation of too many
Members of the House and too many
Members of the Senate of powers that
are vested in this body, under the Constitution, in ceding those authorities
to the Chief Executive.
Why is that wrong? It is wrong because there is wisdom in the Constitution’s separation of powers that power
cannot be concentrated in one branch
of government. And it is as a result of
one branch of government ceding its
authority and its responsibility to the
Executive. We have an obligation to
protect our constitutional role, and it
is not about us. It is about our country.
And what is a greater responsibility
than the decision to send men and
women into combat? That is our job.
And, Senator KAINE, thank you so
much for all of your efforts to remind
us of our responsibility and to tell us
to do our job.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from New Jersey.
Mr. KIM. Mr. President, I rise today
because the American people are looking at this administration’s actions in
Venezuela and asking: What is the
plan? As someone who worked in national security before coming to Congress, I have been in the situation
room for discussions about military operations. I worked on and in both Afghanistan and Iraq, where our country
has seen the risk of getting pulled into
open-ended commitments trying to run
other countries.
And I have seen the importance of always having a plan for the day after,
something this administration clearly
did not do. So what the American people are seeing from this administration
is hubris, but without strategy—a dangerous combination.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.038

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 7, 2026

Moreover, it seems President Trump
is drunk on this hubris. We have now
seen Stephen Miller saying that the
United States has the right to take
Greenland. Secretary Rubio threatened
Colombia and Cuba. It appears that
President Trump thinks that reverting
back to an era of imperialism or
‘‘spheres of influence’’ is the best way
to demonstrate power, that just because a military operation was skillfully executed by our brave military
personnel without Americans killed,
that there are no costs, that a world
where ‘‘might makes right’’ benefits
American interests.
He is simply wrong. We live in a global world—if anything, an increasingly
shrinking world. Borders and oceans no
longer protect us against many of the
threats we face today, including cyber
threats and the changing nature of
warfare. The idea that protecting our
immediate surroundings will keep the
American people safe is a dated, 19th
century idea that long ago became irrelevant.
This approach also risks taking our
eye off the ball on other critical challenges—like the one posed by China—
while opening further feuds with critical allies and partners.
Just look at the letter signed the
other day by leaders from Denmark,
France, the UK, Germany, Italy, Spain,
and Poland reminding President Trump
that Denmark is a treaty ally of the
United States and, in doing so, effectively issuing a ‘‘hands off’’ on Greenland.
I have told you I worked in Afghanistan. I worked on a NATO military
base alongside military servicemembers from Denmark who were there to
be able to protect and defend us with
the work we do. I was there as part of
that NATO mission that was part of
the article 5 response that was about
protecting the United States and supporting us after September 11 in our
time of need. Denmark lost many in
that fight, and the idea that we are
now threatening that nation is shameful.
By staking claim to anything and everything within our so-called sphere,
we are risking alienating ourselves
from allies and partners, which is, arguably, our greatest strength. Furthermore, this approach of ‘‘spheres of influence’’ and ‘‘might makes right’’ is
one that our leading competitors and
adversaries—China and Russia—have
been asserting themselves. We are
using
their
language.
President
Trump’s adoption of this approach endorses and advances their world view, a
move that could have dangerous global
consequences.
How will this administration tell
Putin that he does not have the right
to assert the same control over its proclaimed sphere of influence or that Xi
cannot exercise his will unchecked in
the Indo-Pacific, including with respect to Taiwan? The United States
should be countering this vision of a
world based on spheres of influence

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

S87

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

with our own alternative of a stronger
global order, not participating in the
destruction of the existing one by endorsing Moscow and Beijing’s alternative.
These moves also have costs at home.
At his press conference over the weekend, President Trump demonstrated a
deep lack of understanding that there
is always a cost to our actions. There
is the cost for our servicemembers—
more than 15,000, at last reports—currently positioned in the Caribbean and
focused on the operations in and
around Venezuela. Their lives are on
the line. They have been taken away
from their families.
And there is the cost to the American people. Millions of Americans are
about to see their healthcare costs rise
exponentially. Why are we conducting
military operations in a country that
has no direct security threat to the
United States when people are about to
lose their healthcare?
Even if this administration had a
sound foreign policy, it would be essential that Congress assert its authority
to speak for the American people. But
this administration does not have a
sound foreign policy; it has one that is
rooted in bluster, built on extortion
and extraction, for the President’s own
benefit and without the best interests
of the American people at heart.
It is for them that we must reassert
our authority. It is for them—the
American people—that we must be a
strong check on this reckless and feckless foreign policy.
I yield the floor.
f

MORNING BUSINESS
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Senate be
in a period of morning business, with
Senators permitted to speak therein
for up to 10 minutes each.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

TRIBUTE TO JO ELLEN DEUTSCH
Ms. BALDWIN. Mr. President, I rise
today to recognize the extraordinary
career and service of Jo Ellen Deutsch,
who recently retired after a nearly 40year career focused on ensuring and expanding rights for all Americans.
Jo graduated from Smith College in
1982 with a B.A. in American studies
and later received her M.A. from the
George Washington University, focused
on women’s studies, specializing in
public policy and women’s history. Although her activism began long before
her college years, Jo jumped immediately into advocacy and public service as she began her professional career.
On Capitol Hill, Jo spent a year as a
fellow in Representative Barbara Boxer’s Washington, DC, office. She then
joined the Association of Flight Attendants, as their director of government affairs, focusing on passing a ban
on smoking in-flight to protect work-

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ers and passengers from secondhand
smoke. Later, with roles at both the
American Federation of State, County,
and Municipal Employees and the Commercial Workers International Union,
Jo continued her work to support and
defend the rights of working men and
women across our Nation.
In 2011, Jo joined Freedom to Marry
as their Federal director, with the goal
of overturning the so-called Defense of
Marriage Act which defined marriage
as between one man and one woman.
Jo, as she did with all her efforts,
threw herself wholeheartedly into this
fight for equality. She built coalitions—including Mayors for the Freedom to Marry, Young Conservatives for
the Freedom to Marry, and the Respect
for Marriage Coalition—signaling that
there was sustained momentum and
progress across our Nation in support
of the freedom to marry. She used her
deep knowledge of the inner workings
of Capitol Hill to build support with a
bipartisan coalition of Members in the
House of Representatives and in the
Senate. Jo’s sustained efforts paved the
way for change across the Nation.
After 2015’s landmark Supreme Court
ruling in Obergefell v. Hodges, establishing the freedom to marry across
the country, Jo turned her advocacy
into sustained mentorship. She established the Deutsch Initiatives Group,
sharing her experiences and expertise
in lobbying, management, training,
and messaging. She later joined the
Campaign Legal Center to advocate for
critical reforms goals to the laws undergirding our democracy, particularly
with regard to campaign finance, ethics, and voting rights laws.
Jo’s landmark work at Freedom to
Marry paved the way for legislation I
was proud to help author and usher
into law in 2022, the Respect for Marriage Act. This act repealed the Defense of Marriage Act and ensured that
under Federal law, you were free to
marry the person that you love.
And love has always been at the center of Jo’s world. Together with her
wife Teresa, they have centered their
family in their adopted home of Maryland. After 29 years together, in 2013,
they were married with their three
children serving as their wedding attendants, an event I was honored to attend.
I am delighted to congratulate my
friend Jo on a wonderful and deeply
impactful career. The ripples of her determination and advocacy will be felt
for generations to come, and I am
thrilled to see what the next chapter
holds for her, Teresa, and their family.
f

ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS
REMEMBERING NATHAN CLARK
∑ Mrs. BLACKBURN. Mr. President,
last month Tennessee lost a great man,
community leader, and champion of
our State’s military community: Mr.
Nathan Clark.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.039

S07JAPT1

S88

For more than 20 years, Mr. Clark
served as a store manager for Lowe’s in
Clarksville, TN, always looking for
ways to give back to the community,
including to the brave men and women
who serve at Fort Campbell. Over the
years, he spearheaded several major
improvement projects on the base, including the complete restoration of the
Night Stalker Remembrance Trail,
which honors the fallen warriors of the
160th Special Operations Aviation
Regiment; the revitalization of Gabriel
Field, the sacred ground honoring the
fallen of the 5th Special Forces Group;
and the transformation of the Survivor
Outreach Services building, a place of
solace and support for families who
have lost loved ones in service to our
Nation.
For his dedicated support for our
servicemembers, Mr. Clark was honored with the titles of Tennessee Colonel Aide de Camp, Kentucky Colonel,
and Champion of Fort Campbell.
On behalf of all Tennesseans, I extend
my heartfelt condolences to Mr.
Clark’s family, including his wife
Marcia and their children Madison,
Montgomery, and Callie. While our
State has lost a great leader, Mr.
Clark’s legacy will endure in Clarksville and at Fort Campbell for generations to come.∑

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

RECOGNIZING KINETIC
TECHNOLOGIES
∑ Ms. ERNST. Mr. President, as chair
of the Senate Committee on Small
Business and Entrepreneurship, each
week I recognize an outstanding Iowa
small business that exemplifies the
American entrepreneurial spirit. This
week, it is my privilege to honor Kinetic Technologies of Kossuth County,
IA, as the Senate Small Business of the
Week.
Founded in 2021 by Mark and Betsy
Barglof, Kinetic Technologies began as
a small custom manufacturing and fabrication shop in Algona, IA. Initially
focused on machining, custom tooling,
and prototype development, the company quickly earned a reputation for
practical, reliable solutions to everyday production challenges. Their early
commitment to craftsmanship and
problem solving laid the foundation for
its evolution into a trusted manufacturing partner.
Under the leadership of founder and
president Mark Barglof, an experienced
engineer and Small Business Administration-certified
veteran
business
owner, Kinetic accelerated its growth
and sharpened its focus. Mark’s technical expertise, hands-on industry experience, and the discipline and integrity shaped by his military background
helped define the company’s culture.
His vision guided Kinetic’s transition
from a traditional fabrication shop to
an advanced automation firm built for
modern manufacturing needs, supporting greater efficiency. Working
alongside him, business manager Betsy
Barglof strengthened the company’s

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

operational backbone with a peoplecentered approach that positioned Kinetic for sustainable growth. Her leadership in business operations, customer
relationships, and internal processes
has ensured that the company’s drive
for innovation is matched by stability,
reliability, and exemplary service.
Today, Kinetic Technologies is recognized for innovative robotic welding
systems and custom automation solutions and is proud to serve as a FANUC
Authorized System Integrator. Backed
by a dedicated team of 15 employees,
the company provides end-to-end services, including design consultation,
simulation, custom fixtures and tooling, system installation, and on-site
employee training. Whether manufacturers need complete robotic work
cells, automated welding solutions, or
specialized equipment integration, Kinetic delivers systems engineered to
address real production challenges and
bring measurable improvement.
Kinetic Technologies also remains
deeply committed to its community as
a member of the Algona Chamber of
Commerce, by supporting a robotics
class at the local high school, and
through providing job shadowing and
internship opportunities for students
interested in engineering. The company also partners with the local Future Farmers of America chapter, helping inspire the next generation of
skilled professionals.
From its origins as a small fabrication shop to its role as a modern automation
integrator,
Kinetic
Technologies demonstrates how innovation,
adaptability, and strong leadership can
propel a small business into a nationally respected industry player, shaping
a lasting impact on the manufacturing
landscape.
It is my honor to recognize Mark and
Betsy Barglof and the entire Kinetic
Technologies team for their outstanding work and dedication to their
community. I look forward to their
continued success and wish them the
very best in the years ahead.∑
f

RECOGNIZING THE KANSAS CITY,
KANSAS, POLICE DEPARTMENT
NARCOTICS
UNIT
AND
TASK
FORCE OFFICERS
∑ Mr. MARSHALL. Mr. President, I
rise today to recognize the Kansas
City, KS, Police Department Narcotics
Unit and Task Force officers for their
exemplary service in protecting others
from dangerous, illicit substances.
On December 30, 2025, the KCKPD
conducted one of the largest drug busts
in the city’s history, seizing 120 pounds
of methamphetamine, 8 firearms, and
arresting 4 individuals.
This marked the culmination of a
successful year for the Kansas City, KS
Police Department, during which officers seized 1,305 pounds of methamphetamine, 3,540 pounds of marijuana, 673 pounds of cocaine, 1.5 pounds
of heroin, 30 pounds of powder fentanyl,
12,761 fentanyl pills, 375 firearms, and
$1,224,507.

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Under the leadership of Chief Karl
Oakman, the KCKPD has adopted an
effective approach to responding to the
rampant fentanyl epidemic. By responding to every overdose incident,
whether fatal or nonfatal, the police
department is able to identify and dismantle drug trafficking networks at
their source.
As part of the Midwest High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas—HIDTA—
program, the KCKPD coordinates with
Federal, State, local, and Tribal law
enforcement partners to combat drug
trafficking in critical regions of the
United States.
Fentanyl alone has killed tens of
thousands of Americans, and it is the
leading cause of death for young
adults. By seizing these lethal substances, the KCKPD Narcotics Unit
and Task Force officers have prevented
the deaths of countless individuals.
Keeping these drugs off the streets is
crucial to public safety, and I commend the police department’s commitment to protecting the health of its
community.
I now ask my colleagues to join me
in recognizing the KCKPD Narcotics
Unit and Task Force officers for their
outstanding service and tireless efforts
in combating the flow of deadly drugs
into our Nation.∑
f

RECOGNIZING DR. RICK WAITLEY
∑ Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, I rise
today with my colleagues Senator
MIKE CRAPO, Congressman MIKE SIMPSON, and Congressman RUSS FULCHER
to honor Dr. Rick Waitley for his 32
years of dedicated service as the executive director of Leadership Idaho Agriculture, LIA, and more than half a century of advocating for the State’s
farmers and ranchers.
Founded in 1985, LIA has provided
countless Idahoans with hands-on
learning and experience to help keep
the Gem State’s agricultural communities strong. Since taking the reins in
1993, Rick has led the organization to
resounding success, overseeing 37 classes and facilitating the graduation of
over 1,093 individuals. Many current
and former members of the LIA Board
of Trustees and other industry leaders
credit Rick with influencing their personal and professional journeys. Under
Rick’s stewardship and vision, LIA has
sparked tremendous growth in the
number of leaders developed within
Idaho’s agriculture industry, creating a
lasting impact felt throughout the
State.
Outside of LIA, Rick’s commitment
to public service is evident in his creation and involvement with organizations that advance Idaho agriculture,
including Food Producers of Idaho, the
Idaho Coop Council, Idaho Ag in the
Classroom, and the Idaho Ag Summit.
As a member of the Food Producers of
Idaho, Rick plays an integral role in facilitating meetings during the State’s
annual legislative session and connecting local farmers and ranchers

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.017

S07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

with elected officials to discuss issues
affecting the industry. Rick’s efforts
have also opened doors to other crucial
initiatives for many aspiring leaders,
including State and international exchange tours and the Washington, DC,
experience.
Rick’s dedication extends beyond his
professional life. He is a steadfast partner to his wife Dorita, a father of two
daughters, and an active member of the
Valley Shepherd Nazarene Church in
Meridian.
As Rick assumes his new role as executive director emeritus, we are confident that he will continue to provide
invaluable support and guidance as his
daughter Kendra Dustin takes the
helm as executive director.
On behalf of the people of Idaho, we
extend our sincere appreciation to Rick
for his dedication and exemplary service to Leadership Idaho Agriculture
and to our great State. His legacy will
undoubtedly inspire future generations
of leaders in Idaho and across the West.
Thank you, Rick, for your years of
service, and congratulations again on
this well-deserved recognition.∑
f

MESSAGE FROM THE HOUSE
At 11:59 a.m., a message from the
House of Representatives, delivered by
Mrs. Cole, one of its reading clerks, announced that the House has agreed to
the following resolution:
H. Res. 975. Resolution that the Clerk of
the House inform the Senate that a quorum
of the House is present and that the House is
ready to proceed with business.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

EXECUTIVE AND OTHER
COMMUNICATIONS
The following communications were
laid before the Senate, together with
accompanying papers, reports, and documents, and were referred as indicated:
EC–2405. A communication from the Chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report
on D.C. Act 26–215, ‘‘Green Housing Coordination Temporary Amendment Act of 2025’’; to
the Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs.
EC–2406. A communication from the Director, Office of Personnel Management, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report entitled
‘‘Agency Financial Report: Fiscal Year
2025’’; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2407. A communication from the Deputy Director, U.S. Trade and Development
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
Agency’s Performance and Accountability
Report for fiscal year 2025; to the Committee
on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2408. A communication from the Chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report
on D.C. Act 26–216, ‘‘Food & Friends Property
Tax Exemption Temporary Amendment Act
of 2025’’; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2409. A communication from the Chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report
on D.C. Act 26–238, ‘‘Private Vehicle-for Hire
Operator Clarification Temporary Amend-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

S89

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

ment Act of 2025’’; to the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2410. A communication from the Chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report
on D.C. Act 26–237, ‘‘Avanti Real Estate Services, LLC Real Property Tax Relief Temporary Act of 2025’’; to the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2411. A communication from the Chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report
on D.C. Act 26–218, ‘‘Juvenile Curfew Second
Temporary Amendment Act of 2025’’; to the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2412. A communication from the Chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report
on D.C. Act 26–217, ‘‘D.C. Income and Franchise Tax Conformity and Revision Temporary Amendment Act of 2025’’; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2413. A communication from the Administrator of the General Services Administration, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
Administration’s Semiannual Report to Congress for the period from April 1, 2025
through September 30, 2025; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2414. A communication from the Acting
Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Civil
Rights Division, Department of Justice,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Rescinding Portions of Department of Justice Title VI Regulations to
Conform More Closely With the Statutory
Text and To Implement Executive Order
14281’’ (RIN1190–AA83) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 5,
2026; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
EC–2415. A communication from the Acting
Deputy Division Chief, Citizenship and Immigration Services, Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Weighted
Selection Process for Registrants and Petitioners Seeking to File Cap-Subject H–1B Petitions’’ (RIN1615–AD01) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on January 5, 2026; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
EC–2416. A communication from the Secretary, Judicial Conference of the United
States, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report entitled ‘‘Report of the Proceedings of
the Judicial Conference of the United
States’’ for the September 2025 calendar session; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
EC–2417. A communication from the Acting
Deputy Division Chief, Citizenship and Immigration Services, Department of Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Security
Bars and Processing; Confirmation of Effective Date; Partial Withdrawal’’ ((RIN1615–
AC57) (RIN1125–AB08)) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 5,
2026; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
f

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND
JOINT RESOLUTIONS
The following bills and joint resolutions were introduced, read the first
and second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated:

PO 00000

By Mr. CORNYN (for himself, Mr.
CRUZ, Mr. GALLEGO, Mr. BUDD, Mr.
TILLIS, Ms. LUMMIS, Mr. HAGERTY,
Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. SCHMITT, Mr.
LANKFORD, and Mr. MULLIN):

Frm 00027

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

S. 3584. A bill to amend the definition of
aggravated felony in the Immigration and
Nationality Act to include certain serious
drunk driving offenses; to the Committee on
the Judiciary.
By Mr. COTTON:
S. 3585. A bill to amend the Federal Power
Act to exempt consumer-regulated electric
utilities from Federal regulation, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources.
By Mr. YOUNG (for himself and Ms.
CANTWELL):
S. 3586. A bill to amend the Small Business
Act to require small business development
centers to assist small business concerns
with the use of artificial intelligence, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Small
Business and Entrepreneurship.
By Mrs. BLACKBURN:
S. 3587. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide an exemption
from gross income for interest paid to taxpayers by the Internal Revenue Service following an audit or litigation in which the
taxpayer prevailed; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. MERKLEY (for himself, Mr.
SCOTT of Florida, Mr. KAINE, Mr.
WYDEN, Mr. FETTERMAN, and Mr.
HEINRICH):
S. 3588. A bill to amend the Public Health
Service Act to provide funding for trained
school personnel to administer drugs and devices for emergency treatment of known or
suspected opioid overdose, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
By Mr. BANKS (for himself, Ms. HASSAN, Mr. CASSIDY, Mr. VAN HOLLEN,
Mr. YOUNG, and Ms. SMITH):
S. 3589. A bill to amend the Higher Education Act of 1965 to provide students with
disabilities and their families with access to
critical information needed to select the
right college and succeed once enrolled; to
the Committee on Health, Education, Labor,
and Pensions.
By Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER (for herself and Mr. CURTIS):
S. 3590. A bill to amend the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act to reauthorize the
clean water infrastructure resiliency and
sustainability program, to amend the Safe
Drinking Water Act to reauthorize certain
resilience and sustainability programs, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
By Mr. KING (for himself and Mr.
BANKS):
S. 3591. A bill to require the Secretary of
Labor, in coordination with the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs, to develop a notice detailing benefits available to veterans, and to require employers to display such notice, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Ms. DUCKWORTH (for herself, Mr.
Ms.
HIRONO,
Mr.
BLUMENTHAL,
WYDEN, and Mr. BOOKER):
S. 3592. A bill to amend the Immigration
and Nationality Act to require the Secretary
of Homeland Security to parole into the
United States certain relatives of current
and former members of the Armed Forces,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
the Judiciary.
By Mrs. MOODY:
S. 3593. A bill to increase the penalties for
health care fraud, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. LUJÁN:
S. 3594. A bill to provide additional funds
to States for administration of certain nutrition programs; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.
By Mr. BENNET:
S. 3595. A bill to prohibit the use of funds
for the deployment of United States military

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.015

S07JAPT1

S90

CORRECTION

or intelligence personnel in Venezuela for
certain purposes; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
f

ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS
S. 128

At the request of Mr. LEE, the name
of the Senator from Montana (Mr.
DAINES) was added as a cosponsor of S.
128, a bill to amend the National Voter
Registration Act of 1993 to require
proof of United States citizenship to
register an individual to vote in elections for Federal office, and for other
purposes.
S. 570

At the request of Mr. KELLY, the
name of the Senator from Mississippi
(Mr. WICKER) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 570, a bill to amend the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation
Act of 2014 to establish payment and
performance security requirements for
projects, and for other purposes.
S. 1281

At the request of Mr. TILLIS, the
name of the Senator from New Hampshire (Mrs. SHAHEEN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1281, a bill to establish a
new nonimmigrant visa for mobile entertainment workers.
S. 1504

At the request of Mr. CASSIDY, the
names of the Senator from Indiana
(Mr. YOUNG) and the Senator from New
Hampshire (Ms. HASSAN) were added as
cosponsors of S. 1504, a bill to require
the Social Security Administration to
make changes to the social security
terminology used in the rules, regulation, guidance, or other materials of
the Administration.
S. 1552

At the request of Mr. COTTON, the
name of the Senator from Michigan
(Ms. SLOTKIN) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 1552, a bill to promote and protect
from discrimination living organ donors.
S. 1650

At the request of Ms. DUCKWORTH,
the name of the Senator from Massachusetts (Ms. WARREN) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 1650, a bill to amend
title 38, United States Code, to modify
authorities relating to the collective
bargaining of employees in the Veterans Health Administration.
S. 1924

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

At the request of Mr. KENNEDY, the
name of the Senator from New Mexico
(Mr. HEINRICH) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1924, a bill to add suicide prevention resources to school identification cards.

(Mr. BENNET), the Senator from Indiana (Mr. BANKS), the Senator from
Oklahoma (Mr. MULLIN) and the Senator from Michigan (Ms. SLOTKIN) were
added as cosponsors of S. 2858, a bill to
improve research and data collection
on stillbirths, and for other purposes.
S. 2918

At the request of Mr. WHITEHOUSE,
the names of the Senator from Florida
(Mr. SCOTT) and the Senator from
Maryland (Ms. ALSOBROOKS) were added
as cosponsors of S. 2918, a bill to amend
the Rebuilding Economic Prosperity
and Opportunity for Ukrainians Act to
improve the implementation of the seizure of Russian sovereign assets for the
benefit of Ukraine, and for other purposes.
S. 3480

At the request of Mrs. MURRAY, the
name of the Senator from Virginia (Mr.
KAINE) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3480, a bill to prohibit the Secretary of
Health and Human Services from implementing the WISeR model under the
Medicare program.
S. 3570

At the request of Mr. SCHATZ, the
name of the Senator from Minnesota
(Ms. KLOBUCHAR) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3570, a bill to establish
duties for online service providers with
respect to end user data that such providers collect and use.
S.J. RES. 98

At the request of Mr. KAINE, the
names of the Senator from New Mexico
(Mr. LUJÁN), the Senator from Wisconsin (Ms. BALDWIN), the Senator
from Nevada (Ms. CORTEZ MASTO), the
Senator from New Jersey (Mr. KIM) and
the Senator from New Mexico (Mr.
HEINRICH) were added as cosponsors of
S.J. Res. 98, a joint resolution to direct
the removal of United States Armed
Forces from hostilities within or
against Venezuela that have not been
authorized by Congress.
f

AUTHORITY FOR COMMITTEES TO
MEET
Mrs. BLACKBURN. Mr. President, I
have two requests for committees to
meet during today’s session of the Senate. They have the approval of the Majority and Minority Leaders.
Pursuant to rule XXVI, paragraph
5(a), of the Standing Rules of the Senate, the following committees are authorized to meet during today’s session
of the Senate:

S. 2106

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

At the request of Mr. VAN HOLLEN,
the name of the Senator from Connecticut (Mr. MURPHY) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 2106, a bill to provide a
process for granting lawful permanent
resident status to aliens from certain
countries who meet certain eligibility
requirements, and for other purposes.

The Committee on the Judiciary is
authorized to meet during the session
of the Senate on Wednesday, January
7, 2026, at 2:30 p.m., to conduct a hearing.

S. 2858

At the request of Mr. BOOKER, the
names of the Senator from Colorado

VerDate Sep 11 2014

02:52 Jan 14, 2026

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 059060

SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE

The Select Committee on Intelligence is authorized to meet during
the session of the Senate on Wednesday, January 7, 2026, at 3:00 p.m., to
conduct a closed briefing.

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

CONDEMNING THE RISE IN IDEOLOGICALLY
MOTIVATED
ATTACKS ON JEWISH INDIVIDUALS
IN THE UNITED STATES, INCLUDING THE RECENT VIOLENT ASSAULT IN BOULDER, COLORADO,
AND REAFFIRMING THE COMMITMENT OF THE SENATE TO COMBATING ANTISEMITISM AND POLITICALLY
MOTIVATED
VIOLENCE
RECOGNIZING THE THIRD COMMEMORATION
OF
THE
ANTILGBTQ+
ATTACK
THAT
OCCURRED ON NOVEMBER 19–20,
2022, AT CLUB Q, AN LGBTQ+ BAR
IN COLORADO SPRINGS, COLORADO
COMMENDING CENTENARY COLLEGE OF LOUISIANA ON THE OCCASION OF ITS BICENTENNIAL
AND ITS YEARS OF SERVICE TO
THE STATE OF LOUISIANA AND
THE UNITED STATES
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the applicable
committees be discharged and the Senate proceed to the en bloc consideration of the following resolutions: S.
Res. 288, S. Res. 503, and S. Res. 543.
There being no objection, the committees were discharged, and the Senate proceeded to consider the resolutions en bloc.
Mr. THUNE. I ask unanimous consent that the resolutions be agreed to,
the preambles be agreed to, and the
motions to reconsider be considered
made and laid upon the table, all en
bloc.
The resolutions were agreed to en
bloc, as follows:
The resolution (S. Res. 288) was
agreed to.
The preamble was agreed to.
(The resolution, with its preamble, is
printed in the RECORD of June 18, 2025,
under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
The resolution (S. Res. 503) was
agreed to.
The preamble was agreed to.
(The resolution, with its preamble, is
printed in the RECORD of November 19,
2025, under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
The resolution (S. Res. 543) was
agreed to.
The preamble was agreed to.
(The resolution, with its preamble, is
printed in the RECORD of December 11,
2025, under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
f

ORDERS FOR THURSDAY,
JANUARY 8, 2026
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that when the Senate completes its business today, it
stand in recess until 10 a.m., Thursday,
January 8; that following the prayer
and pledge, the Journal of proceedings
be approved to date, the time for the
two leaders be reserved for their use
later in the day, and the Senate be in

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\S07JA6.REC

S07JA6

January 7, 2026

a period of morning business, with Senators permitted to speak therein for up
to 10 minutes each; further, that Senator KAINE or his designee be recognized to make a motion to discharge
S.J. Res. 98, and if made, the Senate
vote on the motion to discharge at 11
a.m.; finally, following the vote on the
motion to discharge, the Senate proceed to executive session and resume
consideration of Calendar No. 574, Van
Hook, and the Senate execute the order
of December 18 in relation to the nomination at 1:45 p.m.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

ORDER FOR RECESS
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, if there is
no further business to come before the
Senate, I ask that it stand in recess
under the previous order, following the
remarks of my colleagues.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The Senator from Rhode Island.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

PERMITTING REFORM
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President, I
am here to give, I guess, an explanation and update to my colleagues
about the status of permitting reform.
I think, as you know, the chair and
ranking member of the Energy and
Natural Resources Committee and the
chair and ranking member of the Environment and Public Works Committee
were working on a permitting reform
bill until very recently. I have, together with Senator HEINRICH, declared
a pause in that permitting reform process, and I want to explain that because
the progress had actually been good.
We were working toward what I think
could have been a very meaningful,
very effectual, very bipartisan permitting reform bill. There were fairly new
ideas being developed in it—like requiring front-loaded stakeholder engagement so the whole rest of the process, as it goes forward, is accelerated;
disciplining the despised-by-me interagency process mechanism that excuses so much executive branch delay
and indecision. I was actually pretty
pleased with the way the process was
going.
Off of Rhode Island, we are developing offshore wind. Our offshore wind
project, Revolution Wind, had already
weathered one stop work order which
came out of the blue from the administration. This was a project then with
about $4 billion of investment already
expended and north of 80 percent complete—a lot of turbines fully complete
out there.
And that order was without any lawful basis. As a result, the order was
challenged in court. And in court, the
Federal judge said: You can put that
project back to work. The stop work
order from President Trump is invalid.
The judge made that decision on September 22. The Trump administration
had 60 days to appeal. It did not appeal.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

S91

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

We got to November 21, the last appeal
day, no notice of appeal was filed. The
matter was settled; work could continue; and everybody was already back
at work.
Thirty days later, the 22nd of December, a new stop work order was dropped
by the Trump administration with no
explanation.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the stop work letter of December 22 be printed in the RECORD at
the end of my remarks.
So the first stop work attempt by the
Trump administration had cited the
protection of national security interests of the United States as one of its
bases. And, obviously, that was deliberated in court. There were pleadings
on that subject. The Trump administration lost. They did not appeal the
order finding that they had lost, declaring that they had lost, so that was
a settled question.
This second letter goes back and says
again, national security risks. It does
not identify them. In comments made
on FOX News, it has been said that
radar interference is the risk. Radar interference was deliberated in the initial permits. Radar interference was
deliberated in the stop work order proceedings where the Trump administration lost. So what this looks like is a
vindictive attack outside the law and
proper due process by the Trump administration.
It is not the only mischief, and I am
going to be joined here by Ranking
Member HEINRICH to talk about some
of the more westerly tricks that the
Trump administration has been up to
to interfere with clean energy.
But that second stop work order kind
of tore it for me—because any negotiation that we would enter into, any good
bill that would result from it, would
then have to be implemented by this
administration; and this administration has been found to have illegally
stopped work on this project, did not
appeal that finding, and then came up
with a new stop work order 30 days
later. If that is not vindictive harassment without legal basis, I don’t know
what is.
It is in litigation right now. With any
luck, it will be stopped again, and they
can go back to work again. And—who
knows—maybe there will be a third
imaginary stop work order that drops.
But in an environment like that, where
the executive branch refuses its constitutional duty to faithfully execute
the laws, it doesn’t make any sense for
us to continue negotiations on a major
bipartisan bill.
I want to say, in particular, that
Chair
CAPITO
has
been
helpful,
thoughtful, a good partner. All the Environment and Public Works Committee Republicans have been helpful
and thoughtful. There is literally zero
blame for this to land on the other side
of the aisle in the Senate. This is entirely a legislative versus executive
problem of an executive branch—a
rogue executive branch—that refuses

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

to faithfully execute the laws, notwithstanding its constitutional duty.
It is so bad that the three major miscreants
in
this
process—Zeldin,
Burgum, and Wright—have gone on a
campaign of falsehood about the cost of
offshore wind. Here are some of the
things that they have been saying. Secretary Burgum said that ‘‘intermittent, highly expensive wind is bad.’’
‘‘Highly expensive,’’ he called it. He
then tweeted:
Offshore wind is one of the most expensive
. . . schemes ever pushed upon American
taxpayers.

He said:
Offshore wind forces consumers and taxpayers to pay CONSIDERABLY more for
electricity.

He said that ‘‘blue State offshore
wind policies . . . lock in high prices.’’
Zeldin criticized the economic impacts of wind.
Wright said that ‘‘wind and solar
brings us . . . less reliable energy delivery and higher electric bills.’’
So all three of them have falsely asserted that offshore wind will raise
electric bills.
In court proceedings, where you actually need to tell the truth—as opposed
to in tweets and talk shows—the story
that emerges is exactly the opposite. In
the Rhode Island and Connecticut
sworn complaint, we alleged that Revolution Wind, the project off our shores,
‘‘will . . . yield substantial cost savings to the States’ ratepayers.’’
[S]avings to ratepayers—

the pleading continues—
are estimated to be hundreds of millions of
dollars over 20 years.

The September complaint brought in
the Federal court by Orsted—again, a
court filing—pled that long-term contract prices ‘‘are expected to act as a
successful hedge against rising electricity rates,’’ projected to save ratepayers ‘‘hundreds of millions of dollars.’’
In January—just now—in the litigation about the second stop work order,
an affidavit was filed that swore that
Revolution Wind would be a new source
of low marginal cost power in New
England; that ‘‘once operational, Revolution Wind alone will provide hundreds of millions of dollars each year in
energy bill savings to New England.’’
The ISO, the grid operator, specified
that during a specific cold snap, from
December 24, 2017, to January 8, 2018—
what is that?—2 weeks, basically—had
this offshore wind been online during
that period, it would have ‘‘lowered regional electricity production costs by
$80–85 million’’ over those 2 weeks, ‘‘resulting in an $11–13 per megawatt-hour
reduction’’ in what the grid charged
ratepayers.
Revolution Wind has cleared in the
New England capacity market, and if it
were to fail, it would require increases
in electricity rates in New England of
hundreds of millions of dollars per
year.
Over and over again, when people
who know what they are talking about

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.044

S07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S92

have to say in court pleadings, where
they have an obligation to tell the
truth, what the cost effect of Revolution Wind will be, they talk about cost
savings of hundreds of millions of dollars. And that is confirmed across the
country by grid operators. You can go
to any grid, and you can see pretty
much the same thing. They call up
power units by cost. They call up the
least expensive power units first, for
obvious reasons, and wind and solar
tend to be the low marginal cost units.
They are the ones that are called up
first.
So the allegations made in court of
savings to ratepayers are backstopped
by the actual economic practice of our
electric grids.
So back to Zeldin, Burgum, and
Wright. If they are conspicuously and
consistently failing to tell the truth
about savings, specifically misleading
the public, telling them fossil fuel is
cheaper when it isn’t, what does that
tell you about their motives and their
bias and inability to faithfully execute
the laws?
It tells me that there is really no
point in passing a bipartisan bill,
which would be a really good one, because we wouldn’t get the benefit of
the bill. They would just continue with
illegal acts and false statements—anything to help fossil fuel.
It is not just Revolution Wind. Dominion Wind is set to lower consumer
power prices in Virginia, once it is
operational, and it is, too, now under a
stop work order.
I want to resume. I want to get back
to work. I want to do this permitting
reform bill. In order to get there, I am
going to need some help. The artificial
intelligence folks, the crypto folks, the
data system folks who need massive
amounts of electrons, you all need to
start showing up and letting people
know that you actually want permitting reform, and you actually want an
administrative and regulatory process
in which electrons are treated fairly,
irrespective of source, so you can get
the power that you need. That is where
we need to go.
If you want permitting reform, don’t
come to me. I am not the problem.
Don’t come to Democrats in the Senate. We are eager to do permitting reform. Don’t bother Chairman CAPITO
and the Republicans. They are ready to
go too. Leader THUNE has been very
supportive of our effort.
The problem isn’t in the Senate. The
problem is in the White House and in
Environment and Public Works, Energy, and Interior. They are simply not
executing the laws fairly, and the bias
and injustice and illegality they have
already demonstrated have got to stop
if we are going to go forward.
It ain’t just this bill that has to come
through EPW and go through the Congress. There is also a highway bill coming. There is a water resources bill for
the Army Corps bill. Are we really
going to have to stop work on those big
bipartisan bills because we can’t trust

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

the Trump administration to implement them according to law?
Something has to give here, and nobody has done anything wrong in this
building. All of the problems are in illegal, false, unfair, and biased enforcement of what should be faithful execution of the laws. That is where we are.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR,
BUREAU OF OCEAN ENERGY
MANAGEMENT,
Director’s Order, December 22, 2025.
Rob Keiser,
Head of Asset Management, Orsted North America Inc., Boston, MA, College Park, MD.
DEAR MR. KEISER: The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) is issuing this Director’s Order to Revolution Wind, LLC, pursuant to 30 C.F.R. § 585.417(b), to suspend all
ongoing activities related to the Revolution
Wind Project on the Outer Continental Shelf
for the next 90 days for reasons of national
security. During this time, BOEM will coordinate with you to determine whether the
national security threats posed by this
project can be adequately mitigated.
In November 2025, the Department of War
(DoW) completed an additional assessment
regarding the national security implications
of offshore wind projects, and provided senior
leadership at the Department of the Interior
with new classified information, including
the rapid evolution of relevant adversary
technologies and the resulting direct impacts to national security from offshore wind
projects. These impacts are heightened by
the projects’ sensitive location on the East
Coast and the potential to cause serious, immediate, and irreparable harm to our great
nation.
Based on BOEM’s initial review of this
classified information, the particularized
harm posed by this project can only be feasibly averted by suspension of on-lease activities. In coordination with DoW, BOEM
will determine whether the national security
threats relating to this project can be mitigated and invites you to meet and confer
about that possibility. Given the construction status of this project, BOEM will consider all feasible mitigation measures before
making a decision as to whether the project
must be cancelled.
Finally, while BOEM and DoW endeavor to
reach a determination on feasible mitigation
measures within 90 days following the date
of this letter, BOEM may further extend the
90 day suspension period based on the status
of those discussions. Even though all ongoing activities at this project are suspended,
you may perform any activities that are necessary to respond to emergency situations
and/or to prevent impacts to health, safety,
and the environment over the next 90 days
and during any subsequent extensions.
I appreciate your attention to this matter
and look forward to hearing from you quickly.
Sincerely,
MATTHEW N. GIACONA,
Acting Director.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from New Mexico.
f

PERMITTING REFORM
Mr. HEINRICH. Mr. President, I am
here today to join my colleague Senator WHITEHOUSE in talking about permitting reform.
I want to start with a story from my
home State of New Mexico. Right now,

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

across my State and Arizona, hundreds
of workers are putting the finishing
touches on a 3.5-gigawatt wind farm
and a 550-mile transmission line.
For context, 3.5 gigawatts is roughly
the equivalent of 31⁄2 nuclear reactors.
This project is literally the largest
clean energy project in North American history, bigger than the Hoover
Dam. That is pretty unbelievable.
But what is even more unbelievable
is that the permitting process for that
transmission line and that generation
started over 17 years ago, and the
project is being energized, as we speak.
Think about that. It took nearly two
decades to get the permits needed to
build the project. That is 17 years of
redtape. That is 17 years without the
jobs this could create; 17 years of lost
income, lost local spending, lost tax
revenue; 17 years without the energy
our Nation needs to grow; and 17 years
without the roughly $20 billion of economic impact on the southwestern part
of our country that we are finally seeing—because the reality is that electricity is what powers our communities, our innovation, our economies,
and our lives. And electricity has powered this country since the 1880s.
But, right now, we are facing an energy crisis of the Trump administration’s own making. First, electricity is
becoming
prohibitively
expensive.
While we know that permitting reform
will help lower costs, the Trump administration is dismantling the permitting process that we use to build
new energy projects and get cheaper
electrons on the grid.
Put simply, costs are high. We need
reform, and the President is blocking
our ability to do just that. It is no secret that, right now, Americans’ electric bills are going through the roof.
Since Trump took office, electricity
prices have risen an average of 13 percent in just a matter of months. That
is double digits in well under a year.
Beyond the growing costs, demand is
growing too. Grid Strategies, the power
sector consulting firm, predicts electricity demand will grow 32 percent by
2030, just 5 years from now. Across New
Mexico and the country, people are
looking at their bills and asking how
they are going to find the money to
keep their lights on.
The answer is that Americans need
more affordable energy, more electrons
on the grid, not less, and they need it
now. But we can’t build a future using
the last century’s infrastructure and
redtape. We need to set up a system
that can reliably get to a yes or a no on
a permit in 2 or 3 years, not 10, not 17.
We know that permitting reform can
work. Scientists at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory estimate
that by 2050, transmission expansion
could save $270 to $490 billion—billion
with a ‘‘b.’’ And for every dollar spent
on new transmission, over $1.50 would
be saved in system costs. That is a 150percent savings margin. That is a deal
that is hard to argue with, and it is one
of the reasons why I have been such a

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.045

S07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

strong advocate for Congress taking up
bipartisan permitting reform.
But instead of working to get Americans more affordable energy, the
Trump administration has been orchestrating a reckless, vindictive assault
on new energy projects.
On July 15, the Interior Department
began requiring Secretary Burgum’s
personal review and approval of every
single wind and solar project on public
lands, not to mention things as trivial
as rights of way. What this really
turned out to be was a de facto moratorium on new projects, new electrons on
the grid. And so far, 22 gigawatts—the
equivalent of two New York Cities—of
solar, storage, and wind have been
stalled because of this new review requirement.
That doesn’t even include other actions from the administration. We have
seen stalled an additional 116 gigawatts
of energy. If we are counting, that is
the equivalent of powering 12 New
York Cities. Or, to put it bluntly, more
than half of all the new power planned
to be built in the United States over
the next few years is tied up in one way
or another.
Let me repeat that. This administration has halted more than half of all
the new power planned to be built in
the United States, to be brought onto
the grid over the next 4 years.
And it gets worse.
President Trump’s Department of
Energy canceled 26 projects that would
make our power grid more reliable. The
Department of Energy estimated the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:01 Jan 08, 2026

S93

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

transmission
built
through
these
projects would have helped add 35
gigawatts of clean power to the grid
over the next 5 years. Now, that is gone
too. That is over 17 New York Cities’
worth of power that the Trump administration has stalled, canceled, or
taken away.
The truth is that permitting reform
in this building has not been a partisan
issue. It is about building big things
again in the United States, providing
hard-working
Americans,
skilled
trades union people with affordable energy, growing our economy, and a good
job.
But to do any big energy project, you
need a permitting system that actually
works. Right now, when Americans
need more energy than ever before, our
permitting system is frozen in place. It
definitely isn’t going to work if Federal
Agencies
ignore
statutory
timelines, stall approvals, issue illegal
stop work orders on partially constructed, fully permitted projects,
pause leases, and cancel projects that
were already under construction.
So what this administration is doing
doesn’t just undermine one of our
cheapest sources of power; it wrecks
the trust that is needed with the executive branch to do bipartisan permitting
reform. It poisons the well.
Certainty is what is required for developers, for utilities, for consumers to
benefit from faster permitting. Any
permitting deal is going to have to
guarantee that no administration of ei-

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ther party can weaponize the permitting process for cheap political points.
By raising electricity prices and killing American jobs, this administration
has made it crystal clear that they are
not interested in permitting reform or
bringing down the price of energy.
The bottom line is this. The Trump
administration needs to follow the law.
They need to reverse their illegal stop
work orders, and they need to start approving legally compliant energy
projects—full stop.
Finally, I will say one last thing because something that the Senator from
Rhode Island said bears repeating. The
challenge to doing permitting reform is
not in this building. Oftentimes, the
problem of getting to yes is in this
building. It is not the chairman of the
Energy and Natural Resources Committee. It is not the chairwoman of the
EPW Committee. It is this administration that is poisoning the well. If we
can turn that around, then I think we
can all get back to the good work of
trying to make our permitting system
work for our country and for our economy.
f

RECESS UNTIL 10 A.M. TOMORROW
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senate stands in recess until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 5:45 p.m.,
recessed until Thursday, January 8,
2026, at 10 a.m.

E:\CR\FM\G07JA6.041

S07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

E7

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS
HONORING THE LIFE AND CAREER
OF STEVE SHEETZ

HON. JOHN JOYCE
OF PENNSYLVANIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker,
with a heavy heart, I rise to honor the life and
career of Steve Sheetz, an entrepreneur, a
businessman, a philanthropist, and a personal
long-time friend, who passed away this past
Sunday in his hometown of Altoona.
The Sheetz name is familiar to many as one
of the largest family-owned and operated convenience store chains in the United States,
with more than 800 stores across seven
states.
As the company’s President and CEO and
Chairman of the Board, Steve provided an inspired leadership that was essential for expansion and sustained success.
For all of his achievements, Steve was truly
a man without pretenses. A lifelong resident of
Altoona, he never lost sight of where he was
from and where he was going.
Throughout the years, numerous Blair
County charities and non-profit organizations
benefited from the philanthropy of Steve and
his loving wife, Nancy.
In particular, the couple took great pride in
their gift to Penn State Altoona that created an
incredible entrepreneurial center and endowed
The Sheetz Fellows program.
Steve crafted a distinguished legacy as a
business leader, as a community volunteer,
and as a philanthropist that will forever serve
as a source of inspiration and blueprint for all
who share his values and ideals.
As we pause to remember Steve, we also
keep his wife Nancy and all of his family in our
prayers.
Steve was truly a selfless man, and his legacy will continue to live on throughout Pennsylvania’s 13th Congressional District, the
seven states where Sheetz stores serve, and
all of America. The legacy of Steve Sheetz will
always live on.
f

RECOGNIZING THE SUPPORTERS
OF THE 2025 CONGRESSIONAL
APP CHALLENGE IN PUERTO
RICO

opportunity to develop original applications
that address real-world challenges through
coding, creativity, and critical thinking. This
year’s competition in Puerto Rico reached a
historic milestone, with a record total of 20 applications submitted and more than 30 students participating from 16 municipalities
across the island, reflecting the growing interest in STEM education in Puerto Rico.
Behind the success of this program stands
an exceptional group of judges, professionals,
and leaders in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, who generously volunteered their time and expertise. They carefully
reviewed student submissions, evaluating
technical execution and creativity, and offered
thoughtful feedback grounded in industry
knowledge and academic rigor—ensuring a
fair, thorough, and meaningful evaluation for
every participant. Beyond judging, these
STEM leaders demonstrated a deep commitment to mentorship and youth development.
By exposing students to professional pathways in technology and innovation, they reinforced the message that Puerto Rico’s young
people can compete, create, and excel at the
highest levels—helping to cultivate the next
generation of engineers, innovators, and problem-solvers who will shape Puerto Rico’s future and contribute to our technological advancement. On behalf of the people of Puerto
Rico, I extend my sincere gratitude to the
judges and STEM leaders who offered their
perspectives and expertise in the industry in
our 2025 Congressional App Challenge: aerospace engineer and CDS Manager at Pratt &
Whitney Puerto Rico Inc., Ms. Shirley Skerrett
Ramı́rez; Executive Director of Grupo
Guayacán, Ms. Laura Cantero, Founder of
Terminal34 and 2019 CAC winner of Puerto
Rico, Mr. Bryan Garcı́a; Former Executive Director of the office of Puerto Rico Innovation
and Technology Services (PRITS), Mr. Antonio Ramos Guardiola; and former Chief Information Officer and Advisor to the Governor,
Mr. Giancarlo González Ascar.
Their service reflects the very standards we
hold our student innovators to: analytical rigor,
ethical judgment, creativity, collaboration, and
a commitment to applying technology to solve
real-world challenges.
f

RECOGNIZING THE SAVANNAH
CHRISTMAS MARKET

HON. PABLO JOSÉ HERNÁNDEZ

HON. EARL L. ‘‘BUDDY’’ CARTER

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

OF PUERTO RICO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF GEORGIA

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. HERNÁNDEZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize and commend the dedicated
judges and STEM leaders who supported the
2025 Congressional App Challenge in Puerto
Rico, a national coding and computer science
competition designed to inspire middle school
and high school students to explore technology, innovation, and problem-solving.
The Congressional App Challenge provides
students in grades 6 through 12 with a unique

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise
to congratulate a great seasonal tradition in
our home state of Georgia: the Savannah
Christmas Market at Plant Riverside District.
This year, it was ranked as one of the top
holiday markets in the entire country by USA
Today, drawing visitors from all over and spotlighting the rich culture and community spirit of
Savannah.

The market transforms historic River Street
into a festive destination filled with local vendors, holiday entertainment, seasonal food
and drink, and family-friendly activities. It
brings together residents and visitors alike and
highlights the unique charm that makes Savannah such a special place. This recognition
not only celebrates the creativity of our local
artisans and businesses but also brings positive economic impact to the region during the
holiday season.
I encourage everyone to experience this
celebrated market while it is open, and I thank
all who worked to make it one of the best in
the Nation.
f

HONORING JESSIE FRANK

HON. CHUCK EDWARDS
OF NORTH CAROLINA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize and honor the exceptional service of
Jessie Frank, whose six years of dedicated
public service to the State of North Carolina
and to the United States Congress reflect the
highest standards of professionalism, integrity,
and commitment to the public good.
Jessie Frank began her career in public
service in the North Carolina Senate, where
she served for three years as an intern and
later as a legislative assistant. From the outset, Jessie distinguished herself through a
strong work ethic, a keen understanding of
policy and procedure, and a genuine respect
for the legislative process. She approached
every task—whether large or small—with diligence and care, earning the confidence of legislators, staff, and constituents alike. These
early years in the state legislature laid a
strong foundation for a career defined by competence, discretion, and thoughtful engagement in public affairs.
Following her service in the North Carolina
Senate and her graduation from the University
of North Carolina Asheville, where she graduated Summa Cum Laude with a major in Political Science, Jessie continued her commitment to the people of our state by joining my
congressional office full-time. Over the next
three years, she served with distinction as
Scheduler and later as Deputy Chief of Staff.
In these roles, Jessie became a central pillar
of our office’s daily operations. She managed
extraordinarily complex schedules, balanced
competing priorities, and ensured that our
work advanced efficiently and responsibly on
behalf of North Carolina’s 11th Congressional
District.
Beyond her administrative excellence, Jessie proved herself to be politically savvy, strategically minded, and deeply perceptive about
the dynamics of both Congress and our district. She possessed a rare ability to understand not only the mechanics of policy and
politics, but also the human and political implications behind every decision. Over time, I

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:08 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

E:\CR\FM\A07JA8.001

E07JAPT1

E8

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

came to rely heavily on her judgment and
counsel. On many occasions, Jessie offered
advice that challenged my initial instincts, and
in those moments, her insight, clarity, and
confidence led me to trust her perspective,
Time and again, that trust was well placed.
Her guidance was thoughtful, grounded, and
motivated solely by what was best for the office, the district, and the people we serve.
Jessie’s leadership was especially evident in
the aftermath of Hurricane Helene, which
struck North Carolina’s 11th District on September 27, 2024. In the face of widespread
devastation and urgent need, she played a
critical role in our response and recovery efforts. Jessie worked tirelessly to coordinate
with local officials, emergency responders, and
community leaders throughout Western North
Carolina, while maintaining close communication with our Washington, D.C., team and relevant federal agencies.
Her ability to operate seamlessly across levels of government ensured that resources and
assistance were directed where they were
most urgently needed. During an extraordinarily challenging time, her calm demeanor,
organizational skill, and unwavering dedication
helped our office serve constituents with compassion and effectiveness.
Throughout her service, Jessie Frank consistently demonstrated the qualities that define
exceptional public servants: intelligence, discretion, political awareness, and a deep sense
of responsibility to those she served. Her contributions strengthened our legislative work,
enhanced constituent services, and improved
our office’s overall effectiveness. She earned
the respect of colleagues on both sides of the
aisle and the trust of community leaders
across our district.
On a personal note, Jessie has been a public servant every Member hopes to have by
their side—steadfast, selfless, and wholly
committed to serving others.
In moments of pressure and calm, she
brought clarity, kindness, and an unwavering
sense of responsibility. Her service was not
simply professional; it was deeply human. I
am grateful beyond words for her loyalty, her
friendship, and the heart she poured into this
office. Her imprint on our work and on the
people we serve will endure long after her
time here.
Jessie Frank will always be part of the story
of this office, as well as my political career. I
am profoundly thankful for the years we had
the privilege to serve together.
f

TRIBUTE TO WOODROW ‘‘WOODY’’
HARPOLE

HON. KEN CALVERT
OF CALIFORNIA

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
honor my good friend Woodrow ‘‘Woody’’
Harpole, who celebrated his 80th birthday on
December 21, 2025. Woody has been a respected business leader, community volunteer, and trusted friend to my hometown of
Corona, California, for nearly five decades.
Woody was born in Mississippi on December 21, 1945. He served his country as a soldier in the United States Army, including a
year in combat in Vietnam during the height of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:08 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

the war. He later moved to California, where
he established himself as a knowledgeable
and dedicated professional in the commercial
and industrial real estate sector. So much so,
in fact, that I hired him nearly 40 years ago to
work at Calvert Real Properties, the small
business that I owned and operated before
being elected to Congress.
Throughout his professional career, Woody
has always made time for community service.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, he was an
active and influential member of the Corona
Jaycees, a dynamic service and leadership organization that shaped many of the city’s rising young professionals. Woody also became
a dedicated member of the Corona Rotary
Club, serving as Club President in 2006 to
2007. His leadership helped advance Rotary’s
mission of ‘‘Service Above Self,’’ and he
played a vital role in supporting the club’s signature events, including the well-loved
Lobsterfest fundraiser, which has generated
substantial support for local nonprofit organizations.
Personally, I will always value his friendship,
sense of humor, loyalty, and am deeply grateful for his many contributions to our community. On this special occasion, I wish Woody a
Happy Birthday and the very best in the years
to come.
f

RECOGNIZING
THE
PUBLIC
SERVICE
BUCHER

DEDICATED
OF
BETTY

HON. JOHN JOYCE
OF PENNSYLVANIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, I
rise to recognize the dedicated public service
of Betty Bucher, who recently concluded a 16year tenure as a member of Littlestown Borough Council in Adams County.
During the December meeting of the borough council, Betty was honored for the
steady and reliable leadership that she provided to the community.
Serving in the role of Council Vice President, Betty was presented a proclamation that
highlighted her service on the borough’s union
and police contract committee and a design
committee that facilitated the creation of a
mural for the new borough building.
Betty’s servant leadership in the borough
stretches from the mid-1960s, when she was
instrumental in the creation and early operation of the former Littlestown Swimming Pool.
With professionalism and integrity over the
last 16 years, Betty has most certainly personified the ideals of representative governance.
On behalf of constituents throughout Pennsylvania’s 13th Congressional District, I thank
Betty for her faithful public service.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. DANIEL WEBSTER
OF FLORIDA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. WEBSTER of Florida. Mr. Speaker, due
to airline schedules, my flight was delayed.

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 7, 2026

Had I been present, I would have voted
present on Roll Call No. 1.
f

RECOGNIZING
PASCO
COUNTY
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FOR
RECEIVING THE AUDREY NELSON AWARD

HON. GUS M. BILIRAKIS
OF FLORIDA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. BILIRAKIS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize the outstanding work of Pasco
County Community Development and to congratulate the County on receiving the prestigious Audrey Nelson Award, a national honor
that recognizes exemplary achievement in
serving communities and low- and moderateincome residents through the innovative use of
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
and HOME Investment Partnership funds.
The Audrey Nelson Award is bestowed annually on only a limited number of projects nationwide. This year, just seven projects were
selected, making Pasco County’s achievement
especially noteworthy. Pasco County is proud
to once again be among this distinguished
group, with recognition for its Behavioral
Health Urgent Care Center (UCC)—the first
Behavioral Health UCC in the State of Florida,
This innovative project was developed to address a critical gap in access to urgent mental
health and substance use services for vulnerable populations. The Behavioral Health UCC
provides immediate, voluntary access to outpatient behavioral health care with extended
hours, offering a vital alternative to emergency
departments. It also serves as an essential access point for individuals transitioning from
high-risk settings such as jails and inpatient
facilities, helping ensure continuity of care at
moments when intervention is most needed.
The impact of this program has been extraordinary. While the UCC initially anticipated
serving 450 individuals during its first year of
operation—from February 5, 2025, through
September 30, 2025—it ultimately provided
services to 1,274 adults, exceeding expectations by 183 percent. Approximately 94 percent of those served were successfully diverted from more acute inpatient settings. Additionally, 71 percent of follow-up appointments were attended, a remarkable improvement from the 34 percent follow-up rate that
existed prior to the establishment of the UCC
for individuals referred from critical transition
points.
This success was made possible in part
through a strategic investment of $1,469,927
in CDBG funds, which supported essential infrastructure and renovation needs at the facility. These funds not only enabled the UCC to
open its doors but also helped leverage additional operational funding to sustain services
in the years ahead. The Behavioral Health Urgent Care Center now stands as a model for
how targeted federal resources can be used to
drive innovation, improve outcomes, and
strengthen communities.
I commend Pasco County Community Development and all partners involved for their
leadership, vision, and commitment to serving
those most in need. Their work exemplifies the
purpose of community development programs
and demonstrates how thoughtful investment

E:\CR\FM\A07JA8.004

E07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

can change lives. It is fitting that this exceptional project has been recognized with the
Audrey Nelson Award.

HONORING THE LIFE AND SERVICE
OF MRS. JEAN BREWER OF MARSHALL COUNTY, ALABAMA

f

HON. ROBERT B. ADERHOLT

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

OF ALABAMA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

HON. JAMES R. BAIRD
OF INDIANA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. BAIRD. Mr. Speaker, I was indisposed
during this vote due to a vehicle accident. Had
I been present, I would have voted present on
Roll Call No. 1.
f

HONORING TRACEY ANN TIPPETT

HON. JACK BERGMAN
OF MICHIGAN

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. BERGMAN. Mr. Speaker, it is my honor
to congratulate Ms. Tracey Ann Tippett on
being named Michigan Marine of the Year and
on her induction into the Oscar G. Johnson
VA Medical Center Hall of Heroes. This welldeserved honor reflects her steadfast dedication to Veterans, our Nation, and the communities throughout Northern Michigan and the
Upper Peninsula.
Ms. Tippett served honorably as a heavy
equipment mechanic in the United States Marine Corps, attaining the rank of Sergeant.
Throughout her distinguished military career,
she was awarded the Good Conduct Medal,
National Defense Service Medal, Rifle Marksmanship Badge, as well as a Letter of Appreciation and Certificate of Appreciation. Her unwavering commitment to her fellow Marines
and Veterans has not wavered since returning
from her service.
Since being honorably discharged in October of 1992, Ms. Tippett has devoted her time
and energy to serving Veterans and strengthening her community. While it would be difficult to fully capture the scope of her service,
her leadership and dedication are evident
across Michigan. Recently, she was elected
as Commandant of the Michigan Marine Corps
League, an organization that supports and
unites Marines from both the past and
present. Notably, Ms. Tippett is only the second woman to hold this position, serving as a
powerful inspiration to young women who aspire to serve our Nation.
In addition to her work with Veterans, Ms.
Tippett has been a constant presence in her
community, supporting programs like Toys for
Tots, the Marquette and Ishpeming Christmas
parades, Negaunee Pioneer Days, and Trinity
Lutheran Church. Her actions within her community have been recognized on multiple occasions, including being named 2022 Upper
Peninsula Veteran of the Year and 2021 State
of Michigan Veteran of the Year.
Mr. Speaker, let us all join in congratulating
Ms. Tracey Ann Tippett on earning the distinguished honor of being named Michigan Marine of the Year and on her induction into the
Oscar G. Johnson VA Medical Center Hall of
Heroes. I thank her for her enduring commitment to Veterans, her community, and our
great country.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:08 Jan 08, 2026

E9

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. ADERHOLT. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor and pay tribute to a remarkable leader, devoted patriot, and tireless advocate for
conservative values in the great State of Alabama, Mrs. Jean Brewer of Marshall County.
Jean Brewer’s life has been one defined by
service to our Nation, her community, and her
beloved state. Upon graduating from DAR
High School in Grant, Alabama, Jean embarked on her first professional journey with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Maryland, where she served with distinction early in
her career.
Jean was married to the late Don Brewer,
whose service in the United States Air Force
took their family around the world. Jean
worked faithfully alongside her husband after
he enlisted and earned his commission as an
officer; she served as a liaison to other military
spouses and providing support, encouragement, and leadership to families navigating the
demands of military life. Together, Jean and
Don raised three children, Jennifer, Renea,
and Roger, instilling in them the same values
of faith, service, and love of country that have
guided their own lives.
Following Don’s retirement from the Air
Force, the Brewer family returned home to
Grant, Alabama. Never content to rest after
years of service, Jean became deeply involved in local civic and political life. Her leadership and dedication were recognized by her
community when she was elected and served
for several years as President of the Marshall
County Republican Party, where she worked
tirelessly to strengthen grassroots involvement
and uphold conservative principles.
Jean Brewer loves this state, she loves this
country, and she has consistently worked to
preserve and restore the values that so many
Alabamians hold dear. Through her leadership, mentorship, and steadfast commitment to
service, she has left a lasting impact on Marshall County and beyond.
As the Member of Congress from the 4th
Congressional District of Alabama, it is my
privilege to recognize Jean’s lifetime of service
and to commend her for her devotion to family, community, and country.
I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring
Mrs. Jean Brewer and extending our deepest
appreciation for her many contributions.
God bless Jean Brewer, and God bless the
United States of America.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. GREGORY F. MURPHY
OF NORTH CAROLINA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. MURPHY. Mr. Speaker, due to unforeseen circumstances, I was unable to vote on
the following. Had I been present, I would
have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 335; YEA on
Roll Call No. 336; YEA on Roll Call No. 337;
YEA on Roll Call No. 338; NAY on Roll Call

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

No. 339; YEA on Roll Call No. 340; NAY on
Roll Call No. 341; YEA on Roll Call No. 342;
YEA on Roll Call No. 343; YEA on Roll Call
No. 344; NAY on Roll Call No. 345; NAY on
Roll Call No. 346; YEA on Roll Call No. 347;
NAY on Roll Call No. 348; YEA on Roll Call
No. 349; NAY on Roll Call No. 350; and YEA
on Roll Call No. 351.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND CAREER
OF G. WILLIAM ‘‘BILL’’ WARD

HON. JOHN JOYCE
OF PENNSYLVANIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, I
rise to honor the life and career of G. William
‘‘Bill’’ Ward, a widely respected corporate executive, community leader, and U.S. Navy veteran who passed away on December 17 in
Blair County.
Bill’s career at family-owned Ward Trucking
Corp. spanned more than 50 years, beginning
in 1956. Bill served as both president and
chairman of the board.
Bill was a driving force in the trucking industry who was gifted with the ability to relate to
people from across the broad spectrum of society.
Tributes to Bill have included recognition of
his philanthropic spirit, integrity, community
service, and mentorship.
As one long-time friend noted so perfectly,
‘‘Trying to capture the life of Bill Ward in a few
words is a daunting task, as this was a man
who was truly larger than life.’’
As we remember Bill, his legacy will live on
through his family and their commitment to
transportation.
Please join me in remembering the life of G.
William Ward.
f

RECOGNIZING LISA JANICKI

HON. RICK LARSEN
OF WASHINGTON

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. LARSEN of Washington. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to recognize and celebrate Lisa
Janicki’s service as a County Commissioner
for Skagit County, Washington.
Commissioner Janicki was first elected to
the Skagit County Board of County Commissioners in November 2014, following a career
of more than thirty years as the Chief Financial Officer for Janicki family businesses.
During her eleven years in office, Commissioner Janicki has been a tireless leader in
fighting the opioid epidemic across our communities and Washington state, advocating for
policy solutions, programs and investments to
end this scourge and repair the incredible
damage it has caused. She has worked collaboratively with the county’s partner jurisdictions to increase services available for community members in need of urgent crisis support. She was a founding member of North
Star, a partnership between the county commissioners and government, the mayors of the
four largest cities in Skagit County, and service organizations to end homelessness and
enhance effective delivery of crisis response,

E:\CR\FM\A07JA8.008

E07JAPT1

E10

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

recovery and support services countywide.
Commissioner Janicki also oversaw the development of the STAR Center providing acute
behavioral health care services to Skagit
County, in addition to the county’s first permanent supportive housing development, Martha’s Place, and the Skagit First Steps Shelter.
Commissioner Janicki’s heartfelt leadership,
strategic foresight, and compassion are an inspiration to leaders and community members
in Skagit County and across northwest Washington. She has been a transformational advocate for the people of Skagit County.
Mr. Speaker, it is an honor to commend
Commissioner Janicki for her outstanding
leadership and vision, dedication to serving
her community, and the enduring legacy she
has helped to cultivate. I ask my colleagues to
join me in expressing our deepest gratitude for
her service.
f

REMEMBERING ‘‘ELDER STATESMAN OF SOUL,’’ DON BRYANT

HON. STEVE COHEN
OF TENNESSEE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. COHEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
pay tribute to Don Bryant, Memphis’ ‘‘elder
statesman of soul,’’ the acclaimed singer and
songwriter who passed last month at the age
of 83.
Probably best known for co-writing the top40 hit ‘‘I Can’t Stand the Rain,’’ with his wife
Ann Peebles and Bernard Miller in 1973, Bryant was a staff songwriter at Willie Mitchell’s
Hi Records label in the 1960s and 1970s with
154 songs to his credit. He later wrote and
sang for Fat Possum Records.
Mr. Bryant and Ms. Peebles, a noted singer,
married in 1974 and were both inducted into
the Memphis Music Hall of Fame (she in 2014
and he in 2019, the same year Steve Cropper
and Tina Tuner were inducted). According to
his obituary in The New York Times, the
song’s title came from an offhand remark
made by Ms. Peebles as they prepared to go
to a concert in a sudden cloudburst. The
Beatles’ John Lennon said ‘‘I Can’t Stand the
Rain’’ was ‘‘the best song ever’’ after hearing
Peebles sing it at The Troubadour in Los Angles. Tina Turner later covered the song in on
her album ‘‘Private Dancer’’ in 1984. Donald
Maurice Bryant was born in Memphis in April
1942, the son of a gospel choir leader and, by
10, was singing in church choirs. In the 1960s,
he was Hi Records leading singer with The
Four Kings, performing on the local WLOK
radio station, and released his first solo album,
‘‘Precious Soul,’’ in 1969. For decades, he
sang mainly in church settings but returned to
the studio in 2016 and produced ‘‘Don’t Give
Up on Love’’ with the Bo-Keys for Fat Possum, his first secular album in 48 years. In
2020, they produced ‘‘You Make Me Feel,’’
which was nominated for a Grammy Award in
the Best Traditional Blues category. Mr. Bryant
and Ms. Peebles toured the world, with Bryant
largely working behind the scenes to advance
his wife’s work on stage until his late career
comeback. Ms. Peebles, who stopped singing
after a stroke in 2012, survives him.
I extend my profound condolences to his
family, friends, collaborators and his many
fans and admirers. The elder statesman of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:08 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

soul sent his unique Memphis sound around
the world and will be long remembered.
f

HONORING DR. ROSE MARIE
BRYANT JONES

HON. ERIC A. ‘‘RICK’’ CRAWFORD
OF ARKANSAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. CRAWFORD. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor the life and legacy of my constituent,
Dr. Rose Marie Bryant Jones, a dedicated
leader in her community and a long-time
member of the Republican Party of Arkansas,
who recently passed away on Friday, December 26, 2025, at the age of 83.
Dr. Jones was born on January 7, 1942. in
East Pulaski County, and was a true trailblazer throughout her life, known for breaking
down educational barriers. She graduated
from Philander Smith College in 1963 and
subsequently from the University of Arkansas.
Dr. Jones was a member of Alpha Kappa
Alpha Sorority and a founding member of the
African American Coalition of Arkansas.
She was a schoolteacher in Lonoke County
for over 30 years, before and after integration,
and established tutoring programs across two
counties in Arkansas. Dr. Jones took great
pride in educating and influencing the next
generation of students in her community.
Her public service did not stop in the classroom. She served on the Lonoke Public
School Board and the Lonoke City Council as
a pioneer of civil rights, with the heart of representing all Lonoke citizens through redistricting efforts. In 1998, she ran for the office
of Arkansas Secretary of State. She was even
the President of the Pea Ridge Cemetery
Board. In 2024, Dr. Jones stepped up again
for her community and was elected Justice of
the Peace in Lonoke County, where she continued her storied career in public service.
She made a lasting impact on all of those
who knew her and an incredible impression on
the 1st Congressional District of Arkansas.
May her legacy of perseverance and hard
work continue to encourage us all. Dr. Rose
Marie Bryant Jones led a life worth honoring
and celebrating for her service to her community. I send my prayers and sincere condolences to the friends and family of Dr. Jones
as they grieve her passing.
f

HONORING POLICE CHIEF
RAYMOND SHORES’ RETIREMENT

HON. EARL L. ‘‘BUDDY’’ CARTER
OF GEORGIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize a public servant who embodies the spirit of community partnership and
gratitude.
In Richmond Hill, Georgia, Police Chief Raymond Shores took a moment this week to
publicly thank the citizens of Richmond Hill
and Bryan County for their overwhelming support during his tenure and as he prepares to
retire.
Chief Shores’ last day is scheduled for January 16, 2026, and in an open letter to his

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 7, 2026

community, he expressed deep appreciation
for the trust and cooperation he received, especially in challenging times. His message reminds us that effective policing is not just
about enforcement; it is about partnership, collaboration, and mutual respect between law
enforcement and the citizens they serve. That
partnership reinforces public safety, strengthens neighborhoods, and builds lasting relationships founded on trust.
Today, we thank Chief Shores for his service and acknowledge the citizens of Richmond
Hill for standing with their law enforcement
leaders. Their mutual support is a model for
communities across our Nation.
f

RECOGNIZING LORENA PACHIARDI

HON. PABLO JOSÉ HERNÁNDEZ
OF PUERTO RICO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. HERNÁNDEZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to recognize Lorena Pachiardi, an extraordinary 11th-grade student from Cupeyville
School in San Juan, Puerto Rico, who has
been selected as the winner of the 2025 Congressional App Challenge for Puerto Rico’s AtLarge Congressional District.
Lorena
developed
GoldenCarePR,
a
thoughtful and innovative bilingual mobile application designed to support elderly individuals and their caregivers throughout Puerto
Rico. Her app centralizes essential information
on services, benefits, legal rights, digital safety, and health guidance, while also providing
practical caregiving tools such as a task manager and a health tracker for vital signs and
medications.
Her project addresses one of the most
pressing demographic challenges of our time.
According to the Puerto Rico Institute of Statistics, the population aged 65 and older is
now double the population under 15 years old.
This dramatic shift in our demographic structure reflects not only a global trend of population aging, but also a profound societal challenge in Puerto Rico—one marked by limited
resources, insufficient services, and a lack of
comprehensive programs to support our older
adults.
It is within this context that GoldenCarePR
becomes more than an app; it becomes a
powerful tool of compassion and public purpose. By identifying real gaps in information,
services, and support for seniors and their
families, Lorena created a platform that has
the potential to meaningfully improve the quality of life of thousands across Puerto Rico.
Mr. Speaker, Lorena’s achievement embodies the very mission of the Congressional
App Challenge: empowering young people to
harness the power of technology to solve real
problems and uplift their communities. Her innovation stands as an inspiring example of
how the next generation is already stepping
forward to address Puerto Rico’s most urgent
needs, with knowledge and love.
I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating Lorena Pachiardi, the 2025 Congressional App Challenge winner for my district.
Her talent, leadership, and compassion give
us great hope for the future of Puerto Rico.

E:\CR\FM\A07JA8.014

E07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

RECOGNIZING THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND COMMUNITY LEADERSHIP OF C. STEWART MCCLEAF

HON. JOHN JOYCE
OF PENNSYLVANIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, I
rise to recognize the public service and community leadership of C. Stewart McCleaf, who
was sworn in on January 5th to begin his
fourth term as a Washington Township Supervisor in Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
Over the years, Stewart has served in leadership positions with the Township Board of
Supervisors, Rouzerville Business Association,
Pennsylvania State Association of Township
Supervisors, and Washington Township Municipal Authority.
Since his retirement from a career in law
enforcement in 1984, Stewart has devoted his
time and talents to support numerous civic
and non-profit organizations.
Stewart’s enduring commitment to various
forms of service sets an inspiring example for
all Americans who strive to make a positive
impact on their community.
On behalf of everyone in Pennsylvania’s
13th Congressional District, I express gratitude
to Stewart for his distinguished legacy of service and offer best wishes for continued success.
f

HONORING JOHNNIE MAE AYLER
ON HER 100TH BIRTHDAY

HON. THOMAS H. KEAN, JR.
OF NEW JERSEY

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

Wednesday, January 7, 2026
Mr. KEAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to commemorate the 100th birthday of Johnnie Mae
Ayler of Branchburg, New Jersey.
Born on January 8, 1926, in Maplesville,
Alabama, Ms. Ayler is the eldest of fourteen
siblings—and one of only two still living today.
She and her late husband, R.E. Ayler, raised
nine children: seven daughters and two sons.
Her family legacy lives on through fourteen
grandchildren and nine great-grandchildren.
Johnnie has called Branchburg, New Jersey
home for more than three decades. She de-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:08 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

voted more than twenty years of her professional life to Gen Tech. Even after retiring, she
continued her service to others as a certified
nursing assistant—finally retiring at the remarkable age of 85. A two-time cancer survivor, Johnnie attributes her extraordinary longevity first and foremost to God, a daily routine that once included walking five miles a
day, faithfully taking her vitamins, and never
missing a doctor’s appointments. As we celebrate 100 hundred years of strength, dedication, and grace, we are honored to recognize
the truly remarkable Johnnie Mae Ayler.
Mr. Speaker, as Johnnie Mae Ayler celebrates her 100th birthday, I am pleased to
commend her for being an integral part of the
Branchburg community. I invite my colleagues
to join me in honoring this determined woman
truly dedicated to faith, passion, and the pursuit of a brighter future.
f

SENATE COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4,
agreed to by the Senate of February 4,
1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized schedule of all
meetings and hearings of Senate committees, subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference.
This title requires all such committees
to notify the Office of the Senate Daily
Digest—designated by the Rules Committee—of the time, place and purpose
of the meetings, when scheduled and
any cancellations or changes in the
meetings as they occur.
As an additional procedure along
with the computerization of this information, the Office of the Senate Daily
Digest will prepare this information for
printing in the Extensions of Remarks
section of the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD
on Monday and Wednesday of each
week.
Meetings scheduled for Thursday,
January 8, 2026 may be found in the
Daily Digest of today’s RECORD.
MEETINGS SCHEDULED
JANUARY 13
9:30 a.m.
Committee on Armed Services
To receive a closed briefing on Operation
Absolute Resolve.
SVC–217

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

E11

3 p.m.
Select Committee on Intelligence
To receive a closed briefing on certain
intelligence matters.
SH–219
JANUARY 14
10 a.m.
Committee on Health, Education, Labor,
and Pensions
To hold hearings to examine chemical
abortion drugs.
SD–430
2:30 p.m.
Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
To hold hearings to examine growing the
small business agricultural economy.
SR–428A
3 p.m.
Select Committee on Intelligence
To receive a closed briefing on certain
intelligence matters.
SH–219
3:30 p.m.
Special Committee on Aging
To hold hearings to examine made in
China and paid by seniors, focusing on
stopping the surge of international
scams.
SH–216
JANUARY 28
10 a.m.
Committee on Environment and Public
Works
To hold hearings to examine improving
the Federal environmental review and
permitting process, part 2.
SD–562
2:30 p.m.
Committee on the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Federal Courts, Oversight, Agency Action, and Federal
Rights
To hold hearings to examine scammers,
focusing on fighting fraud in Minnesota
and beyond.
SD–226
FEBRUARY 3
10:15 a.m.
Committee on the Judiciary
To hold hearings to examine hidden facts
regarding Nazis and Swiss banks.
SH–216

E:\CR\FM\A07JA8.019

E07JAPT1

Wednesday, January 7, 2026

Daily Digest
HIGHLIGHTS
See Final Resume of Congressional Activity (including the History of
Bills) for the Second Session of the 118th Congress (2024).

Senate
Chamber Action
Routine Proceedings, pages S63–S93
Measures Introduced: Twelve bills were introPages S89–90
duced, as follows: S. 3584–3595
Measures Passed:
Condemning the Rise in Attacks on Jewish Individuals: Committee on the Judiciary was discharged from further consideration of S. Res. 288,
condemning the rise in ideologically motivated attacks on Jewish individuals in the United States, including the recent violent assault in Boulder, Colorado, and reaffirming the commitment of the Senate
to combating antisemitism and politically motivated
violence, and the resolution was then agreed to.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Page S90

Commemoration of the Attack at Club Q: Committee on the Judiciary was discharged from further
consideration of S. Res. 503, recognizing the third
commemoration of the anti-LGBTQ+ attack that occurred on November 19–20, 2022, at Club Q, an
LGBTQ+ bar in Colorado Springs, Colorado, and the
Page S90
resolution was then agreed to.
Centenary College of Louisiana Bicentennial:
Committee on the Judiciary was discharged from
further consideration of S. Res. 543, commending
Centenary College of Louisiana on the occasion of its
bicentennial and its years of service to the State of
Louisiana and the United States, and the resolution
was then agreed to.
Page S90
Measures Considered:
Air Plan Approval; South Dakota; Regional Haze
Plan for the Second Implementation Period: Senate began consideration of the motion to proceed to
consideration of S.J. Res. 86, providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5, United
States Code, of the rule submitted by the Environmental Protection Agency relating to ‘‘Air Plan Ap-

proval; South Dakota; Regional Haze Plan for the
Second Implementation Period’’.
Pages S72–87
During consideration of this measure today, Senate
also took the following action:
By 43 yeas to 50 nays (Vote No. 4), Senate did
not agree to the motion to proceed to consideration
of the joint resolution.
Page S74
S.J. Res. 98 and Van Hook Nomination—Agreement: A unanimous-consent agreement was reached
providing that on Thursday, January 8, 2026, Senator Kaine or his designee be recognized to make a
motion to discharge S.J. Res. 98, to direct the removal of United States Armed Forces from hostilities
within or against Venezuela that have not been authorized by Congress, and if made, Senate vote on
the motion to discharge at 11 a.m.; and that following the vote on the motion to discharge, Senate
resume consideration of the nomination of Alexander
C. Van Hook, of Louisiana, to be United States District Judge for the Western District of Louisiana,
and Senate execute the order of December 18, 2025,
in relation to the nomination at 1:45 p.m.
Pages S90–91

Messages from the House:
Page S89
Executive Communications:
Page S89
Additional Cosponsors:
Page S90
Additional Statements:
Pages S87–89
Authorities for Committees to Meet:
Page S90
Record Votes: One record vote was taken today.
(Total—4)
Page S74
Recess: Senate convened at 11:15 a.m. and recessed
at 5:45 p.m., until 10 a.m. on Thursday, January 8,
2026. (For Senate’s program, see the remarks of the
Majority Leader in today’s Record on pages S90–91.)

D15

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

D16

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 7, 2026

at George Mason University, Arlington, Virginia;
Stephen I. Vladeck, Georgetown Law, Washington,
D.C.; and Will Chamberlain, The Article III Project,
Alexandria, Virginia.

Committee Meetings
(Committees not listed did not meet)

JUDGES
Committee on the Judiciary: Subcommittee on Federal
Courts, Oversight, Agency Action, and Federal
Rights concluded a hearing to examine holding
rogue judges accountable, after receiving testimony
from Robert Luther III, Antonin Scalia Law School

INTELLIGENCE
Select Committee on Intelligence: Committee met in
closed session to receive a briefing on certain intelligence matters from officials of the intelligence
community.

h

House of Representatives

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Chamber Action
Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 19 public bills, H.R. 6955–6973; and 6 resolutions, H.J.
Res. 137; H. Con. Res. 68; and H. Res. 978–981,
were introduced.
Pages H133–34
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages H135–36
Reports Filed: Reports were filed today as follows:
H. Res. 977, providing for consideration of the
bill (H.R. 4593) to amend the Energy Policy and
Conservation Act to revise the definition of
showerhead; providing for consideration of the bill
(H.R. 5184) to prohibit the Secretary of Energy
from enforcing energy efficiency standards applicable
to manufactured housing, and for other purposes;
and providing for consideration of the bill (H.R.
6938) making consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other
purposes (H. Rept. 119–424);
H.R. 227, to allow a period in which members of
the clergy may revoke their exemption from Social
Security coverage, and for other purposes, with an
amendment (H. Rept. 119–425);
H.R. 2716, to improve coordination between Federal and State agencies and the Do Not Pay working
system, with an amendment (H. Rept. 119–426);
H.R. 6495, to amend the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986 to provide for specific taxpayer notice when
information is sought from third parties, with an
amendment (H. Rept. 119–427); and
H.R. 6506, to amend the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986 to suspend the period of limitations on filing a claim for credit or refund during collection action proceedings, to prohibit the crediting of overpayments against disputed tax liability during such
proceedings, and to expand the jurisdiction of the
Tax Court, with an amendment (H. Rept. 119–428).
Page H133

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

Speaker: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he
appointed Representative Valadao to act as Speaker
Page H103
pro tempore for today.
Recess: The House recessed at 11:14 a.m. and rePage H111
convened at 12 p.m.
Expressing the profound sorrow of the House of
Representatives on the death of the Honorable
Doug LaMalfa: The House agreed to H. Res. 978,
expressing the profound sorrow of the House of Representatives on the death of the Honorable Doug
Page H112
LaMalfa.
Committee Election: The House agreed to H. Res.
979, electing a Member to a certain standing comPage H112
mittee of the House of Representatives.
Recess: The House recessed at 1:12 p.m. and reconPage H120
vened at 4:31 p.m.
Moment of Silence: The House observed a moment
of silence in remembrance of the Honorable Doug
Pages H121–22
LaMalfa.
Breaking the Gridlock Act: The House considered
H. Res. 780, providing for consideration of the bill
(H.R. 1834) to advance policy priorities that will
break the gridlock. Consideration is expected to resume tomorrow, January 8th. Earlier the House
agreed to the Jeffries motion to discharge the resolution from the Committee on Rules by a yea-and-nay
vote of 221 yeas to 205 nays, Roll No. 4.
Pages H122–26

Select Committee on the Strategic Competition
Between the United States and the Chinese
Communist Party—Appointment: The Chair announces the Speaker’s re-appointment of the following Member of the House to the Select Committee on the Strategic Competition Between the
United States and the Chinese Communist Party:
Representative Khanna, to rank before RepresentaPage H126
tive Krishnamoorthi.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Recess: The House recessed at 6:15 p.m. and reconvened at 6:20 p.m.
Page H127
Saving Homeowners from Overregulation With
Exceptional Rinsing Act: The House considered
H.R. 4593, to amend the Energy Policy and Conservation Act to revise the definition of showerhead.
Consideration is expected to resume tomorrow, January 8th.
Pages H127–32
H. Res. 977, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 4593), (H.R. 5184), and (H.R.
6938) was agreed to by a recorded vote of 214 ayes
to 212 noes, Roll No. 3, after the previous question
was ordered by a yea-and-nay vote of 213 yeas to
211 nays, Roll No. 2.
Pages H112–20, H121, H122
Senate Referrals: S. 320 was held at the desk. S.
1626 was held at the desk.
Pages H111–12
Senate Message: Message received from the Senate
appears on pages H111–12.
Quorum Calls—Votes: Two yea-and-nay votes and
one recorded vote developed during the proceedings
of today and appear on pages H121, H122, and
H123.
Adjournment: The House met at 10 a.m. and adjourned at 7:10 p.m., pursuant to House Resolution
978, as a further mark of respect to the memory of
the late Honorable Doug LaMalfa.

Committee Meetings
MODERNIZING RETIREMENT POLICY FOR
TODAY’S WORKFORCE
Committee on Education and Workforce: Subcommittee
on Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions held a
hearing entitled ‘‘Modernizing Retirement Policy for
Today’s Workforce’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

AMERICAN ENERGY DOMINANCE: DAWN
OF THE NEW NUCLEAR ERA
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Subcommittee on
Energy held a hearing entitled ‘‘American Energy
Dominance: Dawn of the New Nuclear Era’’. Testimony was heard from John Wagner, Director, Idaho
National Laboratory, Department of Energy; and
public witnesses.
FULL STREAM AHEAD: COMPETITION AND
CONSUMER CHOICE IN DIGITAL
STREAMING
Committee on the Judiciary: Subcommittee on the Administrative State, Regulatory Reform, and Antitrust
held a hearing entitled ‘‘Full Stream Ahead: Competition and Consumer Choice in Digital Streaming’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

D17

OVERSIGHT OF FRAUD AND MISUSE OF
FEDERAL FUNDS IN MINNESOTA: PART I
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform: Full
Committee held a hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of
Fraud and Misuse of Federal Funds in Minnesota:
Part I’’. Testimony was heard from the following
members of the Minnesota House of Representatives:
Walter Hudson, District 30A; Marion Rarick, District 29B; and Kristin Robbins, District 37A; and a
public witness.
SHOWER ACT; AFFORDABLE HOMES ACT;
COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE; ENERGY
AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND
INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT
APPROPRIATIONS ACT
Committee on Rules: Full Committee concluded a hearing on H.R. 4593, the ‘‘SHOWER Act’’; H.R.
5184, the ‘‘Affordable HOMES Act’’; and H.R.
6938, the ‘‘Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and
Water Development; and Interior and Environment
Appropriations Act, 2026’’. The Committee granted,
by a record vote of 8–3, a rule providing for consideration of H.R. 4593, the ‘‘SHOWER Act’’, H.R.
5184, the ‘‘Affordable HOMES Act’’, and H.R.
6938, the ‘‘Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and
Water Development; and Interior and Environment
Appropriations Act, 2026’’. The rule provides for
consideration of H.R. 4593, the ‘‘SHOWER Act’’,
under a closed rule. The rule waives all points of
order against consideration of the bill. The rule provides that the bill shall be considered as read. The
rule waives all points of order against provisions in
the bill. The rule provides one hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and
ranking minority member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce or their respective designees.
The rule provides one motion to recommit. The rule
further provides for consideration of H.R. 5184, the
‘‘Affordable HOMES Act’’, under a closed rule. The
rule waives all points of order against consideration
of the bill. The rule provides that the amendment
in the nature of a substitute recommended by the
Committee on Energy and Commerce now printed
in the bill shall be considered as adopted and the
bill, as amended, shall be considered as read. The
rule waives all points of order against provisions in
the bill, as amended. The rule provides one hour of
general debate equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce or their respective
designees. The rule provides one motion to recommit. The rule further provides for consideration of
H.R. 6938, the ‘‘Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy
and Water Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations Act, 2026’’, under a closed

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

D18

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

rule. The rule waives all points of order against consideration of the bill. The rule provides that the bill
shall be considered as read. The rule waives all
points of order against provisions in the bill. The
rule provides one hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations
or their respective designees. The rule provides that
the Chair shall put the question on retaining Division A and retaining Divisions B and C of the bill
in the order specified by the Chair; provides that the
yeas and nays shall be considered as ordered on each
of the questions; and provides that the Chair shall
then put the question on engrossment and third
reading of the text comprising those portions of the
bill retained. The rule provides one motion to recommit. The rule directs the Clerk, in the engrossment of H.R. 6938, to make technical and conforming changes in the event a portion of the bill
is not retained. Finally, the rule provides that the
chair of the Committee on Appropriations may insert in the Congressional Record not later than January 9th, 2026, such material as he may deem explanatory of H.R. 6938.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

A VOICE FOR SMALL BUSINESS: HOW THE
SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
OFFICE OF ADVOCACY IS CUTTING RED
TAPE
Committee on Small Business: Full Committee held a
hearing entitled ‘‘A Voice for Small Business: How
the SBA Office of Advocacy is Cutting Red Tape’’.
Testimony was heard from Casey Mulligan, Chief
Counsel, Office of Advocacy, U.S. Small Business
Administration.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0627

January 7, 2026

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR THURSDAY,
JANUARY 8, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
No meetings/hearings scheduled.

House
Committee on Education and Workforce, Full Committee,
markup on H.R. 6359, the ‘‘Pregnant Students’ Rights
Act’’; and H.R. 4307, the ‘‘Enhancing Detection of
Human Trafficking Act’’, 10:15 a.m., 2175 Rayburn.
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Subcommittee on
Health, hearing entitled ‘‘Legislative Proposals to Support
Patient Access to Medicare Services’’, 10:15 a.m., 2123
Rayburn.
Committee on the Judiciary, Full Committee, markup on
H.R. 6260, the ‘‘Keeping Violent Offenders Off Our
Streets Act’’; H.R. 5213, the ‘‘Keep Violent Criminals
Off Our Streets Act’’; H.R. 6622, the ‘‘Sunshine for Regulatory Decrees and Settlements Act of 2025’’; and H.R.
2641, to amend the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 to require all Federal
contractors to participate in the E-verify program, 10
a.m., 2141 Rayburn.
Committee on Natural Resources, Subcommittee on Water,
Wildlife and Fisheries, hearing entitled ‘‘Fix Our Forests
for Affordable and Reliable Water and Power Supplies’’,
10 a.m., 1324 Longworth.
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Full Committee, hearing entitled ‘‘Chemistry Competitiveness:
Fueling Innovation and Streamlining Processes to Ensure
Safety and Security’’, 10 a.m., 2318 Rayburn.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

January 7, 2026

D19

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Résumé of Congressional Activity
Final Résumé of Congressional Activity

The first table gives a comprehensive résumé of all legislative business transacted by the Senate and House.
The second table accounts for all nominations submitted to the Senate by the President for Senate confirmation.
DATA ON LEGISLATIVE ACTIVITY

DISPOSITION OF EXECUTIVE NOMINATIONS

January 3, 2024 through January 3, 2025

January 3, 2024 through January 3, 2025

Days in session ....................................
Time in session ...................................
Congressional Record:
Pages of proceedings ...................
Extensions of Remarks ................
Public bills enacted into law ...............
Private bills enacted into law ..............
Bills in conference ...............................
Measures passed, total .........................
Senate bills ..................................
House bills ..................................
Senate joint resolutions ...............
House joint resolutions ...............
Senate concurrent resolutions ......
House concurrent resolutions ......
Simple resolutions .......................
Measures reported, total ......................
Senate bills ..................................
House bills ..................................
Senate joint resolutions ...............
House joint resolutions ...............
Senate concurrent resolutions ......
House concurrent resolutions ......
Simple resolutions .......................
Special reports .....................................
Conference reports ...............................
Measures pending on calendar .............
Measures introduced, total ..................
Bills .............................................
Joint resolutions ..........................
Concurrent resolutions ................
Simple resolutions .......................
Quorum calls .......................................
Yea-and-nay votes ...............................
Recorded votes ....................................
Bills vetoed .........................................
Vetoes overridden ................................

Senate

House

Total

176
799 hrs., 42′

167
594 hrs., 54′

..
..

S7,357
..
78
..
..
628
191
159
3
2
11
11
251
*398
324
69
..
..
1
..
4
8
..
500
2,607
2,091
69
22
425
6
339
..
2
..

H7,440
E1,339
159
..
..
666
83
474
1
4
8
15
81
610
1
557
..
15
..
3
34
32
..
285
4,514
3,653
124
54
683
1
324
192
2
..

..
..
..
..
..
1,294
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
1,008
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
7,121
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

Civilian nominees, totaling 378 (including 95 nominees carried over
from the First Session), disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Withdrawn ....................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................
Other Civilian nominees, totaling 2,532 (including 745 nominees
carried over from the First Session), disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Withdrawn ....................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0667

2,020
80
432

Air Force nominees, totaling 5,821 (including 111 nominees carried
over from the First Session), disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

5,805
16

Army nominatees, totaling 6,645 (including 1,906 nominees carried
over from the First Session), disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Withdrawn ....................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

6,631
1
13

Navy nominees, totaling 5,353 (including 7 nominees carried over
from the First Session), disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

5,339
14

Marine Corps nominees, totaling 1,498 (including 6 nominees carried
over from the First Session), disposed of as follows:
Confirmed ......................................................................................
Returned to White House .............................................................

1,496
2

Summary
Total nominees carried over from the First Session ............................... 2,872
Total nominees received this Session ..................................................... 19,803
Total confirmed ..................................................................................... 21,908
Total withdrawn ....................................................................................
92
Total return to the White House ..........................................................
675

* These figures include all measures reported, even if there was no accompanying report. A total of 188 written reports have been filed in the Senate,
642 reports have been filed in the House.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

170
11
197

Sfmt 0667

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0667

Sfmt 0667

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

HISTORY OF BILLS ENACTED
INTO PUBLIC LAW

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

(118th Cong., 2D Sess.)

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 0663

Sfmt 0663

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

21

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 0663

Sfmt 0663

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

D23

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
BILLS ENACTED INTO PUBLIC LAW (118TH, 2D SESSION)
Law No.

Law No.

Law No.

Law No.

Law No.

S. 50 ....................... 118–152
S. 59 ....................... 118–188
S. 91 ....................... 118–149
S. 133 ..................... 118–92
S. 134 ..................... 118–93
S. 138 ..................... 118–70
S. 141 ..................... 118–210
S. 206 ..................... 118–43
S. 223 ..................... 118–189
S. 227 ..................... 118–73
S. 265 ..................... 118–84
S. 310 ..................... 118–153
S. 382 ..................... 118–48
S. 474 ..................... 118–59
S. 546 ..................... 118–64
S. 612 ..................... 118–94
S. 656 ..................... 118–95
S. 670 ..................... 118–96
S. 679 ..................... 118–97
S. 709 ..................... 118–190
S. 759 ..................... 118–191
S. 794 ..................... 118–98
S. 870 ..................... 118–67
S. 932 ..................... 118–192
S. 992 ..................... 118–45
S. 1147 ................... 118–193
S. 1278 ................... 118–46
S. 1351 ................... 118–194
S. 1478 ................... 118–154
S. 1510 ................... 118–131
S. 1549 ................... 118–104
S. 1608 ................... 118–80
S. 1648 ................... 118–85
S. 1858 ................... 118–44
S. 1973 ................... 118–74
S. 2051 ................... 118–65
S. 2143 ................... 118–132
S. 2181 ................... 118–271
S. 2228 ................... 118–105
S. 2274 ................... 118–133
S. 2414 ................... 118–195
S. 2513 ................... 118–196
S. 2685 ................... 118–99
S. 2781 ................... 118–155
S. 2825 ................... 118–87
S. 2861 ................... 118–88
S. 3126 ................... 118–134
S. 3222 ................... 118–36
S. 3249 ................... 118–75

S. 3250 ................... 118–37
S. 3267 ................... 118–135
S. 3285 ................... 118–76
S. 3419 ................... 118–136
S. 3427 ................... 118–38
S. 3448 ................... 118–197
S. 3475 ................... 118–156
S. 3613 ................... 118–157
S. 3639 ................... 118–100
S. 3640 ................... 118–101
S. 3706 ................... 118–77
S. 3764 ................... 118–90
S. 3791 ................... 118–198
S. 3851 ................... 118–102
S. 3857 ................... 118–199
S. 3938 ................... 118–200
S. 3946 ................... 118–201
S. 3959 ................... 118–202
S. 3960 ................... 118–151
S. 3998 ................... 118–203
S. 4077 ................... 118–204
S. 4107 ................... 118–205
S. 4243 ................... 118–150
S. 4351 ................... 118–86
S. 4367 ................... 118–272
S. 4548 ................... 118–78
S. 4610 ................... 118–206
S. 4698 ................... 118–103
S. 4716 ................... 118–207
S. 5314 ................... 118–208
S. 5355 ................... 118–209

H.R. 1432 .............. 118–146
H.R. 1505 .............. 118–137
H.R. 1555 .............. 118–211
H.R. 1568 .............. 118–39
H.R. 1607 .............. 118–162
H.R. 1727 .............. 118–163
H.R. 1823 .............. 118–212
H.R. 2365 .............. 118–66
H.R. 2379 .............. 118–54
H.R. 2468 .............. 118–164
H.R. 2754 .............. 118–55
H.R. 2872 .............. 118–35
H.R. 2882 .............. 118–47
H.R. 2950 .............. 118–138
H.R. 2997 .............. 118–227
H.R. 3019 .............. 118–71
H.R. 3254 .............. 118–165
H.R. 3324 .............. 118–166
H.R. 3354 .............. 118–213
H.R. 3391 .............. 118–228
H.R. 3608 .............. 118–112
H.R. 3728 .............. 118–113
H.R. 3797 .............. 118–167
H.R. 3801 .............. 118–168
H.R. 3821 .............. 118–147
H.R. 3865 .............. 118–56
H.R. 3935 .............. 118–63
H.R. 3944 .............. 118–57
H.R. 3947 .............. 118–58
H.R. 4094 .............. 118–169
H.R. 4136 .............. 118–214
H.R. 4190 .............. 118–114
H.R. 4366 .............. 118–42
H.R. 4385 .............. 118–170
H.R. 4389 .............. 118–51
H.R. 4467 .............. 118–171
H.R. 4581 .............. 118–69
H.R. 4955 .............. 118–215
H.R. 4984 .............. 118–274
H.R. 5009 .............. 118–159
H.R. 5103 .............. 118–229
H.R. 5301 .............. 118–172
H.R. 5302 .............. 118–139
H.R. 5443 .............. 118–230
H.R. 5464 .............. 118–115
H.R. 5476 .............. 118–116
H.R. 5490 .............. 118–117
H.R. 5536 .............. 118–140
H.R. 5640 .............. 118–118

H.R. 5646 .............. 118–173
H.R. 5712 .............. 118–119
H.R. 5770 .............. 118–174
H.R. 5799 .............. 118–141
H.R. 5861 .............. 118–120
H.R. 5863 .............. 118–148
H.R. 5867 .............. 118–216
H.R. 5887 .............. 118–231
H.R. 5985 .............. 118–121
H.R. 6062 .............. 118–232
H.R. 6073 .............. 118–122
H.R. 6116 .............. 118–217
H.R. 6162 .............. 118–218
H.R. 6188 .............. 118–219
H.R. 6244 .............. 118–220
H.R. 6249 .............. 118–123
H.R. 6324 .............. 118–124
H.R. 6395 .............. 118–233
H.R. 6492 .............. 118–234
H.R. 6513 .............. 118–106
H.R. 6633 .............. 118–221
H.R. 6651 .............. 118–125
H.R. 6750 .............. 118–222
H.R. 6810 .............. 118–223
H.R. 6826 .............. 118–175
H.R. 6829 .............. 118–176
H.R. 6843 .............. 118–177
H.R. 6852 .............. 118–235
H.R. 6960 .............. 118–178
H.R. 6983 .............. 118–224
H.R. 7032 .............. 118–89
H.R. 7158 .............. 118–236
H.R. 7177 .............. 118–179
H.R. 7180 .............. 118–237
H.R. 7189 .............. 118–107
H.R. 7192 .............. 118–126
H.R. 7199 .............. 118–127
H.R. 7213 .............. 118–180
H.R. 7218 .............. 118–142
H.R. 7332 .............. 118–181
H.R. 7333 .............. 118–128
H.R. 7365 .............. 118–238
H.R. 7377 .............. 118–81
H.R. 7385 .............. 118–239
H.R. 7417 .............. 118–240
H.R. 7423 .............. 118–129
H.R. 7438 .............. 118–143
H.R. 7454 .............. 118–41
H.R. 7463 .............. 118–40

H.R. 7507 .............. 118–241
H.R. 7508 .............. 118–242
H.R. 7524 .............. 118–182
H.R. 7606 .............. 118–243
H.R. 7607 .............. 118–244
H.R. 7764 .............. 118–144
H.R. 7777 .............. 118–130
H.R. 7872 .............. 118–183
H.R. 7888 .............. 118–49
H.R. 7893 .............. 118–245
H.R. 7938 .............. 118–246
H.R. 8012 .............. 118–247
H.R. 8057 .............. 118–248
H.R. 8219 .............. 118–184
H.R. 8289 .............. 118–60
H.R. 8413 .............. 118–185
H.R. 8641 .............. 118–249
H.R. 8663 .............. 118–186
H.R. 8666 .............. 118–250
H.R. 8667 .............. 118–251
H.R. 8717 .............. 118–252
H.R. 8841 .............. 118–253
H.R. 8868 .............. 118–254
H.R. 8909 .............. 118–255
H.R. 8919 .............. 118–256
H.R. 8932 .............. 118–145
H.R. 8976 .............. 118–257
H.R. 9076 .............. 118–258
H.R. 9106 .............. 118–91
H.R. 9124 .............. 118–259
H.R. 9285 .............. 118–260
H.R. 9322 .............. 118–261
H.R. 9421 .............. 118–262
H.R. 9468 .............. 118–82
H.R. 9487 .............. 118–263
H.R. 9544 .............. 118–264
H.R. 9549 .............. 118–265
H.R. 9566 .............. 118–187
H.R. 9580 .............. 118–266
H.R. 9592 .............. 118–267
H.R. 9600 .............. 118–268
H.R. 9747 .............. 118–83
H.R. 9775 .............. 118–269
H.R. 10065 ............ 118–270
H.R. 10545 ............ 118–158

H.R. 82 .................. 118–273
H.R. 292 ................ 118–52
H.R. 593 ................ 118–61
H.R. 599 ................ 118–108
H.R. 663 ................ 118–160
H.R. 670 ................ 118–225
H.R. 807 ................ 118–109
H.R. 815 ................ 118–50
H.R. 996 ................ 118–53
H.R. 1042 .............. 118–62
H.R. 1060 .............. 118–110
H.R. 1076 .............. 118–79
H.R. 1097 .............. 118–161
H.R. 1098 .............. 118–111
H.R. 1105 .............. 118–72
H.R. 1240 .............. 118–68
H.R. 1318 .............. 118–226

BILLS VETOED
S.J. Res. 38, providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted
by the Federal Highway Administration relating to ‘‘Waiver of Buy America Requirements for Electric Vehicle Chargers’’. Vetoed
Jan. 24, 2024.
H.J. Res. 98, providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted
by the National Labor Relations Board relating to ‘‘Standard for Determining Joint Employer Status’’. Vetoed May 3, 2024.
H.J. Res. 109, providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted
by the Securities and Exchange Commission relating to ‘‘Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 121’’. Vetoed May 31, 2024.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

S. 4199, to authorize additional district judges for the district courts and convert temporary judgeships. Vetoed Dec. 23,
2024.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 0669

Sfmt 0669

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 0669

Sfmt 0669

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

Making further continuing appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30, 2024,
and for other purposes.
To ensure the security of office space rented
by Senators, and for other purposes.
To provide remote access to court proceedings
for victims of the 1988 Bombing of Pan
Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
To extend the authority to provide employees
of the United States Secret Service with
overtime pay beyond other statutory limitations, and for other purposes.
To amend the Tariff Act of 1930 to protect
personally identifiable information, and for
other purposes.
Making further continuing appropriations for
fiscal year 2024, and for other purposes.
To amend title 49, United States Code, to
extend authorizations for the airport improvement program, to amend the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 to extend the funding and expenditure authority of the Airport and Airway Trust Fund, and for other
purposes.
Making consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2024, and
for other purposes.
To require the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection to regularly review and update policies and manuals related to inspections at ports of entry.
To amend the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act to establish a deadline for applying for disaster
unemployment assistance.
To amend the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 to designate
the Texas and New Mexico portions of the
future Interstate-designated segments of
the Port-to-Plains Corridor as Interstate
Route 27, and for other purposes.
To designate the Federal building located at
985 Michigan Avenue in Detroit, Michigan, as the ‘‘Rosa Parks Federal Building’’,
and for other purposes.
Making further consolidated appropriations
for the fiscal year ending September 30,
2024, and for other purposes.
To take certain land in the State of Washington into trust for the benefit of the
Puyallup Tribe of the Puyallup Reservation, and for other purposes.
To reform the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978.
Making emergency supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year ending September
30, 2024, and for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

3250

S.

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

7888
815

H.R.
H.R.

382

2882

H.R.
S.

1278

992

S.

S.

1858

S.

206

S.

7454

H.R.

4366

7463

H.R.

H.R.

1568

H.R.

3427

3222

S.

S.

2872

H.R.

Bill No.

Apr.
9,
2024
Feb.
2,
2023

Feb.
9,
2023

Apr.
26,
2023

Apr.
25,
2023

Mar.
28,
2023

June
7,
2023

Feb.
1,
2023

June
27,
2023

Feb.
28,
2024
Feb.
26,
2024

Mar.
10,
2023

Dec.
6,
2023

Nov.
2,
2023
Nov.
8,
2023

Apr.
26,
2023

Date
introduced

Jud
Int
VA

E&W
NR

App

App
Bud
TI
WM
SST
Jud
HS

WM

NR

House

IA

EPW

EPW

HS&GA

HS&GA

Jud

Jud

Senate

Committee

..................

Jan.
30,
2024

..................

..................

..................

..................

June
27,
2023

Dec.
1,
2023

..................

..................

..................

Sept.
14,
2023

House

..................

..................

Dec.
12,
2023

..................

July
26,
2023

July
25,
2023

May
4,
2023

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

Senate

Date Reported

............

............

............

364

............

............

............

............

122

............

............

287

............

............

............

198

House
118–

............

............

130

............

0

............

74

16

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

Senate
118–

Report No.

Apr.
12,
2024
Mar.
7,
2023

Apr.
11,
2024

Feb.
5,
2024

Mar.
13,
2024

Dec.
4,
2023

Mar.
11,
2024

Mar.
7,
2024

July
27,
2023

Feb.
29,
2024
Feb.
29,
2024

Jan.
18,
2024

Jan.
29,
2024

Jan.
18,
2024
Jan.
18,
2024

Sept.
20,
2023

House

Apr.
19,
2024
Feb.
13,
2024

Dec.
14,
2023

Mar.
12,
2024

Nov.
29,
2023

July
27,
2023

July
27,
2023

June
22,
2023

Nov.
1,
2023

Feb.
29,
2024
Mar.
6,
2024

Jan.
31,
2024

Dec.
18,
2023

Nov.
2,
2023
Dec.
6,
2023

Jan.
18,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

Apr.
20,
2024
Apr.
24,
2024

Apr.
19,
2024

Mar.
23,
2024

Mar.
22,
2024

Mar.
22,
2024

Mar.
18,
2024

Mar.
18,
2024

Mar.
9,
2024

Mar.
1,
2024
Mar.
8,
2024

Feb.
9,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Jan.
26,
2024
Jan.
26,
2024

Jan.
19,
2024

Date approved

50

49

48

47

46

45

44

43

42

41

40

39

38

37

36

35

No.
118–

Public Law

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
D25

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

To amend the Neotropical Migratory Bird
Conservation Act to make improvements to
that Act, and for other purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 24355 Creekside
Road in Santa Clarita, California, as the
‘‘William L. Reynolds Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 3901 MacArthur
Blvd., in New Orleans, Louisiana, as the
‘‘Dr. Rudy Lombard Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 616 East Main
Street in St. Charles, Illinois, as the ‘‘Veterans of the Vietnam War Memorial Post
Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 2395 East Del
Mar Boulevard in Laredo, Texas, as the
‘‘Lance Corporal David Lee Espinoza, Lance
Corporal Juan Rodrigo Rodriguez & Sergeant Roberto Arizola Jr. Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 101 South 8th
Street in Lebanon, Pennsylvania, as the
‘‘Lieutenant William D. Lebo Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 120 West Church
Street in Mount Vernon, Georgia, as the
‘‘Second Lieutenant Patrick Palmer Calhoun Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 859 North State
Road 21 in Melrose, Florida, as the ‘‘Pamela Jane Rock Post Office Building’’.
To amend title 18, United States Code, to
strengthen reporting to the CyberTipline
related to online sexual exploitation of
children, to modernize liabilities for such
reports, to preserve the contents of such reports for 1 year, and for other purposes.
To extend authorizations for the airport improvement program, to extend the funding
and expenditure authority of the Airport
and Airway Trust Fund, and for other purposes.
To rename the Department of Veterans Affairs community-based outpatient clinic in
Hinesville, Georgia, as the ‘‘John Gibson,
Dan James, William Sapp, and Frankie
Smiley VA Clinic’’.
To prohibit the importation into the United
States of unirradiated low-enriched uranium that is produced in the Russian Federation, and for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

593

1042

H.R.

H.R.

474

S.

8289

3947

H.R.

H.R.

3944

3865

2754

2379

H.R.

H.R.

H.R.

H.R.

996

292

H.R.

H.R.

4389

H.R.

Bill No.

Feb.
14,
2023

Jan.
27,
2023

May
8,
2024

Feb.
16,
2023

June
9,
2023

June
9,
2023

June
6,
2023

Apr.
20,
2023

Mar.
29,
2023

Feb.
14,
2023

Jan.
11,
2023

June
27,
2023

Date
introduced

EC

TI
SST
Jud
HS
WM
VA

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

NR

House

VA

Jud

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

EPW

Senate

Committee

Dec.
1,
2023

..................

Apr.
5,
2024

House

..................

..................

June
6,
2023

Apr.
11,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Apr.
11,
2024

Apr.
11,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Senate

Date Reported

296

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

439

House
118–

............

............

............

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

............

Senate
118–

Report No.

Dec.
11,
2023

Nov.
13,
2023

May
8,
2024

Apr.
29,
2024

Jan.
29,
2024

Oct.
2,
2023

Jan.
29,
2024

Jan.
31,
2024

Oct.
2,
2023

Oct.
2,
2023

Oct.
2,
2023

Apr.
9,
2024

House

Apr.
30,
2024

May
2,
2024

May
9,
2024

Dec.
14,
2023

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
17,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

May
13,
2024

May
13,
2024

May
10,
2024

May
7,
2024

May
7,
2024

May
7,
2024

May
7,
2024

May
7,
2024

May
7,
2024

May
7,
2024

May
7,
2024

Apr.
24,
2024

Date approved

62

61

60

59

58

57

56

55

54

53

52

51

No.
118–

Public Law

D26
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

To amend title 49, United States Code, to reauthorize and improve the Federal Aviation
Administration and other civil aviation
programs, and for other purposes.
To amend the Omnibus Crime Control and
Safe Streets Act of 1968 to authorize law
enforcement agencies to use COPS grants
for recruitment activities, and for other
purposes.
To reauthorize the Missing Children’s Assistance Act, and for other purposes.
To direct the Secretary of Health and Human
Services to carry out a national project to
prevent, diagnose, treat, and cure Parkinson’s, to be known as the National Parkinsons Project, and for other purposes.
To authorize appropriations for the United
States Fire Administration and firefighter
assistance grant programs, to advance the
benefits of nuclear energy, and for other
purposes.
To transfer administrative jurisdiction of certain Federal lands from the Army Corps of
Engineers to the Bureau of Indian Affairs,
to take such lands into trust for the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska, and for other
purposes.
To amend title V of the Social Security Act
to support stillbirth prevention and research, and for other purposes.
To amend the Tibetan Policy Act of 2002 to
modify certain provisions of that Act.
To establish an inspections regime for the
Bureau of Prisons, and for other purposes.
To amend the DNA Analysis Backlog Elimination Act of 2000 to reauthorize the
Debbie Smith DNA Backlog Grant Program, and for other purposes.
To amend title 28, United States Code, to
provide an additional place for holding
court for the Pecos Division of the Western District of Texas, and for other purposes.
To require the purchase of domestically made
flags of the United States of America for
use by the Federal Government.
To designate the outpatient clinic of the Department of Veterans Affairs in Wyandotte
County, Kansas City, Kansas, as the ‘‘Captain Elwin Shopteese VA Clinic’’.
To rename the community-based outpatient
clinic of the Department of Veterans Affairs in Butte, Montana, as the ‘‘Charlie
Dowd VA Clinic’’.
To amend section 3663A of title 18, United
States Code, to clarify that restitution includes necessary and reasonable expenses
incurred by a person who has assumed the
victim’s rights.
To make a technical correction to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2024 by repealing section 5101 and
enacting an updated version of the Foreign
Extortion Prevention Act.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

3249

3285

3706

4548

S.

S.

S.

1973

S.
S.

227

1105

H.R.

S.

3019

138

S.
H.R.

4581

1240

H.R.

H.R.

870

2365

H.R.

S.

2051

546

3935

S.

S.

H.R.

D07JAPT1

June
13,
2024

Jan.
31,
2024

Nov.
9,
2023

Nov.
8,
2023

June
14,
2023

Feb.
2,
2023

Jan.
30,
2023
Apr.
28,
2023
Feb.
17,
2023

July
12,
2023

Feb.
28,
2023

Mar.
16,
2023

June
20,
2023
Mar.
29,
2023

Feb.
28,
2023

June
9,
2023

Jud

O&A

EC

NR

EC

TI

Jud

VA

VA

HS&GA

Jud

Jud

FR

IA

HEL&P

Jud

Jud

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

Oct.
25,
2023

..................

May
7,
2024

Jan.
30,
2024

..................

Dec.
12,
2023

..................

..................

July
11,
2023

..................

Sept.
5,
2023

..................

May
7,
2024

..................

June
3,
2024

..................

June
8,
2023

..................

............

............

............

............

............

............

250

............

............

490

369

............

313

............

............

138

............

............

............

............

94

............

............

............

0

............

180

............

............

............

0

............

July
22,
2024

July
23,
2024

July
22,
2024

July
22,
2024

July
22,
2024

July
23,
2024

June
12,
2024
May
21,
2024
Nov.
13,
2023

May
15,
2024

Feb.
5,
2024

May
8,
2024

Apr.
9,
2024
Dec.
14,
2023

May
14,
2024

July
20,
2023

June
13,
2024

Feb.
29,
2024

May
2,
2024

May
2,
2024

Nov.
2,
2023

Feb.
28,
2023

May
23,
2024
July
10,
2024
July
11,
2024

June
11,
2024

June
20,
2024

Apr.
20,
2023

July
26,
2023
May
23,
2024

July
26,
2023

May
9,
2024

July
30,
2024

July
30,
2024

July
30,
2024

July
30,
2024

July
30,
2024

July
30,
2024

July
12,
2024
July
25,
2024
July
30,
2024

July
12,
2024

July
12,
2024

July
9,
2024

June
17,
2024
July
2,
2024

May
24,
2024

May
16,
2024

78

77

76

75

74

73

72

71

70

69

68

67

66

65

64

63

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
D27

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

To require the Comptroller General of the
United States to carry out a study on the
trafficking into the United States of synthetic drugs, and related illicit finance, and
for other purposes.
To provide for the expansion of the StarrCamargo Bridge near Rio Grande City,
Texas, and for other purposes.
To amend the Federal Oil and Gas Royalty
Management Act of 1982 to improve the
management of royalties from oil and gas
leases, and for other purposes.
Making supplemental appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2024, and
for other purposes.
Making continuing appropriations and extensions for fiscal year 2025, and for other
purposes.
To reauthorize the rural emergency medical
service training and equipment assistance
program, and for other purposes.
To facilitate access to the electromagnetic
spectrum for commercial space launches
and commercial space reentries, and for
other purposes.
To amend the Public Health Service Act to
reauthorize certain poison control programs.
To award a Congressional Gold Medal to the
United States Army Dustoff crews of the
Vietnam War, collectively, in recognition
of their extraordinary heroism and life-saving actions in Vietnam.
To award a Congressional Gold Medal to Billie Jean King, an American icon, in recognition of a remarkable life devoted to
championing equal rights for all, in sports
and in society.
To amend the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 to provide
the Congressional Budget Office with necessary authorities to expedite the sharing of
data from executive branch agencies, and
for other purposes.
To extend and authorize annual appropriations for the United States Commission on
International Religious Freedom through
fiscal year 2026.
To direct the Director of the United States
Secret Service to apply the same standards
for determining the number of agents required to protect Presidents, Vice Presidents, and major Presidential and Vice
Presidential candidates, and for other purposes.
To extend the National Alzheimer’s Project.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

2861

7032

3764

9106

133

H.R.

S.

H.R.

S.

2825

S.

S.

4351

1648

S.

S.

265

9747

H.R.
S.

9468

H.R.

7377

1608

S.
H.R.

1076

H.R.

Bill No.

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

Jan.
30,
2023

July
23,
2024

Feb.
7,
2024

Jan.
18,
2024

Sept.
20,
2023

Sept.
14,
2023

May
15,
2024

May
17,
2023

Feb.
2,
2023

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
6,
2024

Feb.
15,
2024

May
16,
2023

Feb.
17,
2023

Date
introduced

Jud

Bud

App
Bud

App

NR

FS
Jud
EC

House

HEL&P

FR

BHUA

BHUA

HEL&P

CST

HEL&P

EPW

BHUA

Senate

Committee

..................

..................

Apr.
29,
2024

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

June
27,
2024

..................

May
22,
2023

House

July
27,
2023

..................

..................

June
18,
2024

Sept.
18,
2023

July
26,
2023

..................

..................

..................

Senate

Date Reported

............

............

............

474

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

562

............

75

House
118–

0

............

............

............

............

............

0

0

0

............

............

............

............

............

Senate
118–

Report No.

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
20,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Apr.
29,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

July
22,
2024

Sept.
9,
2024

May
22,
2023

House

July
30,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Sept.
11,
2024

Sept.
10,
2024

May
8,
2024

May
9,
2024

July
11,
2024

Oct.
31,
2023

Dec.
13,
2023

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
19,
2024

Sept.
11,
2024

July
27,
2023

July
23,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Sept.
30,
2024

Sept.
30,
2024

Sept.
26,
2024

Sept.
26,
2024

Sept.
26,
2024

Sept.
26,
2024

Sept.
26,
2024

Sept.
26,
2024

Sept.
20,
2024

Sept.
20,
2024

Sept.
13,
2024

Sept.
13,
2024

Date approved

92

91

90

89

88

87

86

85

84

83

82

81

80

79

No.
118–

Public Law

D28
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

To amend title 38, United States Code, to revise the rules for approval by the Secretary
of Veterans Affairs of commercial driver
education programs for purposes of veterans educational assistance, and for other
purposes.
To improve services for trafficking victims by
establishing, in Homeland Security Investigations, the Investigators Maintain Purposeful Awareness to Combat Trafficking
Trauma Program and the Victim Assistance Program.
To amend chapter 8 of title 5, United States
Code, to require Federal agencies to submit
to the Comptroller General of the United
States a report on rules that are revoked,
suspended, replaced, amended, or otherwise
made ineffective.
To require a pilot program on the participation of non-asset-based third-party logistics
providers in the Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism.
To make data and internal guidance on excess
personal property publicly available, and
for other purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 2075 West Stadium Boulevard in Ann Arbor, Michigan,
as the ‘‘Robert Hayden Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 155 South Main
Street in Mount Clemens, Michigan, as the
‘‘Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Jefferson
Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 90 McCamly
Street South in Battle Creek, Michigan, as
the ‘‘Sojourner Truth Post Office’’.
To authorize the Joint Task Forces of the Department of Homeland Security, and for
other purposes.
To provide the Congressional Budget Office
with necessary authorities to expedite the
sharing of data from executive branch
agencies, and for other purposes.
To amend the William M. (Mac) Thornberry
National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2021 to clarify the scope of a
major Federal action under the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 with respect to certain projects relating to the
production of semiconductors, and for
other purposes.

To require an annual budget estimate for the
initiatives of the National Institutes of
Health pursuant to reports and recommendations made under the National
Alzheimer’s Project Act.
To reauthorize the Lake Tahoe Restoration
Act, and for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

4698
1549

2228

S.

S.

3851

S.

S.

3640

3639

2685

794

679

670

S.

S.

S.

S.

S.

S.

656

612

S.
S.

134

S.

D07JAPT1

July
11,
2023

May
10,
2023

July
11,
2024

Feb.
29,
2024

Jan.
23,
2024

Jan.
23,
2024

July
27,
2023

Mar.
14,
2023

Mar.
7,
2023

Mar.
7,
2023

Mar.
6,
2023

Mar.
1,
2023

Jan.
30,
2023

NR
TI
Agr

EPW

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

VA

ENR

HEL&P

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

Sept.
23,
2024

..................

June
13,
2023

Sept.
9,
2024

Apr.
11,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Dec.
5,
2023

May
11,
2023

May
11,
2023

May
4,
2023

July
11,
2023

July
27,
2023

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

702

............

............

40

215

0

0

0

120

27

25

17

............

55

0

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Dec.
14,
2023

June
22,
2023

Sept.
19,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Dec.
18,
2023

July
18,
2023

Dec.
18,
2023

Nov.
8,
2023

Nov.
2,
2023

July
10,
2024

July
30,
2024

Oct.
2,
2024

Oct.
2,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

Oct.
1,
2024

105

104

103

102

101

100

99

98

97

96

95

94

93

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
D29

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

To amend the Help America Vote Act of
2002 to confirm the requirement that
States allow access to designated congressional election observers to observe the
election administration procedures in congressional elections.
To amend the Public Health Service Act to
reauthorize a national congenital heart disease research, surveillance, and awareness
program, and for other purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 3500 West 6th
Street, Suite 103 in Los Angeles, California, as the ‘‘Dosan Ahn Chang Ho Post
Office’’.
To require the Secretary of the Treasury to
mint coins in commemoration of the invaluable service that working dogs provide
to society.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 1663 East Date
Place in San Bernardino, California, as the
‘‘Dr. Margaret B. Hill Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 50 East Derry
Road in East Derry, New Hampshire, as
the ‘‘Chief Edward B. Garone Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 28081 Marguerite
Parkway in Mission Viejo, California, as
the ‘‘Major Megan McClung Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 25 Dorchester Avenue, Room 1, in Boston, Massachusetts, as
the ‘‘Caroline Chang Post Office’’.
To amend title 38, United States Code, to direct the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to
repay the estates of deceased beneficiaries
for certain benefits paid by the Secretary
and misused by fiduciaries of such beneficiaries.
To name the Department of Veterans Affairs
community-based outpatient clinic in
Guntersville, Alabama, as the ‘‘Colonel Ola
Lee Mize Department of Veterans Affairs
Clinic’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 1077 River Road,
Suite 1, in Washington Crossing, Pennsylvania, as the ‘‘Susan C. Barnhart Post Office’’.
To amend the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
to expand the John H. Chafee Coastal Barrier Resources System, and for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

5464

5476

5490

H.R.

H.R.

4190

H.R.

H.R.

3728

3608

H.R.

H.R.

1098

H.R.

1060

H.R.

599

H.R.

807

7189

H.R.

H.R.

6513

H.R.

Bill No.

Sept.
14,
2023

Sept.
14,
2023

Sept.
14,
2023

June
15,
2023

May
25,
2023

May
23,
2023

Feb.
17,
2023

Feb.
17,
2023

Feb.
2,
2023

Jan.
27,
2023

Feb.
1,
2024

Nov.
30,
2023

Date
introduced

NR

O&A

VA

VA

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

FS
Bud

O&A

EC

HA

House

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

BHUA

HS&GA

RAdm

Senate

Committee

Sept.
12,
2024

Sept.
9,
2024

May
22,
2024

Jan.
29,
2024

House

..................

Aug.
1,
2024

..................

..................

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

..................

Senate

Date Reported

667

............

............

655

............

............

............

............

............

............

517

361

House
118–

............

0

............

............

0

0

0

0

............

0

............

............

Senate
118–

Report No.

Sept.
24,
2024

June
3,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Jan.
31,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

Jan.
31,
2024

May
21,
2024

Jan.
31,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
9,
2024

House

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
13,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
21,
2024

Oct.
4,
2024

Date approved

117

116

115

114

113

112

111

110

109

108

107

106

No.
118–

Public Law

D30
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 12804 Chillicothe
Road in Chesterland, Ohio, as the ‘‘Sgt.
Wolfgang Kyle Weninger Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 220 Fremont
Street in Kiel, Wisconsin, as the ‘‘Trooper
Trevor J. Casper Post Office Building’’.
To extend reemployment services and eligibility assessments to all claimants for unemployment benefits, and for other purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 517 Seagaze Drive
in
Oceanside,
California,
as
the
‘‘Charlesetta Reece Allen Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 9925 Bustleton
Avenue in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, as
the ‘‘Sergeant Christopher David Fitzgerald
Post Office Building’’.
To provide for a review and report on the assistance and resources that the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency provides to individuals with
disabilities and the families of such individuals that are impacted by major disasters, and for other purposes.
To authorize major medical facility projects
for the Department of Veterans Affairs for
fiscal year 2024, and for other purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 603 West 3rd
Street in Necedah, Wisconsin, as the ‘‘Sergeant Kenneth E. Murphy Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 333 West Broadway in Anaheim, California, as the ‘‘Dr.
William I. ‘Bill’ Kott Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at S74w16860 Janesville Road, in Muskego, Wisconsin, as the
‘‘Colonel Hans Christian Heg Post Office’’.
To name the Department of Veterans Affairs
medical center in West Palm Beach, Florida, as the ‘‘Thomas H. Corey VA Medical
Center’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 103 Benedette
Street in Rayville, Louisiana, as the ‘‘Luke
Letlow Post Office Building’’.
To increase, effective as of December 1, 2024,
the rates of compensation for veterans with
service-connected disabilities and the rates
of dependency and indemnity compensation for the survivors of certain disabled
veterans, and for other purposes.
To amend provisions relating to the Office of
the Inspector General of the Government
Accountability Office, and for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00017

6073

6249

H.R.

H.R.

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

7333

7423

7777

1510

H.R.

H.R.

S.

7199

H.R.

H.R.

7192

6651

H.R.

H.R.

6324

5985

H.R.

H.R.

5861

5712

H.R.

H.R.

5640

H.R.

D07JAPT1

May
10,
2023

Mar.
21,
2024

Feb.
20,
2024

Feb.
13,
2024

Feb.
1,
2024

Feb.
1,
2024

Dec.
6,
2023

Nov.
9,
2023

Nov.
6,
2023

Oct.
26,
2023

Oct.
18,
2023

Oct.
2,
2023

Sept.
26,
2023

Sept.
21,
2023

VA

O&A

VA

O&A

O&A

O&A

VA

TI

O&A

O&A

WM

O&A

O&A

HS&GA

HS&GA

VA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

Fin

HS&GA

HS&GA

..................

July
18,
2024

Aug.
9,
2024

Feb.
20,
2024

Nov.
21,
2023

Aug.
22,
2023

..................

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

..................

July
23,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

............

591

............

............

............

............

............

627

392

............

............

277

............

............

88

............

0

............

0

0

0

............

195

0

0

............

0

0

Nov.
12,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

May
7,
2024

July
22,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Mar.
11,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

Nov.
16,
2023

Sept.
25,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
13,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
14,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
13,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

131

130

129

128

127

126

125

124

123

122

121

120

119

118

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
D31

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 320 South 2nd
Avenue in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, as
the ‘‘Staff Sergeant Robb Lura Rolfing Post
Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 112 Wyoming
Street in Shoshoni, Wyoming, as the
‘‘Dessie A. Bebout Post Office’’.
To amend title 38, United States Code, to
authorize the Secretary of Veterans Affairs
to furnish or replace a headstone, marker,
or medallion for the grave of an eligible
Medal of Honor recipient regardless of the
recipient’s dates of service in the Armed
Forces, and for other purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 410 Dakota Avenue South in Huron, South Dakota, as the
‘‘First Lieutenant Thomas Michael Martin
Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 1765 Camp Hill
Bypass in Camp Hill, Pennsylvania, as the
‘‘John Charles Traub Post Office’’.
To modify the prohibition on recognition by
United States courts of certain rights relating to certain marks, trade names, or commercial names.
To authorize the Secretary of the Interior,
through the Coastal Program of the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service, to work
with willing partners and provide support
to efforts to assess, protect, restore, and enhance important coastal landscapes that
provide fish and wildlife habitat on which
certain Federal trust species depend, and
for other purposes.
To designate the Air and Marine Operations
Marine Unit of the U.S. Customs and Border Protection located at 101 Km 18.5 in
Cabo Rojo, Puerto Rico, as the ‘‘Michel O.
Maceda Marine Unit’’.
To require transparency in notices of funding
opportunity, and for other purposes.
To designate the checkpoint of the United
States Border Patrol located on United
States Highway 90 West in Uvalde County, Texas, as the ‘‘James R. Dominguez
Border Patrol Checkpoint’’.
To amend title III of the Public Health Service Act to extend the program for promotion of public health knowledge and
awareness of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias, and for other purposes.
To require the Secretary of the Treasury to
mint coins in commemoration of the FIFA
World Cup 2026, and for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

5799

7218

7438

H.R.

H.R.

5302

H.R.

H.R.

2950

H.R.

5536

1505

H.R.

H.R.

3419

3267

S.

S.

3126

2274

S.

S.

2143

S.

Bill No.

D07JAPT1

Feb.
23,
2024

Feb.
5,
2024

Sept.
18,
2023
Sept.
28,
2023

Aug.
29,
2023

Apr.
27,
2023

Mar.
9,
2023

Dec.
6,
2023

Nov.
9,
2023

Oct.
25,
2023

July
12,
2023

June
22,
2023

Date
introduced

FS

EC

TI

O&A

HS
WM

NR

Jud

House

BHUA

HS&GA

HS&GA

Jud

HS&GA

HS&GA

VA

HS&GA

HS&GA

Senate

Committee

May
21,
2024

June
7,
2024

Sept.
12,
2024

Sept.
29,
2023

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

House

..................

Nov.
13,
2024

..................

..................

Feb.
6,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Senate

Date Reported

............

515

............

............

542

671

232

............

............

............

............

............

House
118–

............

............

0

............

............

............

............

0

0

............

0

0

Senate
118–

Report No.

Sept.
17,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Nov.
18,
2024
May
21,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Nov.
13,
2023

Nov.
12,
2024

Nov.
12,
2024

Nov.
18,
2024

Nov.
12,
2024

Nov.
12,
2024

House

Dec.
2,
2024

Nov.
21,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024
Nov.
21,
2024

Nov.
21,
2024

Nov.
21,
2024

Nov.
19,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

May
1,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Apr.
23,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

Dec.
11,
2024

Dec.
11,
2024

Dec.
11,
2024
Dec.
11,
2024

Dec.
11,
2024

Dec.
11,
2024

Dec.
1,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Nov.
25,
2024

Date approved

143

142

141

140

139

138

137

136

135

134

133

132

No.
118–

Public Law

D32
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

To establish a commission to study the potential transfer of the Weitzman National
Museum of American Jewish History to
the Smithsonian Institution, and for other
purposes.
To establish an earlier application processing
cycle for the FAFSA.
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
to provide for the deductibility of charitable contributions to certain organizations
for members of the Armed Forces.
To reauthorize the Firefighter Cancer Registry Act of 2018.
To provide tax relief with respect to certain
Federal disasters.
To award a Congressional Gold Medal to 60
diplomats, in recognition of their bravery
and heroism during the Holocaust.
To award posthumously the Congressional
Gold Medal to Shirley Chisholm.
To amend title 35, United States Code, to
provide a good faith exception to the imposition of fines for false assertions and certifications, and for other purposes.
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act to require the Administrator of
the Environmental Protection Agency to
give priority consideration to selecting
Pensacola and Perdido Bays as an estuary
of national significance, and for other purposes.
To establish an advisory group to encourage
and foster collaborative efforts among individuals and entities engaged in disaster recovery relating to debris removal, and for
other purposes.
To designate United States Route 20 in the
States of Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Nebraska, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana,
Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York, and Massachusetts as the ‘‘National Medal of Honor
Highway’’, and for other purposes.
To promote remediation of abandoned
hardrock mines, and for other purposes.
To amend title 49, United States Code, to
allow the Secretary of Transportation to
designate an authorized operator of the
commercial driver’s license information system, and for other purposes.
To require Facility Security Committees to
respond to security recommendations
issued by the Federal Protective Service relating to facility security, and for other
purposes.
Making further continuing appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30, 2025,
and for other purposes.
To authorize appropriations for fiscal year
2025 for military activities of the Department of Defense, for military construction,
and for defense activities of the Department of Energy, to prescribe military personnel strengths for such fiscal year, and
for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

2781
3475

S.
S.

D07JAPT1

10545
5009

H.R.
H.R.

3613

1478

S.

S.

310

S.

50

3960

S.

S.

4243

S.

5863

H.R.
91

3821

H.R.

S.

1432

8932

H.R.
H.R.

7764

H.R.

July
27,
2023

Dec.
20,
2024

Jan.
18,
2024

Sept.
13,
2023
Dec.
12,
2023

May
9,
2023

Feb.
9,
2023

Jan.
24,
2023

May
2,
2024
Mar.
14,
2024

June
5,
2023
Oct.
2,
2023
Jan.
26,
2023

July
5,
2024
Mar.
7,
2023

Mar.
20,
2024

NR

App
Bud

WM

EC

WM

E&W

HA

HS&GA

CST

EPW

EPW

HS&GA

EPW

Jud

BHUA

BHUA

Fin

HEL&P

RAdm

Jan.
30,
2024

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

Oct.
25,
2023
Jan.
16,
2024
..................

Sept.
20,
2024
Jan.
18,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

..................

..................

Mar.
14,
2024

Jan.
25,
2024
Aug.
1,
2024

May
11,
2023

..................

..................

366

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

348

247

351

695

683

............

............

160

0

0

............

24

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

Feb.
5,
2024

Dec.
20,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024
Dec.
9,
2024

Dec.
9,
2024

Dec.
9,
2024

Dec.
9,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024
Dec.
3,
2024

Mar.
6,
2024
May
21,
2024
Dec.
4,
2024

Nov.
15,
2024
Sept.
17,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Mar.
23,
2024

July
31,
2024
Sept.
25,
2024

Dec.
19,
2023

Dec.
18,
2023

Mar.
12,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024
June
20,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024
Dec.
4,
2024
Sept.
24,
2024

Nov.
21,
2024
Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024
Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
12,
2024
Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
12,
2024
Dec.
12,
2024
Dec.
12,
2024

Dec.
11,
2024
Dec.
12,
2024

Dec.
11,
2024

159

158

157

156

155

154

153

152

151

150

149

148

147

146

145

144

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
D33

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

To amend the Indian Child Protection and
Family Violence Prevention Act.
To award a Congressional Gold Medal to
Everett Alvarez, Jr., in recognition of his
service to the Nation.
To clarify jurisdiction with respect to certain
Bureau of Reclamation pumped storage development, and for other purposes.
To amend the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal
Development Act to extend the Chesapeake
and Ohio Canal National Historical Park
Commission.
To require the Secretary of the Interior to
convey to the State of Utah certain Federal
land under the administrative jurisdiction
of the Bureau of Land Management within
the boundaries of Camp Williams, Utah,
and for other purposes.
To amend the Homeland Security Act of
2002 to establish a process to review applications for certain grants to purchase
equipment or systems that do not meet or
exceed any applicable national voluntary
consensus standards, and for other purposes.
To extend the authority to collect ShastaTrinity Marina fees through fiscal year
2029.
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
to provide an alternative manner of furnishing certain health insurance coverage
statements to individuals.
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
to streamline and improve the employer reporting process relating to health insurance
coverage and to protect dependent privacy.
To amend the Central Utah Project Completion Act to authorize expenditures for the
conduct of certain water conservation measures in the Great Salt Lake basin, and for
other purposes.
To extend authorization of the Reclamation
States Emergency Drought Relief Act of
1991.
To direct the Under Secretary for Management of the Department of Homeland Security to assess contracts for covered services performed by contractor personnel
along the United States land border with
Mexico, and for other purposes.
To amend title 31, United States Code, to require agencies to include a list of outdated
or duplicative reporting requirements in
annual budget justifications, and for other
purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

1607

H.R.

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

4385
4467

5301

H.R.

H.R.

4094

H.R.

H.R.

3801

3797

H.R.

H.R.

3324

3254

2468

H.R.

H.R.

H.R.

1727

1097

H.R.

H.R.

663

H.R.

Bill No.

D07JAPT1

Aug.
29,
2023

July
6,
2023

June
27,
2023

June
14,
2023

June
5,
2023

June
5,
2023

May
15,
2023

May
11,
2023

Apr.
3,
2023

Mar.
22,
2023

Mar.
14,
2023

Jan.
31,
2023
Feb.
17,
2023

Date
introduced

O&A
Bud

HS

NR

NR

WM

WM

NR

HS

NR

NR

NR

FS

NR

House

HS&GA

HS&GA

ENR

Fin

Fin

ENR

HS&GA

ENR

BHUA

Senate

Committee

Oct.
2,
2023

Jan.
30,
2024

Sept.
12,
2024

June
13,
2023

June
13,
2023

Sept.
8,
2023

July
19,
2023

Sept.
12,
2024

Jan.
30,
2024

Nov.
3,
2023

Sept.
14,
2023

House

Dec.
2,
2024

..................

Nov.
13,
2024

..................

..................

..................

Senate

Date Reported

............

238

365

666

111

110

188

152

668

363

264

............

196

House
118–

............

257

............

............

............

............

............

243

............

............

............

............

............

Senate
118–

Report No.

Nov.
12,
2024

Mar.
5,
2024

Feb.
5,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

June
21,
2023

June
21,
2023

Sept.
13,
2023

July
27,
2023

Sept.
24,
2024

Feb.
6,
2024

Nov.
6,
2023

Sept.
18,
2023
May
21,
2024

House

Dec.
11,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
18,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024
Dec.
10,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024
Dec.
23,
2024

Date approved

172

171

170

169

168

167

166

165

164

163

162

161

160

No.
118–

Public Law

D34
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

To amend the Higher Education Act of 1965
to require institutions of higher education
to disclose hazing incidents, and for other
purposes.
To reauthorize certain United States Geological Survey water data enhancement programs.
To designate the visitor and education center
at Fort McHenry National Monument and
Historic Shrine as the Paul S. Sarbanes Visitor and Education Center.
To amend the Public Health Service Act to
authorize and support the creation and dissemination of cardiomyopathy education,
awareness, and risk assessment materials
and resources to identify more at-risk families, to authorize research and surveillance
activities relating to cardiomyopathy, and
for other purposes.
To expand the boundaries of the Atchafalaya
National Heritage Area to include
Lafourche Parish, Louisiana.
To amend the Public Health Service Act to
reauthorize the Emergency Medical Services
for Children program.
To amend title 28, United States Code, to
consolidate certain divisions in the Northern District of Alabama.
To amend the Public Health Service Act to
enhance and reauthorize activities and programs relating to autism spectrum disorder, and for other purposes.
To require the Secretary of the Interior and
the Secretary of Agriculture to convey certain Federal land to the State of Utah for
inclusion in certain State parks, and for
other purposes.
To amend title 40, United States Code, to require the submission of reports on certain
information technology services funds to
Congress before expenditures may be made,
and for other purposes.
To amend the Colorado River Basin Salinity
Control Act to modify certain requirements
applicable to salinity control units, and for
other purposes.
To require the Secretary of the Interior to
conduct a study to assess the suitability
and feasibility of designating certain land
as the Lahaina National Heritage Area, and
for other purposes.
To provide for the conveyance of certain Federal land at Swanson Reservoir and Hugh
Butler Reservoir in the State of Nebraska,
and for other purposes.
To require the Science and Technology Directorate in the Department of Homeland Security to develop greater capacity to detect,
identify, and disrupt illicit substances in
very low concentrations.
To require governmentwide source code sharing, and for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00021

7177

H.R.

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

8219

8413

8663

9566

H.R.

H.R.

H.R.

7872

H.R.

H.R.

7524

7332

H.R.

H.R.

7213

6960

H.R.

H.R.

6843

6829

H.R.

H.R.

6826

5770

H.R.
H.R.

5646

H.R.

D07JAPT1

Sept.
12,
2024

June
7,
2024

May
15,
2024

May
1,
2024

Apr.
5,
2024

Mar.
5,
2024

Feb.
13,
2024

Feb.
1,
2024

Jan.
31,
2024

Jan.
11,
2024

Dec.
15,
2023

Dec.
14,
2023

Dec.
14,
2023

Sept.
27,
2023

Sept.
21,
2023

O&A

HS

NR

NR

NR

O&A

NR

EC

Jud

EC

NR

EC

NR

NR

E&W

HS&GA

HS&GA

Jud

HEL&P

HEL&P

ENR

Aug.
23,
2024

Nov.
14,
2024

Nov.
26,
2024

Oct.
22,
2024

Nov.
14,
2024

July
30,
2024

May
7,
2024

Nov.
14,
2024

May
22,
2024

Nov.
14,
2024

June
27,
2024

..................

..................

..................

..................

Dec.
9,
2024

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

............

634

735

770

709

............

737

620

............

488

736

520

738

566

............

............

............

............

............

............

285

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

Dec.
4,
2024

Sept.
9,
2024

Dec.
5,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

May
6,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

Sept.
18,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

May
15,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

July
8,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
12,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Nov.
21,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
18,
2024

Dec.
11,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

187

186

185

184

183

182

181

180

179

178

177

176

175

174

173

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
D35

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

To implement merit-based reforms to the
civil service hiring system that replace degree-based hiring with skills- and competency-based hiring.
To amend the Controlled Substances Act to
fix a technical error in the definitions.
To improve performance and accountability
in the Federal Government, and for other
purposes.
To authorize the National Detector Dog
Training Center, and for other purposes.
To amend title 5, United States Code, to provide for the halt in pension payments for
Members of Congress sentenced for certain
offenses, and for other purposes.
To amend the Child Abuse Prevention and
Treatment Act to provide for grants in
support of training and education to teachers and other school employees, students,
and the community about how to prevent,
recognize, respond to, and report child sexual abuse among primary and secondary
school students.
To study and prevent child abuse in youth
residential programs, and for other purposes.
To require agencies with working dog programs to implement the recommendations
of the Government Accountability Office
relating to the health and welfare of working dogs, and for other purposes.
To amend title 38, United States Code, to
improve benefits administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and for other
purposes.
To reauthorize the Director of the United
States Holocaust Memorial Museum to
support Holocaust education programs, and
for other purposes.
To reauthorize the America’s Conservation
Enhancement Act, and for other purposes.
To take certain land in the State of California
into trust for the benefit of the Jamul Indian Village of California, and for other
purposes.
To designate the community-based outpatient
clinic of the Department of Veterans Affairs in Lynchburg, Virginia, as the ‘‘Private First Class Desmond T. Doss VA
Clinic’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 1106 Main Street
in Bastrop, Texas, as the ‘‘Sergeant Major
Billy D. Waugh Post Office’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

3791
3857

3938

3946

S.

S.

S.

3448

S.

S.

2513

2414

1351

S.

S.

S.

1147

759

S.

S.

709

S.

932

223

S.

S.

59

S.

Bill No.

D07JAPT1

Mar.
14,
2024

Mar.
14,
2024

Feb.
8,
2024
Feb.
29,
2024

Dec.
7,
2023

July
26,
2023

July
20,
2023

Apr.
27,
2023

Mar.
30,
2023

Mar.
9,
2023
Mar.
22,
2023

Feb.
1,
2023
Mar.
8,
2023

Jan.
24,
2023

Date
introduced

EC
Jud

House

HS&GA

VA

IA

EPW

ENR

VA

HS&GA

HEL&P

HEL&P

HS&GA

ANF

HS&GA

HS&GA

Senate

Committee

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

House

Aug.
1,
2024

Mar.
12,
2024
Nov.
18,
2024

Dec.
13,
2023

May
30,
2023

May
4,
2023

..................

Dec.
2,
2024

Senate

Date Reported

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

House
118–

0

............

247

0

............

............

137

............

............

37

............

18

............

250

Senate
118–

Report No.

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024
Dec.
18,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
18,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
18,
2024
Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024
Dec.
5,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

House

Nov.
19,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

May
8,
2024
Dec.
12,
2024

July
9,
2024

Dec.
12,
2024

Jan.
11,
2024

Dec.
11,
2024

Feb.
9,
2024

Nov.
21,
2024
July
13,
2023

Feb.
1,
2023
Feb.
8,
2024

Dec.
12,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024
Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024
Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024
Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Date approved

201

200

199

198

197

196

195

194

193

192

191

190

189

188

No.
118–

Public Law

D36
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

To require the Transportation Security Administration to streamline the enrollment
processes for individuals applying for a
Transportation Security Administration security threat assessment for certain programs, including the Transportation
Worker Identification Credential and Hazardous Materials Endorsement Threat Assessment programs of the Administration,
and for other purposes.
To provide for the permanent appointment of
certain temporary district judgeships.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 180 Steuart Street
in San Francisco, California, as the ‘‘Dianne
Feinstein Post Office’’.
To require Amtrak to report to Congress information on Amtrak compliance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
with respect to trains and stations.
To amend title 36, United States Code, to
designate the bald eagle as the national
bird.
To amend section 7504 of title 31, United
States Code, to improve the single audit
requirements.
To designate the medical center of the Department of Veterans Affairs in Tulsa,
Oklahoma, as the James Mountain Inhofe
VA Medical Center.
To ensure that the National Advisory Council
on Indian Education includes at least 1
member who is the president of a Tribal
College or University.
To amend title 38, United States Code, to
improve certain programs of the Department of Veterans Affairs for home and
community based services for veterans, and
for other purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 2300 Sylvan Avenue in Modesto, California, as the ‘‘Corporal Michael D. Anderson Jr. Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 207 East Fort
Dade Avenue in Brooksville, Florida, as the
‘‘Specialist Justin Dean Coleman Memorial
Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 220 North Hatcher Avenue in Purcellville, Virginia, as the
‘‘Secretary of State Madeleine Albright Post
Office Building’’.
To name the Department of Veterans Affairs
community-based outpatient clinic in
Plano, Texas, as the ‘‘U.S. Congressman
Sam Johnson Memorial VA Clinic’’.
To name the community-based outpatient
clinic of the Department of Veterans Affairs in Monroeville, Pennsylvania, as the
‘‘Henry Parham VA Clinic’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

3354

4136

4955

H.R.

H.R.

1823

H.R.

H.R.

1555

141

H.R.

S.

5355

5314

S.

S.

4716

4610

S.

S.

4107

4077

S.

S.

3998

3959

S.

S.

D07JAPT1

July
27,
2023

June
14,
2023

May
15,
2023

Mar.
28,
2023

Mar.
10,
2023

Jan.
30,
2023

Nov.
20,
2024

Nov.
13,
2024

July
11,
2024

June
20,
2024

Apr.
11,
2024

Mar.
20,
2024
Apr.
8,
2024

Mar.
14,
2024

VA

VA

O&A

O&A

O&A

VA

VA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

VA

HEL&P

HS&GA

Jud

CST

HS&GA

Jud

CST

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

..................

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

..................

Sept.
19,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

0

0

0

............

............

............

226

............

0

0

............

0

Dec.
16,
2024

July
22,
2024

May
7,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024
Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
18,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
12,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

Nov.
13,
2024

Nov.
14,
2024

July
29,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

Apr.
20,
2024
Nov.
19,
2024

Nov.
21,
2024

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024
Dec.
23,
2024

Dec.
23,
2024

215

214

213

212

211

210

209

208

207

206

205

204

203

202

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
D37

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 109 Live Oaks
Boulevard in Casselberry, Florida, as the
‘‘Colonel Joseph William Kittinger II Post
Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 14280 South Military Trail in Delray Beach, Florida, as the
‘‘Benjamin Berell Ferencz Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 379 North Oates
Street in Dothan, Alabama, as the
‘‘LaBruce ‘Bruce’ Tidwell Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 420 Highway 17
North in Surfside Beach, South Carolina, as
the ‘‘Nancy Yount Childs Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 1535 East Los
Ebanos Boulevard in Brownsville, Texas, as
the ‘‘1st Lieutenant Andres Zermeno Post
Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 9355 113th Street
in Seminole, Florida, as the ‘‘Army SSG
Ryan Christian Knauss Memorial Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 501 Mercer Street
Southwest in Wilson, North Carolina, as
the ‘‘Milton F. Fitch, Sr. Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 518 North Ridgewood Drive in Sebring, Florida, as the
‘‘U.S. Army Air Corps Major Thomas B.
McGuire Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 15 South Valdosta
Road in Lakeland, Georgia, as the ‘‘Nell
Patten Roquemore Post Office’’.
To direct the Secretary of Health and Human
Services to establish a website to promote
awareness of available resources for individuals with disabilities, and for other purposes.
To authorize the location of a monument on
the National Mall to commemorate and
honor the women’s suffrage movement and
the passage of the 19th Amendment to the
Constitution, and for other purposes.
To direct the Secretary of the Interior to convey to Mesa County, Colorado, certain Federal land in Colorado, and for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

6983

670

1318

2997

H.R.

H.R.

H.R.

6810

H.R.

H.R.

6750

6633

H.R.

H.R.

6244

6188

H.R.

H.R.

6162

6116

H.R.

H.R.

5867

H.R.

Bill No.

D07JAPT1

Apr.
28,
2023

Mar.
1,
2023

Jan.
31,
2023

Jan.
11,
2024

Dec.
14,
2023

Dec.
13,
2023

Dec.
6,
2023

Nov.
6,
2023

Nov.
2,
2023

Nov.
1,
2023

Oct.
30,
2023

Oct.
2,
2023

Date
introduced

NR

NR

EC

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

House

ENR

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

Senate

Committee

Jan.
30,
2024

Nov.
3,
2023

Dec.
16,
2024

House

..................

..................

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

Nov.
20,
2024

Nov.
20,
2024

Nov.
20,
2024

Nov.
20,
2024

Nov.
20,
2024

Senate

Date Reported

370

268

874

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

House
118–

............

............

............

0

0

0

0

............

0

0

............

0

Senate
118–

Report No.

Feb.
5,
2024

Nov.
6,
2023

Dec.
17,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

June
3,
2024

July
22,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Sept.
23,
2024

House

Dec.
20,
2024

Dec.
20,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Jan.
2,
2025

Date approved

227

226

225

224

223

222

221

220

219

218

217

216

No.
118–

Public Law

D38
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

To extend the Gabriella Miller Kids First Pediatric Research Program at the National
Institutes of Health, and for other purposes.
To require the Director of the Office of Management and Budget to approve or deny
spend plans within a certain amount of
time, and for other purposes.
To establish a policy regarding appraisal and
valuation services for real property for a
transaction over which the Secretary of the
Interior has jurisdiction, and for other purposes.
To amend chapter 3 of title 5, United States
Code, to improve Government service delivery, and build related capacity for the
Federal Government, and for other purposes.
To restore the ability of the people of American Samoa to approve amendments to the
territorial constitution based on majority
rule in a democratic act of self-determination, as authorized pursuant to an Act of
Congress delegating administration of Federal territorial law in the territory to the
President, and to the Secretary of the Interior under Executive Order 10264, dated
June 29, 1951, under which the Constitution of American Samoa was approved and
may be amended without requirement for
further congressional action, subject to the
authority of Congress under the Territorial
Clause in article IV, section 3, clause 2 of
the United States Constitution.
To amend the Energy Act of 2020 to require
the Secretary of the Interior to include the
Secretary of Health and Human Services in
consultations regarding designations of
critical minerals, elements, substances, and
materials.
To improve recreation opportunities on, and
facilitate greater access to, Federal public
land, and for other purposes.
To designate Holcombe Rucker Park, in Harlem, New York, as a National Commemorative Site, and for other purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 201 East Battles
Road in Santa Maria, California, as the
‘‘Larry Lavagnino Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 80 1st Street in
Kingsland, Arkansas, as the ‘‘Kingsland
‘Johnny Cash’ Post Office’’.
To provide PreCheck to certain severely injured or disabled veterans, and for other
purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 29 Franklin Street
in Petersburg, Virginia, as the ‘‘John Mercer Langston Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 135 West Spring
Street in Titusville, Pennsylvania, as the
‘‘Edwin L. Drake Post Office Building’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

6062

H.R.

Frm 00025

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

6492
6852
7158

7180

7365
7385

7417

H.R.
H.R.
H.R.

H.R.

H.R.
H.R.

H.R.

6395

5887

H.R.

H.R.

5443

5103

H.R.

H.R.

3391

H.R.

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

Feb.
20,
2024

Feb.
15,
2024

Feb.
15,
2024

Jan.
31,
2024

Jan.
31,
2024

Dec.
19,
2023

Nov.
29,
2023

Nov.
14,
2023

Oct.
25,
2023

Oct.
3,
2023

Sept.
13,
2023

Aug.
1,
2023

May
16,
2023

O&A

O&A

HS
VA

O&A

O&A

NR
Agr
VA
NR

NR

NR

O&A

NR

NR

EC

HS&GA

HS&GA

CST

HS&GA

HS&GA

ENR

ENR

ENR

HS&GA

ENR

CST

HEL&P

Dec.
10,
2024

Sept.
12,
2024

Apr.
5,
2024

Oct.
22,
2024

June
27,
2024

June
27,
2024

Nov.
14,
2024

Aug.
25,
2023

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

..................

Nov.
21,
2024

Dec.
9,
2024

Nov.
21,
2024

............

............

846

............

............

672

441

710

564

............

565

733

165

0

0

............

0

............

............

............

............

0

283

0

............

............

June
3,
2024

July
22,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

June
3,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Apr.
9,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

July
8,
2024

May
21,
2024

July
8,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

Mar.
5,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
20,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
20,
2024

Dec.
18,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
18,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
20,
2024

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

240

239

238

237

236

235

234

233

232

231

230

229

228

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
D39

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 203 East 6th
Street in Lexington, Nebraska, as the ‘William E. and Elise L. Barrett Post Office
Building.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 1285 Emancipation Highway in Fredericksburg, Virginia, as the ‘‘Gladys P. Todd Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 1087 Route 47
South in Rio Grande, New Jersey, as the
‘‘Carlton H. Hand Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at Block 1025, Lots
18 & 19, Northeast Corner of US Route 9
South and Main Street in the Township of
Middle, County of Cape May, New Jersey,
as the ‘‘George Henry White Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 306 Pickens Street
in Marion, Alabama, as the ‘‘Albert Turner, Sr. Post Office Building’’.
To amend the Klamath Basin Water Supply
Enhancement Act of 2000 to provide the
Secretary of the Interior with certain authorities with respect to projects affecting
the Klamath Basin watershed, and for
other purposes.
To establish the Jackie Robinson Ballpark
National Commemorative Site in the State
of Florida, and for other purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 9317 Bolsa Avenue in Westminster, California, as the
‘‘Little Saigon Vietnam War Veterans Memorial Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 401 Main Street
in Brawley, California, as the ‘‘Walter
Francis Ulloa Memorial Post Office Building’’.
To amend title 28, United States Code, to
authorize holding court for the Central Division of Utah in Moab and Monticello.
To rename the community-based outpatient
clinic of the Department of Veterans Affairs in Cadillac, Michigan, as the ‘‘Duane
E. Dewey VA Clinic’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 20 West Main
Street in Santaquin, Utah, as the ‘‘SGT
Bill Hooser Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 114 Center Street
East in Roseau, Minnesota, as the ‘‘Floyd
B. Olson Post Office’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

8667

8717

8841

H.R.

H.R.

H.R.

8641

H.R.

8666

8057

H.R.

H.R.

8012

7938

H.R.

H.R.

7893

7607

H.R.

H.R.

7606

7508

H.R.

H.R.

7507

H.R.

Bill No.

D07JAPT1

June
26,
2024

June
12,
2024

June
7,
2024

June
7,
2024

June
5,
2024

Apr.
17,
2024

Apr.
15,
2024

Apr.
11,
2024

Apr.
9,
2024

Mar.
8,
2024

Mar.
8,
2024

Feb.
29,
2024

Feb.
29,
2024

Date
introduced

O&A

O&A

VA

Jud

O&A

O&A

NR

NR

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

House

HS&GA

HS&GA

VA

Jud

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

Senate

Committee

Dec.
10,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

House

Nov.
20,
2024

..................

..................

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

Sept.
25,
2024

Senate

Date Reported

............

............

............

............

............

............

848

847

............

............

............

............

............

House
118–

............

............

............

............

............

0

............

............

0

0

0

............

............

Senate
118–

Report No.

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
3,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

June
3,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

House

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
20,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Date approved

253

252

251

250

249

248

247

246

245

244

243

242

241

No.
118–

Public Law

D40
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 609 Portsmouth
Avenue in Greenland, New Hampshire, as
the ‘‘Chief Michael Maloney Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 82-6110
Mamalahoa Highway in Captain Cook, Hawaii, as the ‘‘Army 1st Lt. John Kuulei
Kauhaihao Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 151 Highway 74
South in Peachtree City, Georgia, as the
‘‘SFC Shawn McCloskey Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 20 West White
Street in Millstadt, Illinois, as the ‘‘Corporal Matthew A. Wyatt Post Office’’.
To reauthorize child welfare programs under
part B of title IV of the Social Security Act
and strengthen the State and tribal child
support enforcement program under part D
of such title, and for other purposes.
To name the Department of Veterans Affairs
community-based outpatient clinic in Auburn, California, as the ‘‘Louis A. Conter
VA Clinic’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 3913 Leland Avenue Northwest in Comstock Park, Michigan, as the ‘‘Captain Miguel Justin Nava
Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 675 Wolf Ledges
Parkway in Akron, Ohio, as the ‘‘Judge
James R. Williams Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 108 North Main
Street in Bucoda, Washington, as the
‘‘Mayor Rob Gordon Post Office’’.
To amend the Legislative Reorganization Act
of 1970 to authorize the Legislative Counsel of the House of Representatives to designate more than one of the attorneys of
the Office of the Legislative Counsel as a
Deputy Legislative Counsel, and for other
purposes.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 340 South Loudon
Avenue in Baltimore, Maryland, as the
‘‘United States Representative Elijah E.
Cummings Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 125 South 1st Avenue in Hillsboro, Oregon, as the ‘‘Elizabeth Furse Post Office Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 2777 Brentwood
Road in Raleigh, North Carolina, as the
‘‘Millie Dunn Veasey Post Office’’.
To amend title 44, United States Code, to
modernize the Federal Register, and for
other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 0668

Sfmt 0668

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

9549

9580

9592

H.R.

H.R.

H.R.

9487

H.R.

9544

9421

H.R.

H.R.

9322

9285

H.R.

H.R.

9124

9076

H.R.

H.R.

8976

H.R.

8919

8909

H.R.

H.R.

8868

H.R.

D07JAPT1

Sept.
16,
2024

Sept.
12,
2024

Sept.
12,
2024

Sept.
11,
2024

Sept.
6,
2024

Aug.
27,
2024

Aug.
6,
2024

Aug.
2,
2024

July
24,
2024

July
22,
2024

July
10,
2024

July
2,
2024

June
28,
2024

June
27,
2024

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

HA

O&A

O&A

O&A

VA

WM

O&A

O&A

O&A

O&A

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

VA

Fin

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

Sept.
16,
2024

Sept.
17,
2024

Dec.
17,
2024

..................

............

............

............

............

678

............

............

............

............

679

............

............

............

............

308

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

............

Nov.
12,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
16,
2024

Sept.
18,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

267

266

265

264

263

262

261

260

259

258

257

256

255

254

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST
D41

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Title

To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 119 Main Street
in Plains, Georgia, as the ‘‘Jimmy and
Rosalynn Carter Post Office’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 119 North Anderson Street in Elwood, Indiana, as the ‘‘Officer Noah Jacob Shahnavaz Post Office
Building’’.
To designate the facility of the United States
Postal Service located at 802 North
Tancahua Street in Corpus Christi, Texas,
as the ‘‘Captain Robert E. ‘Bob’ Batterson
Post Office’’.
To amend title 38, United States Code, to
extend the entitlement to memorial
headstones and markers for commemoration of veterans and certain individuals and
to extend authority to bury remains of certain spouses and children in national cemeteries, and for other purposes.
To provide for improvements to the rivers
and harbors of the United States, to provide for the conservation and development
of water and related resources, and for
other purposes.
To amend title II of the Social Security Act
to repeal the Government pension offset
and windfall elimination provisions.
To direct the Secretary of the Interior to
transfer administrative jurisdiction over the
Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium
Campus to the District of Columbia so
that the District may use the Campus for
purposes including residential and commercial development, and for other purposes.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 0668

82
4984

H.R.

4367

2181

H.R.

S.

S.

10065

9775

H.R.

H.R.

9600

H.R.

Bill No.

Sfmt 0668

July
27,
2023

Jan.
9,
2023

May
20,
2024

June
22,
2023

Oct.
29,
2024

Sept.
24,
2024

Sept.
16,
2024

Date
introduced

O&A
NR
TI

WM

O&A

O&A

O&A

House

ENR

EPW

VA

HS&GA

HS&GA

HS&GA

Senate

Committee

Feb.
23,
2024
Feb.
23,
2024

..................

..................

House

Nov.
21,
2024

..................

May
22,
2024

Senate

Date Reported

400

............

............

............

............

............

............

House
118–

0

............

227

............

............

............

............

Senate
118–

Report No.

Feb.
28,
2024

Nov.
12,
2024

Dec.
10,
2024

Nov.
18,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
4,
2024

Dec.
5,
2024

House

Dec.
21,
2024

Dec.
21,
2024

Aug.
1,
2024

May
1,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Dec.
19,
2024

Senate

Date of passage

Jan.
6,
2025

Jan.
5,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Jan.
4,
2025

Date approved

274

273

272

271

270

269

268

No.
118–

Public Law

D42
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

AG .........Aging
Agr ........Agriculture
ANF .......Agriculture, Nutrition,
and Forestry
App ........Appropriations
AS .........Armed Services
BHUA ....Banking, Housing, and
Urban Affairs
Bud ........Budget

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Eth ........Ethics
Fin ........Finance
FS .........Financial Services
FA .........Foreign Affairs
FR .........Foreign Relations
HEL&P ..Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions
HS .........Homeland Security
HS&GA ..Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs
HA .........House Administration
IA ..........Indian Affairs
Int .........Intelligence
Jud ........Judiciary
NR .........Natural Resources
O&A .......Oversight and
Accountability
R ...........Rules
RAdm ....Rules and
Administration

TABLE OF COMMITTEE ABBREVIATIONS
CST .......Commerce, Science and
Transportation
E&W ......Education and the
Workforce
EC .........Energy and Commerce
ENR .......Energy and Natural
Resources
EPW ......Environment and
Public Works

SST .......Science, Space, and
Technology
SB .........Small Business
SBE .......Small Business and
Entrepreneurship
TI ..........Transportation and
Infrastructure
VA .........Veterans’ Affairs
WM ........Ways and Means

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 0660

Sfmt 0660

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

D43

D44

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 7, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

10 a.m., Thursday, January 8

10 a.m., Thursday, January 8

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Thursday: Senate will be in a period of
morning business. Senator Kaine, or his designee, will be
recognized to make a motion to discharge S.J. Res. 98,
Hostilities Within or Against Venezuela. If made, Senate
will vote on the motion to discharge at 11 a.m.
Following disposition of the motion to discharge S.J.
Res. 98, Senate will resume consideration of the nomination of Alexander C. Van Hook, of Louisiana, to be
United States District Judge for the Western District of
Louisiana, and vote on confirmation thereon at 1:45 p.m.

Program for Thursday: Complete consideration of H.R.
4593—Saving Homeowners from Overregulation With
Exceptional Rinsing Act.

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE

Calvert, Ken, Calif., E8
Carter, Earl L. ‘‘Buddy’’, Ga., E7, E10
Cohen, Steve, Tenn., E10
Crawford, Eric A. ‘‘Rick’’, Ark., E10
Edwards, Chuck, N.C., E7
Hernández, Pablo José, Puerto Rico, E7, E10

Aderholt, Robert B., Ala., E9
Baird, James R., Ind., E9
Bergman, Jack, Mich., E9
Bilirakis, Gus M., Fla., E8

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Joyce, John, Pa., E7, E8, E9, E11
Kean, Thomas H., Jr., N.J., E11
Larsen, Rick, Wash., E9
Murphy, Gregory F., N.C., E9
Webster, Daniel, Fla., E8

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:56 Jan 08, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D07JA6.REC

D07JAPT1

