UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, JANUARY 15, 2026

No. 11

House of Representatives
The House met at 9 a.m. and was
called to order by the Speaker.

Mr. CASTEN led the Pledge of Allegiance as follows:

f

I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

PRAYER
The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret
Grun Kibben, offered the following
prayer:
O Lord, our God, we pray for strength
and courage.
Grant us the inner strength that
comes with the serenity to accept the
things we cannot change: things about
our situation, about other people’s personalities, and about our own flawed
human nature.
Yet give us the moral courage to
change the things we can: our own attitudes, our responses to people whose
opinions and perspectives differ from
our own, and our willingness to trust in
You.
Then grant us the wisdom not only to
know the difference between what is
within our control and what is not, but
also, in our discernment, not to be
afraid; for You, Lord God, are with us.
You never leave nor forsake us.
In this promise may we place our
hope and live one day at a time, trusting that in Your perfect timing, You
will make things right.
May we surrender our all to Your
will.
In Your merciful name, we pray.
Amen.
f

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER. The Chair has examined the Journal of the last day’s proceedings and announces to the House
the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER. Will the gentleman
from Illinois (Mr. CASTEN) come forward and lead the House in the Pledge
of Allegiance.

f

PROTECTING PRUDENT INVESTMENT OF RETIREMENT SAVINGS
ACT
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to House Resolution 988, I call up
the bill (H.R. 2988) to amend the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974 to specify requirements concerning the consideration of pecuniary
and non-pecuniary factors, and for
other purposes, and ask for its immediate consideration.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
SMITH of Nebraska). Pursuant to House
Resolution 988, the amendment in the
nature of a substitute recommended by
the Committee on Education and
Workforce, printed in the bill, is adopted and the bill, as amended, is considered read.
The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:
H.R. 2988
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
(a) SHORT TITLE.—This Act may be cited as

the ‘‘Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act’’.
(b) TABLE OF CONTENTS.—The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
DIVISION A—INCREASE RETIREMENT
EARNINGS
Sec. 1001. Short title.
Sec. 1002. Limitation on consideration of nonpecuniary factors by fiduciaries.
DIVISION B—NO DISCRIMINATION IN MY
BENEFITS
Sec. 2001. Short title.
Sec. 2002. Service provider selection.

DIVISION C—RETIREMENT PROXY
PROTECTION
Sec. 3001. Short title.
Sec. 3002. Exercise of shareholder rights.
DIVISION D—PROVIDING COMPLETE INFORMATION TO RETIREMENT INVESTORS
Sec. 4001. Short title.
Sec. 4002. Brokerage window disclosures.
DIVISION A—INCREASE RETIREMENT
EARNINGS
SEC. 1001. SHORT TITLE.

This division may be cited as the ‘‘Increase
Retirement Earnings Act’’.
SEC. 1002. LIMITATION ON CONSIDERATION OF
NON-PECUNIARY FACTORS BY FIDUCIARIES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 404(a) of the Em-

ployee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
(29 U.S.C. 1104(a)) is amended by adding at the
end the following:
‘‘(3) INTEREST BASED ON PECUNIARY FACTORS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of paragraph
(1), a fiduciary shall be considered to act solely
in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the plan with respect to an investment or investment course of action only if the
fiduciary’s action with respect to such investment or investment course of action is based
solely on pecuniary factors (except as provided
in subparagraph (B)). The fiduciary may not
subordinate the interests of the participants and
beneficiaries in their retirement income or financial benefits under the plan to other objectives
and may not sacrifice investment return or take
on additional investment risk to promote nonpecuniary benefits or goals. The weight given to
any pecuniary factor by a fiduciary shall reflect
a prudent assessment of the impact of such factor on risk and return.
‘‘(B) USE OF NON-PECUNIARY FACTORS FOR INVESTMENT
ALTERNATIVES.—Notwithstanding
paragraph (A), if a fiduciary is unable to distinguish between or among investment alternatives
or investment courses of action on the basis of
pecuniary factors alone, the fiduciary may use
non-pecuniary factors as the deciding factor if
the fiduciary documents—
‘‘(i) why pecuniary factors were not sufficient
to select a plan investment or investment course
of action;
‘‘(ii) how the selected investment compares to
the alternative investments with regard to the
composition of the portfolio with regard to diversification, the liquidity and current return of

b This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
H897

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:49 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 6333

E:\CR\FM\A15JA7.000

H15JAPT1

H898

the portfolio relative to the anticipated cash
flow requirements of the plan, and the projected
return of the portfolio relative to the funding
objectives of the plan; and
‘‘(iii) how the selected non-pecuniary factor
or factors are consistent with the interests of the
participants and beneficiaries in their retirement income or financial benefits under the
plan.
‘‘(C) INVESTMENT ALTERNATIVES FOR PARTICIPANT-DIRECTED INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNT PLANS.—In
selecting or retaining investment options for a
pension plan described in subsection (c)(1)(A), a
fiduciary is not prohibited from considering, selecting, or retaining an investment option on the
basis that such investment option promotes,
seeks, or supports one or more non-pecuniary
benefits or goals, if—
‘‘(i) the fiduciary satisfies the requirements of
paragraph (1) and subparagraphs (A) and (B)
of this paragraph in selecting or retaining any
such investment option; and
‘‘(ii) such investment option is not added or
retained as, or included as a component of, a
default investment under subsection (c)(5) (or
any other default investment alternative) if its
investment objectives or goals or its principal investment strategies include, consider, or indicate
the use of one or more non-pecuniary factors.
‘‘(D) DEFINITIONS.—For the purposes of this
paragraph:
‘‘(i) The term ‘pecuniary factor’ means a factor that a fiduciary prudently determines is expected to have a material effect on the risk or
return of an investment based on appropriate
investment horizons consistent with the plan’s
investment objectives and the funding policy established pursuant to section 402(b)(1).
‘‘(ii) The term ‘investment course of action’
means any series or program of investments or
actions related to a fiduciary’s performance of
the fiduciary’s investment duties, and includes
the selection of an investment fund as a plan investment, or in the case of an individual account plan, a designated investment alternative
under the plan.’’.
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments made
by this section shall apply to actions taken by
a fiduciary on or after the date that is 12
months after the date of enactment of this Act.
DIVISION B—NO DISCRIMINATION IN MY
BENEFITS
SEC. 2001. SHORT TITLE.

This division may be cited as the ‘‘No Discrimination in My Benefits Act’’.
SEC. 2002. SERVICE PROVIDER SELECTION.

Section 404(a)(1) of the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C.
1104(a)(1)) is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (C), by striking ‘‘and’’;
(2) in subparagraph (D), by striking the period at the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(3) by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
‘‘(E) by selecting, monitoring, and retaining
any fiduciary, counsel, employee, or service provider of the plan—
‘‘(i) in accordance with subparagraphs (A)
and (B); and
‘‘(ii) without regard to race, color, religion,
sex, or national origin.’’.
DIVISION C—RETIREMENT PROXY
PROTECTION
SEC. 3001. SHORT TITLE.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

This division may be cited as the ‘‘Retirement
Proxy Protection Act’’.
SEC. 3002. EXERCISE OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 404 of the Employee

Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29
U.S.C. 1104) is amended by adding at the end
the following new subsection:
‘‘(f) EXERCISE OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS.—
‘‘(1) AUTHORITY TO EXERCISE SHAREHOLDER
RIGHTS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—The fiduciary duty to
manage plan assets that are shares of stock in-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:49 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

cludes the management of shareholder rights
appurtenant to those shares, including the right
to vote proxies. When deciding whether to exercise a shareholder right and in exercising such
right, including the voting of proxies, a fiduciary must act prudently and solely in the interests of participants and beneficiaries and for the
exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and beneficiaries and defraying the
reasonable expenses of administering the plan.
The fiduciary duty to manage shareholder
rights appurtenant to shares of stock does not
require the voting of every proxy or the exercise
of every shareholder right.
‘‘(B) EXCEPTION.—This subsection shall not
apply to voting, tender, and similar rights with
respect to qualifying employer securities or securities held in an investment arrangement that is
not a designated investment alternative in the
event such rights are passed through pursuant
to the terms of an individual account plan to
participants and beneficiaries with accounts
holding such securities.
‘‘(2) REQUIREMENTS FOR EXERCISE OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS.—A fiduciary, when deciding
whether to exercise a shareholder right and
when exercising a shareholder right—
‘‘(A) shall—
‘‘(i) act solely in accordance with the economic interest of the plan and its participants
and beneficiaries;
‘‘(ii) consider any costs involved;
‘‘(iii) evaluate material facts that form the
basis for any particular proxy vote or exercise of
shareholder rights; and
‘‘(iv) maintain a record of any proxy vote,
proxy voting activity, or other exercise of a
shareholder right, including any attempt to influence management; and
‘‘(B) shall not subordinate the interests of
participants and beneficiaries in their retirement income or financial benefits under the
plan to any non-pecuniary objective, or promote
non-pecuniary benefits or goals unrelated to
those financial interests of the plan’s participants and beneficiaries.
‘‘(3) MONITORING.—A fiduciary shall exercise
prudence and diligence in the selection and
monitoring of a person, if any, selected to advise
or otherwise assist with the exercise of shareholder rights, including by providing research
and analysis, recommendations on exercise of
proxy voting or other shareholder rights, administrative services with respect to voting proxies,
and recordkeeping and reporting services.
‘‘(4) INVESTMENT MANAGERS AND PROXY ADVISORY FIRMS.—Where the authority to vote proxies or exercise other shareholder rights has been
delegated to an investment manager pursuant to
section 403(a), or a proxy voting advisory firm or
other person who performs advisory services as
to the voting of proxies or the exercise of other
shareholder rights, a responsible plan fiduciary
shall prudently monitor the proxy voting activities of such investment manager or advisory firm
and determine whether such activities are in
compliance with paragraphs (1) and (2).
‘‘(5) VOTING POLICIES.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In deciding whether to
vote a proxy pursuant to this subsection, the
plan fiduciary may adopt a proxy voting policy,
including a safe harbor proxy voting policy described in subparagraph (B), providing that the
authority to vote a proxy shall be exercised pursuant to specific parameters designed to serve
the economic interest of the plan.
‘‘(B) SAFE HARBOR VOTING POLICY.—With respect to a decision not to vote a proxy, a fiduciary shall satisfy the fiduciary responsibilities
under this subsection if such fiduciary adopts
and follows a safe harbor proxy voting policy
that—
‘‘(i) limits voting resources to particular types
of proposals that the fiduciary has prudently
determined are substantially related to the business activities of the issuer or are expected to
have a material effect on the value of the plan
investment; or

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 6333

‘‘(ii) establishes that the fiduciary will refrain
from voting on proposals or particular types of
proposals when the assets of a plan invested in
the issuer relative to the total assets of such
plan are below 5 percent (or, in the event such
assets are under management, when the assets
under management invested in the issuer are
below 5 percent of the total assets under management).
‘‘(C) EXCEPTION.—No proxy voting policy
adopted pursuant to this paragraph shall preclude a fiduciary from submitting a proxy vote
when the fiduciary determines that the matter
being voted on is expected to have a material
economic effect on the investment performance
of a plan’s portfolio (or the investment performance of assets under management in the case of
an investment manager); provided, however,
that in all cases compliance with a safe harbor
voting policy shall be presumed to satisfy fiduciary responsibilities with respect to decisions
not to vote.
‘‘(6) REVIEW.—A fiduciary shall periodically
review any policy adopted under this subsection.’’.
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments made
by subsection (a) shall apply to an exercise of
shareholder rights occurring on or after January 1, 2026.
DIVISION D—PROVIDING COMPLETE INFORMATION TO RETIREMENT INVESTORS
SEC. 4001. SHORT TITLE.

This division may be cited as the ‘‘Providing
Complete Information to Retirement Investors
Act’’.
SEC. 4002. BROKERAGE WINDOW DISCLOSURES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 404(c) of the Em-

ployee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
(29 U.S.C. 1104(c)) is amended by adding at the
end the following new paragraph:
‘‘(7) NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR BROKERAGE
WINDOWS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—In the case of a pension
plan which provides for individual accounts
and which provides a participant or beneficiary
the opportunity to choose from designated investment alternatives, a participant or beneficiary shall not be treated as exercising control
over assets in the account of the participant or
beneficiary unless, with respect to any investment arrangement that is not a designated investment alternative, each time before such a
participant or beneficiary directs an investment
into, out of, or within such investment arrangement, such participant is notified of, and acknowledges, each element of the notice described
under paragraph (B).
‘‘(B) NOTICE.—The notice described under this
paragraph is a four part information that is
substantially similar to the following information:
‘‘1. Your retirement plan offers designated investment alternatives prudently selected and
monitored by fiduciaries for the purpose of enabling you to construct an appropriate retirement
savings portfolio. In selecting and monitoring
designated investment alternatives, your plan’s
fiduciary considers the risk of loss and the opportunity for gain (or other return) compared
with reasonably available investment alternatives.
2. The investments available through this investment arrangement are not designated investment alternatives, and have not been prudently
selected and are not monitored by a plan fiduciary.
3. Depending on the investments you select
through this investment arrangement, you may
experience diminished returns, higher fees, and
higher risk than if you select from the plan’s
designated investment alternatives.
4. The following is a hypothetical illustration
of the impact of return at 4 percent, 6 percent,
and 8 percent on your account balance projected to age 67.
‘‘(C) ILLUSTRATION.—The notice described
under paragraph (B) shall also include a graph

E:\CR\FM\A15JA7.007

H15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

displaying the projected retirement balances of
such participant or beneficiary at age 67 if the
account of such individual were to achieve an
annual return equal to each of the following:
‘‘(i) 4 percent.
‘‘(ii) 6 percent.
‘‘(iii) 8 percent.’’.
(b) DESIGNATED INVESTMENT ALTERNATIVE DEFINED.—Section 3 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1002) is
amended by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
‘‘(46)
DESIGNATED
INVESTMENT
ALTERNATIVE.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘designated investment alternative’ means any investment alternative designated by a responsible fiduciary
of an individual account plan described in subsection 404(c) into which participants and beneficiaries may direct the investment of assets held
in, or contributed to, their individual accounts.
‘‘(B) EXCEPTION.—The term ‘designated investment alternative’ does not include brokerage
windows, self-directed brokerage accounts, or
similar plan arrangements that enable participants and beneficiaries to select investments beyond those designated by a responsible plan fiduciary.’’.
(c) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendment made
by subsection (a) shall take effect on January 1,
2027.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill,
as amended, shall be debatable for 1
hour equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Education and
Workforce or their respective designees.
After 1 hour of debate, it shall be in
order to consider the further amendment printed in part A of House Report
119–440, if offered by the Member designated in the report, which shall be
considered read, shall be separately debatable for the time specified in the report equally divided and controlled by
the proponent and an opponent, and
shall not be subject to a demand for a
division of the question.
The gentleman from Michigan (Mr.
WALBERG) and the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. SCOTT) each will control 30
minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Michigan (Mr. WALBERG).

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days in which to
revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on H.R. 2988.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Michigan?
There was no objection.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak in
support of H.R. 2988, the Protecting
Prudent Investment of Retirement
Savings Act, introduced by Representative RICK ALLEN, chairman of the Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions.
At its core, this legislation is about
one simple principle: Retirement savings should be managed to protect
workers’ futures and not to advance
political agendas.
Over the past several years, the
Biden administration pushed a rule
that encouraged retirement plan fidu-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:49 Jan 16, 2026

H899

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ciaries to consider environmental, social, and governance—ESG—factors,
when making investment decisions.
That might sound harmless, but in
practice, it shifts the focus away from
what retirement investing is supposed
to be about: maximizing returns and
minimizing risk for workers and retirees.
Americans set aside money in their
401(k)’s and pension plans to retire
with dignity. They do it so that they
can pay their bills, cover medical
costs, and support their families. They
do not invest their hard-earned savings
so that Federal bureaucrats can push
ideological priorities.
That is exactly the concern here.
ESG investing has become a tool for
advancing a broader political agenda.
Instead of asking: Is this the best investment for the worker, the ESG
framework often asks: Does this investment align with certain social or
environmental goals?
Those goals are not what ERISA was
created to promote. ERISA, the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act, was established to ensure that fiduciaries act in the best interests of
plan participants. It requires loyalty,
prudence, and a clear focus on financial
outcomes that workers rely on.
Mr. Speaker, the problem with the
Biden-Harris rule is that it created permission and, in many cases, pressure
for fiduciaries to prioritize ESG factors
over the economic interests of participants. When that happens, retirement
security is placed at risk.
ESG funds are often more costly and
less transparent. In many cases, they
underperform compared to traditional
options. That means that workers may
be paying more and getting less—less
growth, less stability, and less certainty about their future.
This is not a theoretical issue. When
a fiduciary chooses investments based
on nonfinancial criteria, the person
paying the price is not the bureaucrat
in Washington or the corporate executive on a conference call. The person
paying the price is the worker who depends on that retirement account to
survive. That is why H.R. 2988 is needed.
Mr. Speaker, this bill restores the
proper purpose of retirement investing:
financial security. It makes clear that
retirement plan decisions must be
made based solely on economic factors—things like risk, return, liquidity, and diversification. It also addresses how fiduciaries use shareholder
rights, like proxy voting.
Under current practices, some fiduciaries use the shares held in retirement plans to push political policies
through proxy votes, whether or not
those policies benefit the workers
whose money is at stake.
H.R. 2988 stops that. It makes clear
that exercising shareholder rights, including proxy votes, must be done in
the economic interests of plan participants, not to advance radical political
initiatives, not to appease advocacy

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

groups, and not to satisfy trends in the
corporate boardrooms.
In addition, the bill strengthens fairness and nondiscrimination in the selection of service providers. It states
clearly that race, color, religion, sex,
or national origin may not be considered when selecting fiduciaries, counsel, employees, or service providers for
ERISA plans. Retirement plan service
providers should be chosen on performance and price, not on ideology or racebased preference.
Finally, Mr. Speaker, H.R. 2988 increases transparency for workers. It includes a notice requirement for defined
contribution plans that explains the
difference between selecting investments chosen by ERISA fiduciaries and
selecting investments through a brokerage window.
b 0910
Why does that matter? It matters because many workers do not realize that
when they move money into a brokerage window, they may be stepping outside the protections provided by plan
fiduciaries. This bill ensures workers
are informed and can make decisions
with clarity. In short, H.R. 2988 is a
course correction. It protects retirees
from financial experimentation. It protects workers from political interference, and it reinforces the idea that
retirement plans exist for one reason:
to help Americans retire with stability
and security.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
H.R. 2988, the Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act.
This bill is premised on the Republicans’ mistaken belief that they know
best when it comes to investing workers’ retirement savings.
Under the present law, the retirement plan fiduciary is required to
make prudent investment decisions in
the best interests of plan participants
and beneficiaries. The bill codifies two
rules from the first Trump administration that impose first-of-their-kind restrictions on plan fiduciaries’ abilities
to consider what are called environmental, social, and governance, or
ESG, factors when making investment
decisions and exercise shareholder
rights.
The appropriate course of action is to
permit fiduciaries to consider ESG factors so long as they don’t diminish investment returns. As we know, such
factors, whether it be sea level rise or
poor corporate governance, are relevant to a company’s performance.
Considering whether a real estate investment will literally be underwater
because of sea level rise is not ideology. It is sensible for plan fiduciaries
to be permitted to consider such factors and to be able to adopt them if
they don’t reduce investment returns.
That is precisely what the rule from
the Biden administration permitted.

E:\CR\FM\A15JA7.007

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H900

Predictably, the Trump administration is walking away from that rule,
and now the House is continuing to go
in the wrong direction. For example,
H.R. 2988 will impose unnecessary barriers to considering things like sea
level rise. The supporters are making
up some risk, suggesting that some of
these funds may be worse than others.
I think the studies have shown that
they are as good or better, in fact, than
others. Meanwhile, the Trump administration appears to be poised to green
light what are clearly consensus-held
risky
investments
such
as
cryptocurrency and put those in retirement plans. That makes no sense at
all.
Finally, H.R. 2988 would undermine
the worthwhile efforts to increase diversity among asset managers. There
are about $82 trillion in financial assets
in retirement funds. Only 1.4 percent of
those assets are managed by women or
minority firms. Women and minorities,
represented by two-thirds of the population, they are managing 1.4 percent
of the assets.
Now, apparently that creates a problem, and the problem is: How did they
get the 1.4 percent? How did the good
old boys lose 1.4 percent? So they are
going to change the rules to limit access to women- and minority-owned
firms. This bill would needlessly undermine what little progress has been
made and actually raise questions
about what problem we are trying to
solve.
We should be trusting our professionals bound by law, not House Republicans to make sound decisions about
Americans’ retirement savings.
For those reasons, I oppose the bill,
and I encourage my colleagues to do
the same.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
H.R. 2988 codifies the principles in
the Trump Department of Labor’s 2020
rule on retirement plan ESG investing.
Under the bill, as with the 2020
Trump rule, if a fiduciary finds that an
ESG factor is a financial factor, then
that factor can be considered when investing and exercising shareholder
rights.
Nothing in H.R. 2988 prevents a fiduciary from appropriately considering
any material risk of an investment.
Like the 2020 Trump rule, H.R. 2988 recognizes that ESG factors can present
an economic risk or opportunity, which
qualified
investment
professionals
would appropriately treat as material
economic considerations under generally accepted investment principles.
H.R. 2988 neutrally applies these
principles to all investment decisions.
To suggest this bill bars a fiduciary
from appropriately considering any
factor that may be material to investment is blatantly false. Unlike the
Biden-Harris rule, this legislation ensures neutrality and prudent decisionmaking by fiduciaries.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:49 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

My colleagues on the other side of
the aisle have made many claims about
the supposed advantages of ESG investing.
Allow me to set the record straight.
ESG funds have underperformed for
years. According to Morningstar, ESG
funds lagged the U.S. Market Index and
the S&P 500 in 2023 and 2024. To make
matters worse, ESG products charge
higher fees to participants than traditional investment funds, which can significantly limit the growth of participants’ retirement savings over time.
Finally, according to researchers at
George Mason University, ESG funds
expose workers and retirees to additional investment risk that traditional
investments typically do not face. Increased costs, increased risk, and lackluster returns make for a bad cocktail.
Participants and beneficiaries of employer-sponsored retirement plans rely
on the expertise of fiduciaries, who are
required by law to act solely in the financial
interests
of
participants.
Weakening that expectation to advance partisan ideological objectives is
wrong and hurts the safety and stability of Americans.
Finally, Mr. Speaker, in response to
my friends on the other side, many
Democrats want to make race and sex
the most important factors in choosing
ERISA retirement plan service providers. In so doing, they are advocating
for blatant race and sex discrimination, which we should all strongly oppose.
Discrimination is never justified, and
the use of quotas is inherently discriminatory. ERISA plan service providers must be selected using a prudent
and nondiscriminatory process. That is
what H.R. 2988 requires.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from Illinois (Mr. CASTEN).
Mr. CASTEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
opposition to H.R. 2988.
I am going to be honest. I cannot believe we are still engaged in this anticapitalist doublespeak; but if my Republican colleagues are going to keep
bringing bills to the floor to destroy
the fabric of our market-based economy, I am going to keep standing up
for it.
Let’s be clear: ERISA already requires fiduciaries to act solely in the
financial interests of plan participants
and beneficiaries. H.R. 2988 does not
strengthen that standard. It simply assumes that a handful of paternalistic
legislators know more about the interests of America’s businessowners than
they do.
Before coming to Congress, I was a
CEO of an energy company. We raised a
couple hundred million dollars to build
that business, and I was understandably accountable to a board appointed
by those investors.
I am trying to imagine a world where
I showed up at a board meeting and
told the owners of the company that I

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

was leading that they were not allowed
to ask me certain questions because, in
my judgment, I had determined that
their questions were nonpecuniary.
That is not a world where I would have
been employed for very long.
It also wouldn’t have been good for
our business because different investors have different time horizons. You
have got short-term investors who are
concerned about next year’s cash flows,
but then you can have long-term investors, like pension funds, endowments,
and family offices, who are going to be
concerned about longer term risks including, but not limited to, your governance, your environmental exposures, who you hire, what kind of liabilities you are taking on, and that is
fine. That is how a functioning market
works.
But H.R. 2988 prioritizes those shortterm investors by creating an arbitrary
distinction between pecuniary and nonpecuniary risk factors. That requires
investors to ignore financially relevant
information that they, in their sole
discretion, believe impact long-term
performance.
b 0920
Why should we mandate ignorance?
It is not the Federal Government’s job
to tell fiduciaries what categories of
risk they can consider. Making investors dumber will only serve to drive
capital out of U.S. markets, and that is
not just theoretical.
In Oklahoma, public pension officials
estimated that complying with a similar blacklist policy could cost them
nearly $10 million. In Arkansas, the
State retirement system estimated
comparable restrictions could reduce
returns by $30 million to $40 million a
year. In Indiana, an analysis found it
could cost pension returns as much as
$6.4 billion over 10 years.
This legislation is not about protecting retirees. It is about protecting
mediocre businesses from the vibrancy
of well-informed, competitive capital
markets. Maybe that satisfies some
short-term, partisan political purpose,
but it ain’t patriotic and certainly
ain’t capitalism. All this will accomplish is to drive long-term investors
out of U.S. equity markets.
For the retirement savings of our police officers, teachers, and firefighters,
and for the preservation of U.S. capital
markets and capitalism that is free of
the meddlesome government intervention that Republicans seem to love, I
urge a ‘‘no’’ vote and oppose this legislation.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
4 minutes to the gentleman from Georgia (Mr. ALLEN), the chairman of the
Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions Subcommittee and the sponsor of
this good bill.
Mr. ALLEN. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the chairman for yielding his time, for
his tireless work on behalf of American
workers, and specifically for his support of the legislation before us today.

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.003

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 15, 2026

Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of H.R.
2988, the Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act, legislation I introduced earlier this year to
ensure hardworking Americans do not
have their retirement savings jeopardized by politically motivated mismanagement. What I am hearing is
that, I think, this bill fixes everything
that the other side has been talking
about as far as free markets and capitalism.
For those listening at home, it is important to understand how we got here.
In 2022, the Biden administration
heavy-handedly put the retirement security of over 150 million Americans at
risk by issuing a deeply flawed rule to
enable retirement plan fiduciaries to
consider or choose investments based
on environmental, social, and governance, or ESG, factors. That is not free
market. That is not capitalism.
It is proven that ESG factors often
charge steeper fees, carry higher risks,
have lower returns, and are well-known
underperformers. That is precisely why
this rule garnered bipartisan, bicameral disapproval in the form of a
Congressional Review Act resolution
that passed both the House and Senate.
However, the Biden-Harris administration vetoed the resolution, choosing
to prioritize leftwing environmental
and social issues ahead of retirees’ financial security.
As chairman of the HELP Subcommittee, I remain committed to protecting the retirement savings of workers, retirees, and their families. The
Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act would codify
that retirement plan sponsors must
make investment decisions solely
based on economic factors and financial returns.
Additionally, the bill states that the
decision to exercise a shareholder right
is subject to the purchase and loyalty
duties under ERISA. It states that
proxies held by ERISA plans must be
voted in the economic interests of the
plan, not used to advance radical policies and favors to crony capitalists.
The bill declares that race, color, religion, sex, or national origin may not
be taken into consideration when selecting a fiduciary, counsel, employee,
or service provider of an ERISA plan.
Lastly, it implements a notice requirement on defined contribution
plans, explaining the difference between choosing from investments selected by ERISA fiduciaries and choosing from investments through a brokerage window.
Mr. Speaker, I think most would
agree that advancing a political agenda
at the expense of retirement savings is
wrong. Let’s be clear: Americans invest
to secure a brighter future for themselves and their families, not to bankroll Democrats’ radical initiatives and
pet projects and take care of their
crony capitalists.
Retirement plan sponsors have a
duty to prioritize financial returns, ensuring Americans’ hard-earned savings

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:49 Jan 16, 2026

H901

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

are invested in a sensible manner. The
Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement Savings Act delivers a significant win to retirees across the Nation,
and I strongly urge my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle to support its
passage.
I thank my staff for their diligent
work on this bill. I thank Chairman
WALBERG for his support throughout
the committee process and Leader SCALISE and Speaker JOHNSON for bringing
H.R. 2988 to the House floor.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from Rhode Island (Mr. MAGAZINER).
Mr. MAGAZINER. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the ranking member for yielding. I rise in opposition to this bill,
which will only hurt the retirement
savings of millions of Americans.
Our Republican colleagues are once
again prioritizing culture wars over
working people and threatening the retirement savings of nurses, teachers,
police officers, and healthcare workers,
who are just trying to save for their future with peace of mind.
The bill before us today injects politics into investment decisions that
should be guided by sound financial
judgment.
Let me be clear. Environmental, social, and governance risks are material
and pecuniary, and companies that
adopt thoughtful policies on these
risks outperform those that don’t over
the long term.
If an oil company is cutting corners,
and it leads to a spill that is expensive
to the company, that hurts shareholders. That hurts people who are saving for retirement. That is a failure to
manage an environmental risk.
If a company maintains a culture in
the office that allows rampant discrimination that causes lawsuits that
are expensive to the company, that is a
social factor. That is a material risk.
If executive pay is structured in a
way where it is not tied to shareholder
performance, that is a risk.
As a former State treasurer, I know
that ignoring these risks does not
make them disappear.
By the way, the proxy voting process
is an important way for shareholders
to tell executives at companies when
they think that something needs to
change. They are nonbinding. What
this bill would do is make it harder for
shareholders to vote to put even nonbinding items in front of a board to
consider.
I have heard the other side say that
this bill does not preclude ESG factors
from being considered if they are material, but that is not true in practice.
What will happen in practice is that
SEC bureaucrats and political appointees will get to choose what is material and what is not.
Any time an executive, a corporate
executive, doesn’t like what a shareholder proposal is about, they can go to
the SEC and say: ‘‘Keep this off the
ballot. I don’t want to see it.’’ It will
be up to those bureaucrats and polit-

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ical appointees to decide what is material and what is not.
How about we trust the investors?
How about we trust the people who are
actually doing the work? How about we
trust the plan participants, the workers, and the retirees? Anyone who has a
401(k) or an IRA will tell you that they
can go on the website and pick from a
range of different plans based on what
they think is a good idea for them.
Why don’t we trust them instead of
trusting bureaucrats and political appointees to make decisions for everybody else?
Understand why we are here and who
this bill helps. This bill helps corporate
executives who do not want to be held
accountable by their own shareholders.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield an additional 1 minute to the
gentleman from Rhode Island.
Mr. MAGAZINER. Mr. Speaker, this
bill helps executives who do not want
to be held accountable by their own
shareholders for material ESG risks.
It all comes down to time horizons,
as Mr. CASTEN said. When I was State
treasurer, I had 60,000 people who were
relying on me for their retirement. I
had people who were 90- or 100-year-old
retirees, and I had first-year teachers
who were 23 years old. I owed just as
much of a fiduciary duty to those 23year-olds as the 90-year-olds.
b 0930
So long-term factors and ESG factors
matter even when corporate executives
who are focused on the short term
don’t care about them.
This bill claims to be about free markets. It is the opposite. It is taking
choice away from investors and away
from retirees and plan participants and
putting it in the hands of bureaucrats
and political appointees.
Mr. Speaker, I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
3 minutes to the gentleman from
Michigan (Mr. HUIZENGA), who is vice
chair of the Financial Services Committee and extremely well-versed in
being able to deal with this issue.
Mr. HUIZENGA. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate my colleague from Michigan
granting me a little time here. I was
not planning on speaking on this. I am
actually down here for an amendment,
but let me clean it up.
Mr. Speaker, the hot garbage that we
are hearing right now from the other
side prompts me to address this. I am
vice chair of the Financial Services
Committee. One of our speakers earlier
serves on that committee where we
regularly cross swords philosophically
about what the role of ESG is. Environmental, social, and governance has
been a hot topic, Mr. Speaker. I can
tell you that.
When he is trying to compare what
we are talking about today, regarding
what we are dealing with with some of
the other retirement plans and publicly
traded companies and what the SEC

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.005

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H902

has been doing, we are not talking apples and oranges. We are talking apples
and pinecones. They might both grow
on trees, but they are not anything
like what the reality is.
He is talking about being a CEO. One
of our colleagues was talking about
being a CEO of a wind company. Mr.
Speaker, that is, by definition, one of
those ESG companies. When he is talking about pecuniary questions not
being allowed to be asked, that is completely false. Materiality is the watchword.
What we saw under the last administration, by the way, is they blew
through that legal definition which
was from 1976. Thurgood Marshall is
the one who developed the materiality
definition by law.
They blew through that and said: Do
you know what, these issues are so important to us that we are going to just
set the law aside and say: No, you must
have an environmental or social or
governance lens with which to drive
this through.
That has nothing to do with return.
It has nothing to do with return. What
we have seen is that the activist investors who have gotten involved, who
have driven these, who have put these
shareholder proposals in place and have
put these requests in place, don’t care
about return. That isn’t their goal.
Their goal is social change.
What we have seen, Mr. Speaker, is
over the years we have seen time and
time again the cudgel of government
and the cudgel of regulators being used
to pound business and investment into
what they think is the right place.
What it has done is actually cheated
those who are dependent upon the return, whether it is a firefighter or a
teacher.
By the way, in CalPERS, they have
actually extracted themselves from a
number of these ESG programs and
portfolios.
Why is that?
It is because they were having lawsuits from their own members demanding more return and less concern.
What I would just say is that the Financial Services Committee put together an ESG work group that I had
the pleasure of chairing, and we came
up with a report.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 1 minute to the gentleman from Michigan.
Mr. HUIZENGA. I will wrap this up.
Mr. Speaker, what that report identified was that what we are seeing is materiality. By the way, material issues
are legally required to be disclosed for
a publicly traded company or for any of
these investment folks. So nobody is
trying to hide things. In fact, they are
legally required to disclose any of
those material issues that may affect
stock price.
What we are seeing here is that the
gentleman from Illinois and others
have argued that all questions regard-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:49 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

ing the environment or social issues
are somehow material.
Mr. Speaker, it simply isn’t true. We
have to put the investor—that retiree,
that person who is desperate for returns so that they can retire—first, not
second, behind social issues that bureaucrats have decided is the primary
goal.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman
from California (Mr. DESAULNIER), who
is the ranking member of the Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions.
Mr. DESAULNIER. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the ranking member for yielding
and for his leadership in opposition to
this bill.
Environmental, social, and governance are factors that retirement plan
fiduciaries may consider when making
investments on behalf of retirement
plans covered by ERISA. Factors that
may fall within ESG include impact of
the company’s actions on climate
change, working conditions, and employee safety at the company, and its
management structure.
Weighing ESG factors when making
investment decisions is not only more
socially responsible, it is also more fiscally responsible for the type of longterm investments managed by retirement plan fiduciaries. Factors like sea
level rise due to climate change, child
labor violations, or track records for
mistreating workers could cause unnecessary investment risks over time.
Investors should be protected from
those kinds of unethical management
practices. That is why it should be considered a best practice for retirement
plan professionals to appropriately
weigh ESG factors—just weigh them.
Unfortunately, this bill would establish unnecessary barriers to retirement
plan fiduciaries who want to consider
these factors. This is despite the fact
that even those fiduciaries who consider ESG factors are still required
under ERISA to run plans solely in the
best interest of participants and fiduciaries.
I filed an amendment to this bill that
would permit plan fiduciaries to consider ESG factors when they make investment decisions, which aligns with
the Biden administration’s ESG rule
that was upheld twice by Federal district courts before being abandoned by
the Trump administration.
Crucially, my amendment would
have also upheld core ERISA protections and explicitly ensured that fiduciaries do not sacrifice investment returns when they consider ESG factors.
Unfortunately, House Republicans and
House Republican leadership prevented
the amendment from being approved in
the committee.
Mr. Speaker, we should trust the professionals who are legally obligated to
make prudent decisions on behalf of retirement plan participants, not undermine their ability to make sound investment decisions.

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
oppose H.R. 2988. Once again, I thank
the ranking member for his leadership.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, we are
getting to a point, I think, that the old
adage that everything has been said,
just not everyone has said it yet. But
with fear of offending that specific
adage, I must respectfully, again, address the fact of the misconception
that is being put forward about the
Biden ESG rule as being neutral. That
was, is, and always will be patently
false.
The Biden-Harris ESG rule was explicitly intended to advance the left’s
radical climate and social agenda that
harms Americans’ retirement and longterm financial well-being. Even though
the debate can be made about ESG
issues, that is not what we want to see
taking place for the best benefit of retirees.
This legislation is needed to combat
the Biden rule which was issued in response to not one but two executive orders on climate change. The Biden
Labor Department expressly stated
that the intended effect of the rule is
to loosen restrictions on fiduciaries
and encourage them to consider ESG
factors in their decisionmaking; to encourage them, not simply allow it, but
to encourage them.
The Biden Labor Department’s explanation of the rule lists ESG factors
that it believes are relevant to investment performance, including impacts
to climate change, corporate board
composition, and workplace diversity
and inclusion.
H.R. 2988 is essential to restore the
neutrality of financial factor-only
evaluation when investing to protect
America’s retirement savers.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
b 0940
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 4 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Ohio (Ms. KAPTUR).
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, this bill
unnecessarily restricts the free market. It dictates what private sector fiduciaries can and cannot consider when
making investment decisions that directly affect the savings and retirement savings of hardworking Americans.
For this reason and at the appropriate time, I will offer a motion to recommit this bill back to committee.
If House rules permitted, I would
have offered the motion with an important amendment to this bill. My
amendment would have been the text
of H.R. 1357, the Susan Muffley Act.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of my amendment into the RECORD immediately
prior to the motion to recommit.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Ohio?
There was no objection.
Ms. KAPTUR. H.R. 1357 is a bill that
addresses a true injustice to thousands

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.007

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 15, 2026

of workers and retirees across this
country, a bill to restore the Delphi
salaried retirees’ pensions.
For decades, the men and women who
built Delphi—and they worked hard—
were told that if they worked hard and
kept their end of the deal, their retirement benefits would be there for them.
However, that promise was broken
through no fault of their own when
Delphi collapsed, leaving more than
23,000 salaried workers, including over
5,000 in Ohio, with sharply reduced or
eliminated pensions. Those are the
folks that I mean. This is simply
wrong. It is un-American.
Mr. TURNER, Ms. TENNEY, Ms. MOORE,
and I have a bipartisan bill to restore
dignity, fairness, and economic security to people who earned it the hard
way. They worked hard.
For too long, Delphi retirees have
been asked to wait, to be patient, and
to accept less than what they were
promised and worked for and earned.
Many are now well into their retirement years. It almost seems like a conspiracy to keep their retirement benefits away from them. They face rising
healthcare costs, higher prices at the
grocery store, and fixed incomes that
were unjustly cut.
These are not abstract numbers.
These are real people who planned
their lives around commitments and
promises that were made to them and
then broken.
Let me remind you that when the
auto rescue moved forward, corporate
interests were stabilized, made whole,
but working people were left behind,
and that imbalance has lingered for
two decades. Shame on us as a country.
Shame on us and the people who allowed that to happen.
The Susan Muffley Act corrects that
injustice. It directs the Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation to recalculate
benefits without arbitrary gaps that
punished Delphi retirees alone. It is a
narrowly tailored fix, but one that delivers profound relief and long-overdue
justice.
This legislation is also about reaffirming a core American value: If you
work hard, play by the rules, and keep
your word, your company and country
should keep its word to you.
These retirees did not speculate.
They did not gamble. They paid into a
system that was supposed to protect
them. Congress has a moral obligation
to fix what was broken. Too bad the
market can’t do it alone.
Every year of delay compounds the
harm. The Susan Muffley Act will finally make these workers whole. I hope
my colleagues will join me in voting
for the motion to recommit.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I am
prepared to close, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, I include in the RECORD
links to letters in opposition to H.R.
2988: One led by the Americans for Financial Reform and signed by dozens of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

03:49 Jan 16, 2026

H903

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

organizations representing labor, civil
rights, environmental, and other relevant policy issues; another from the
AFL–CIO; a letter from SIRES; another
letter signed by the National Employment Law Project, the Economic Policy Institute, and the National Partnership for Women and Families; one
letter from SEIU; and one letter from
the
U.S.
Sustainable
Investment
Forum.
The
link
is:
https://
house.app.box.com/s/
xpixugm5qpckl4kxrc4h4u55i3to8roy
Mr. Speaker, right now across the
country, workers are struggling to pay
their bills and meet basic needs, let
alone save for retirement. It is incredibly hard for workers to do much on
their own for retirement when, according to the Federal Reserve, many
would struggle to come up with the
money to finance an unexpected $400
expense, such as a car repair or medical
bill.
That being the case, it should not be
controversial for retirement plan professionals to appropriately weigh environmental, social, and governance factors in their clients’ best interests.
H.R. 2988 would restrict the fiduciary’s
ability to consider all relevant factors
that might affect investment decisions
to the detriment of retirees.
Of course, it has been pointed out
that some ESG funds do better, some
do worse, just like all other categories
of funds. The committee chair’s opening statement suggested that ESG
funds don’t do as well as the S&P 500.
The fact is, most funds don’t do as well
as the S&P 500 index funds, but the
other funds are not restricted. A consideration, not a mandate, of ESG factors ought to be allowed.
They said the present law is not neutral. This law is not neutral because if
you want to consider environmental
possibilities and concerns or governance or other factors like that, extra
paperwork is needed, and it is much
more difficult to have those considered.
Mr. Speaker, the professionals ought
to be able to decide what are the best
investments for the retirees, not politicians. For that reason, I oppose the bill
and urge my colleagues to do the same.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Let me close with this: H.R. 2988 is
about keeping retirement investing focused on what matters—protecting
workers and retirees.
The Biden-Harris ESG rule encouraged fiduciaries to consider political
and ideological factors in retirement
plans, even when that could increase
risk and reduce returns. That is unacceptable.
Representative RICK ALLEN’s bill restores the ERISA standard by requiring that investment decisions be based
only on economic factors. It ensures
proxy voting and shareholder rights
are exercised solely in the financial interest of plan participants, not to push

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

radical policies. It bans discrimination
in selecting plan fiduciaries and service
providers based on race, religion, sex,
or national origin. It almost sounds
American in its idea. It improves
transparency by requiring plans to explain the difference between fiduciaryselected investments and brokerage
windows.
This bill puts retirement savers first,
and I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’
on this bill.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate on the bill has expired.
AMENDMENT NO. 1 OFFERED BY MR. HUIZENGA

The SPEAKER pro tempore. It is now
in order to consider amendment No. 1
printed in part A of House Report 119–
440.
Mr. HUIZENGA. Mr. Speaker, I have
an amendment at the desk.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will designate the amendment.
The text of the amendment is as follows:
Add at the end the following:
SEC.

4003.

GAO STUDY
COUNTS.

OF

BROKERAGE

AC-

Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General
shall submit a report to Congress comparing
the returns generated by any investment arrangement that—
(1) is not a designated investment alternative (as defined in section 2(46) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(46));
(2) is subject to section 404(c)(7) of such Act
(29 U.S.C 1104(c)(7)); and
(3) is available in defined contribution
plans (as defined in section 3(34) of such Act
(29 U.S.C. 1002(34))
with the returns generated by other investment options available in such plans.
Page 3, line 7, insert after the item relating to section 4002 the following:
Sec. 4003. GAO study of brokerage accounts.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 988, the gentleman from Michigan (Mr. HUIZENGA)
and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Michigan.
Mr. HUIZENGA. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
This amendment requires the Government Accountability Office, the
GAO, to submit a report to Congress
comparing brokerage window investments in the context of defined contribution plans.
The GAO report will compare investment returns generated through participant-controlled brokerage windows
and similar arrangements with the investment returns generated by investments selected and monitored by plan
fiduciaries.
What does that mean in plain
English? It means basically, do you
want to be involved in the decisions
surrounding your investments?
Most defined contribution plans, like
401(k) plans allow participants to direct their investments from a menu of
options selected by investment fiduciaries, who are the experts. Those are

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.009

H15JAPT1

H904

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

the professionals who have a legal obligation to maximize return for the investor.
b 0950
Plan fiduciaries go through an extensive selection and monitoring process,
evaluating fees, risks, performance,
and how each option compares to available alternatives.
If the plan fiduciary places pooled
asset funds, like mutual funds, on the
investment menu, the fees are almost
always lower, which bolsters the fund’s
net return, meaning more money in the
pockets of the investor.
Brokerage window participants are
bypassing the investments selected by
the plan’s investment fiduciaries and
self-selecting investments for their retirement savings.
Again, Mr. Speaker, this is about
whether you want to be involved in
your own retirement savings decisions.
I do, by the way.
If the participant purchases a mutual
fund through a brokerage window, the
participant would likely be subject to
the highest retail share class fee for
that mutual fund. This amendment
calls for the GAO to study whether the
net returns generated through brokerage windows are comparable to those
generated by the investments selected
by plan fiduciaries.
We have had, Mr. Speaker, quite a
discussion about ESG and the overarching bill. The point that I had been
trying to make earlier was that materiality and return should be the watchword. It is the legal requirement, by
the way, but we have seen a warping of
government and the regulations surrounding it to try to pound these investments into a social circle that
some, not all of us, believe is the right
direction to go.
Here is what I want to do, Mr. Speaker. I want to maximize return for that
firefighter, that teacher, that police officer. I want to make sure that those
who traditionally have not had choice
in how they are going to invest their
retirement savings get some selection
in that through approved funds,
through fiduciary responsibilities of
professionals. This is the right thing to
do and the right direction to go.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Chair, I
claim the time in opposition to the
amendment, and I yield myself such
time as I may consume.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
this amendment appears to require
GAO to submit a report to Congress
that compares the returns generated
through the brokerage windows with
those of other investments available
through retirement plans.
Brokerage windows allow plan participants to invest outside the menu of
designated investment alternatives
available under their plan. Such investments can include mutual funds and, in

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

03:49 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

some cases, individual stocks and
bonds.
Of the amendments that were filed at
Rules Committee, my Democratic colleagues and I would have preferred one
from the ranking member of the
Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions Subcommittee, Mr. DESAULNIER
of California, to be made in order. His
amendment would have fixed the fundamental flaw of division A of the bill,
which simply would have ensured that
plan fiduciaries would be permitted to
consider ESG investments if they can
be done without sacrificing investment
returns.
Although I do not oppose the amendment offered by the gentleman from
Michigan, I do have a couple of observations about it.
First, the effect of this amendment
could be accomplished by just writing a
letter to GAO, along with the chair of
the Education and Workforce Committee. That would be faster than
sticking it on this bill and hoping the
bill passes.
We may draw the conclusion that
this amendment was made in order so
that the Republican majority could say
they have an open process on this
flawed bill and avoid yet another criticism of all of their closed rules.
With respect to the substance of the
amendment, I am concerned that it
needlessly pits two things that are not
in conflict, that is, brokerage windows
and the plan’s designated investments.
My colleagues know, in 2021, the
ERISA Advisory Council examined brokerage windows. They noted that fewer
than one-third of the retirement plans
even offer a brokerage window, and
roughly 2 percent of plan participants
with access to one actually choose it.
When you look at the average brokerage window account, it exceeded over
$300,000, which is far greater than what
many Americans have in their total retirement funds.
While few people are using the brokerage windows, the ones that do may
be interested in exploring funds or
stocks that are not affected by their
plan. Of those mutual funds that are
offered, some may be ESG-themed.
If that is the concern of my colleagues, and if they are banking on the
GAO to produce a report that shows
ESG-themed funds offered in a brokerage account will underperform, they
may be disappointed because researchers at New York University noted that
‘‘empirical studies and meta-analyses
consistently demonstrate a positive relationship between ESG integration
and financial performance.’’
GAO itself has already examined this
issue in the past and stated: ‘‘The vast
majority, 88 percent, of the scenarios
in studies we reviewed . . . reported
finding a neutral or positive relationship between the use of ESG information in investment management and financial returns.’’
Finally, the gentleman’s amendment
must be considered alongside the House
Republicans’ efforts to decimate GAO’s

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

budget. Last summer, House Republicans proposed cutting the GAO budget by 50 percent. Fortunately, that was
restored in the final version, but it is
curious that the House Republicans
now want to give the GAO more work
after they were so intent on cutting its
budget.
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether it
makes much difference whether it
passes or not, but I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. HUIZENGA. Mr. Speaker, I will
close with this. I appreciate where the
gentleman is coming from. This has
been a long debate regarding some of
these issues surrounding what I believe
is the core issue. I believe the core
issue, Mr. Speaker, is that it is time
for us to put retirees first, not second,
in investment decisions.
The gentleman was talking about it
in ESG funds. I have no problem with
the existence of an ESG fund. If someone, for whatever personal reason, decides that they want to invest in a fund
that does not have holdings in oil or in
pharmaceuticals or something along
those lines, that is quite all right, but,
Mr. Speaker, it has to be voluntary. It
has to be voluntary.
It is okay to invest in that ESG fund,
but it is not okay, Mr. Speaker, to
force someone into that ESG fund who
is then going to suffer for that decision
because of a lack of return.
The gentleman cited one study, and I
am actually familiar with the study. I
can show you five studies for every one
that is opposed to this notion that ESG
funds are more expensive and have a
lower return. At the end of the day, it
needs to be about choice for those retirees and their opportunity.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the rule, the previous question
is ordered on the amendment offered by
the gentleman from Michigan (Mr.
HUIZENGA).
The question is on the amendment.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 9 of rule XX, this 15minute vote on the amendment will be
followed by 5-minute votes on:
Motion to recommit H.R. 2988, if offered; and
Passage of H.R. 2988, if ordered.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 395, nays 22,
not voting 14, as follows:
[Roll No. 29]
YEAS—395
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Allen
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Arrington

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.012

H15JAPT1

Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Balint
Barr
Barragán
Barrett
Baumgartner

Bean (FL)
Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Beyer
Bice

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 15, 2026
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Burchett
Burlison
Bynum
Calvert
Cammack
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Case
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Cloud
Clyburn
Clyde
Cohen
Cole
Collins
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davidson
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Frost
Fry
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gill (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gosar
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grijalva
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jackson (TX)
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Kennedy (UT)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna

03:49 Jan 16, 2026

H905

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Luttrell
Lynch
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Massie
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McCaul
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McClintock
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGuire
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Olszewski
Onder
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Pelosi
Perez
Perry
Peters
Pettersen
Pfluger
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross
Rouzer
Roy
Ruiz
Rulli
Rutherford
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin

Jkt 069060

Scott, David
Self
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simon
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Spartz
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman

Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Titus
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps

Casten
Castro (TX)
Clark (MA)
Elfreth
Escobar
Fletcher
Goldman (NY)
Gomez

Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Jackson (IL)
Lee (PA)
McBride
McGarvey
McGovern
Ocasio-Cortez

Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Wagner
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)
Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—22
Omar
Ramirez
Randall
Scanlon
Tlaib
Vargas

NOT VOTING—14
Baird
Casar
Castor (FL)
Hunt
Mace

Moulton
Murphy
Nehls
Norcross
Norman

Steube
Swalwell
Van Orden
Womack

b 1029
Mr. HUFFMAN, Mses. ELFRETH,
RANDALL,
and
OCASIO-CORTEZ
changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to
‘‘nay.’’
Mses. DELBENE, BUDZINSKI, Mr.
COHEN, Mses. LOFGREN, LEGER
FERNANDEZ,
Mr.
GOTTHEIMER,
Mses. DEGETTE, BALINT, Mr. DOGGETT, Ms. JAYAPAL, Mr. AMO, Ms.
PRESSLEY, Mr. MRVAN and Ms.
STANSBURY, changed their vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the amendment was agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the engrossment and
third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
MOTION TO RECOMMIT

Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I have a
motion to recommit at the desk.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will report the motion to recommit.
The Clerk read as follows:
Ms. Kaptur of Ohio moves to recommit the
bill H.R. 2988 to the Committee on Education
and Workforce.

The material previously referred to
by Ms. KAPTUR is as follows:
Ms. Kaptur moves to recommit the bill
H.R. 2988 to the Committee on Education and
the Workforce with instructions to report
the same back to the House forthwith, with
the following amendment:
Add at the end the following:
DIVISION E—SUSAN MUFFLEY ACT
SEC. 5001. SHORT TITLE.

This division may be cited as the ‘‘Susan
Muffley Act of 2025’’.

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 5002. GUARANTEED BENEFIT CALCULATION
FOR CERTAIN PLANS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—
(1) INCREASE TO FULL VESTED PLAN BENEFIT.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of deter-

mining what benefits are guaranteed under
section 4022 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (in this section referred to as ‘‘ERISA’’) with respect to an eligible participant or beneficiary under a covered plan specified in paragraph (4) in connection with the termination of such plan,
the amount of monthly benefits shall be
equal to the full vested plan benefit with respect to the participant.
(B) NO EFFECT ON PREVIOUS DETERMINATIONS.—Nothing in this Act shall be construed to change the allocation of assets and
recoveries under sections 4044(a) and 4022(c)
of ERISA as previously determined by the
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (in
the section referred to as the ‘‘corporation’’)
for the covered plans specified in paragraph
(4), and the corporation’s applicable rules,
practices, and policies on benefits payable in
terminated single-employer plans shall, except as otherwise provided in this section,
continue to apply with respect to such covered plans.
(2) RECALCULATION OF CERTAIN BENEFITS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—In any case in which the
amount of monthly benefits with respect to
an eligible participant or beneficiary described in paragraph (1) was calculated prior
to the date of enactment of this Act, the corporation shall recalculate such amount pursuant to paragraph (1), and shall adjust any
subsequent payments of such monthly benefits accordingly, as soon as practicable after
such date.
(B) LUMP-SUM PAYMENTS OF PAST-DUE BENEFITS.—Not later than 180 days after the date
of enactment of this Act, the corporation, in
consultation with the Secretary of the
Treasury and the Secretary of Labor, shall
make a lump-sum payment to each eligible
participant or beneficiary whose guaranteed
benefits are recalculated under subparagraph
(A) in an amount equal to—
(i) in the case of an eligible participant,
the excess of—
(I) the total of the full vested plan benefits
of the participant for all months for which
such guaranteed benefits were paid prior to
such recalculation, over
(II) the sum of any applicable payments
made to the eligible participant; and
(ii) in the case of an eligible beneficiary,
the sum of—
(I) the amount that would be determined
under clause (i) with respect to the participant of which the eligible beneficiary is a
beneficiary if such participant were still in
pay status; plus
(II) the excess of—
(aa) the total of the full vested plan benefits of the eligible beneficiary for all months
for which such guaranteed benefits were paid
prior to such recalculation, over
(bb) the sum of any applicable payments
made to the eligible beneficiary.
Notwithstanding the previous sentence, the
corporation shall increase each lump-sum
payment made under this subparagraph to
account for foregone interest in an amount
determined by the corporation designed to
reflect a 6 percent annual interest rate on
each past-due amount attributable to the underpayment of guaranteed benefits for each
month prior to such recalculation.
(C) ELIGIBLE PARTICIPANTS AND BENEFICIARIES.—
(i) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of this section, an eligible participant or beneficiary is
a participant or beneficiary who—
(I) as of the date of the enactment of this
Act, is in pay status under a covered plan or

E:\CR\FM\A15JA7.009

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H906

is eligible for future payments under such
plan;
(II) has received or will receive applicable
payments in connection with such plan
(within the meaning of clause (ii)) that does
not exceed the full vested plan benefits of
such participant or beneficiary; and
(III) is not covered by the 1999 agreements
between General Motors and various unions
providing a top-up benefit to certain hourly
employees who were transferred from the
General Motors Hourly-Rate Employees Pension Plan to the Delphi Hourly-Rate Employees Pension Plan.
(ii) APPLICABLE PAYMENTS.—For purposes
of this paragraph, applicable payments to a
participant or beneficiary in connection with
a plan consist of the following:
(I) Payments under the plan equal to the
normal benefit guarantee of the participant
or beneficiary.
(II) Payments to the participant or beneficiary made pursuant to section 4022(c) or
otherwise received from the corporation in
connection with the termination of the plan.
(3) DEFINITIONS.—For purposes of this subsection—
(A) FULL VESTED PLAN BENEFIT.—The term
‘‘full vested plan benefit’’ means the amount
of monthly benefits that would be guaranteed under section 4022 of ERISA as of the
date of plan termination with respect to an
eligible participant or beneficiary if such
section were applied without regard to the
phase-in limit in subsection (b)(1) of such
Act and the maximum guaranteed benefit
limitation in subsection (b)(3) of such Act
(including the accrued-at-normal limitation).
(B) NORMAL BENEFIT GUARANTEE.—The
term ‘‘normal benefit guarantee’’ means the
amount of monthly benefits guaranteed
under such section with respect to an eligible participant or beneficiary without regard
to this Act.
(4) COVERED PLANS.—The covered plans
specified in this paragraph are the following:
(A) The Delphi Hourly-Rate Employees
Pension Plan.
(B) The Delphi Retirement Program for
Salaried Employees.
(C) The PHI Non-Bargaining Retirement
Plan.
(D) The ASEC Manufacturing Retirement
Program.
(E) The PHI Bargaining Retirement Plan.
(F) The Delphi Mechatronic Systems Retirement Program.
(5) TREATMENT OF PBGC DETERMINATIONS.—
Any determination made by the corporation
under this section concerning a recalculation of benefits or lump-sum payment of
past-due benefits shall be subject to administrative review by the corporation. Any new
determination made by the corporation
under this section shall be governed by the
same administrative review process as any
other benefit determination by the corporation.
(b) TRUST FUND FOR PAYMENT OF INCREASED
BENEFITS.—
(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—There is established
in the Treasury of the United States a trust
fund to be known as the ‘‘Delphi Full Vested
Plan Benefit Trust Fund’’ (hereafter in this
subsection referred to as the ‘‘Fund’’), consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the Fund as provided
in this section.
(2) FUNDING.—There is appropriated from
the general fund such amounts as are necessary for the costs of the payment of the
portion of monthly benefits guaranteed to a
participant or beneficiary pursuant to subsection (a) and for necessary administrative
and operating expenses of the corporation relating to such payment. The Fund shall be
credited with amounts from time to time as

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:12 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

the Secretary of the Treasury, in conjunction with the Director of the corporation, determines appropriate, from the general fund
of the Treasury.
(3) EXPENDITURES FROM FUND.—Amounts in
the Fund shall be available for the payment
of the portion of monthly benefits guaranteed to a participant or beneficiary pursuant
to subsection (a) and for necessary administrative and operating expenses of the corporation relating to such payment.
(c) REGULATIONS.—The corporation, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury
and the Secretary of Labor, may issue such
regulations as necessary to carry out this
section.
(d) TAX TREATMENT OF LUMP-SUM PAYMENTS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Unless the taxpayer elects
(at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may provide) to have this paragraph
not apply with respect to any lump-sum payment under subsection (a)(2)(B), the amount
of such payment shall be included in the taxpayer’s gross income ratably over the 3-taxable-year period beginning with the taxable
year in which such payment is received.
(2) SPECIAL RULES RELATED TO DEATH.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—If the taxpayer dies before the end of the 3-taxable-year period described in paragraph (1), any amount to
which paragraph (1) applies which has not
been included in gross income for a taxable
year ending before the taxable year in which
such death occurs shall be included in gross
income for such taxable year.
(B) SPECIAL ELECTION FOR SURVIVING
SPOUSES OF ELIGIBLE PARTICIPANTS.—If—
(i) a taxpayer with respect to whom paragraph (1) applies dies,
(ii) such taxpayer is an eligible participant,
(iii) the surviving spouse of such eligible
participant is entitled to a survivor benefit
from the corporation with respect to such eligible participant, and
(iv) such surviving spouse elects (at such
time and in such manner as the Secretary
may provide) the application of this subparagraph, subparagraph (A) shall not apply and
any amount which would have (but for such
taxpayer’s death) been included in the gross
income of such taxpayer under paragraph (1)
for any taxable year beginning after the date
of such death shall be included in the gross
income of such surviving spouse for the taxable year of such surviving spouse ending
with or within such taxable year of the taxpayer.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 2(b) of rule XIX, the previous question is ordered on the motion
to recommit.
The question is on the motion to recommit.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, on that I
demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 206, nays
210, not voting 15, as follows:
[Roll No. 30]
YEAS—206
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum

Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes

Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani

Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann

Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NAYS—210

E:\CR\FM\A15JA7.014

H15JAPT1

Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga

January 15, 2026
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain

McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Moskowitz
Newhouse
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise

NOT VOTING—15
Baird
Casar
Castor (FL)
Hunt
Mace

Moulton
Murphy
Nehls
Norcross
Norman

Steube
Swalwell
Van Orden
Veasey
Womack

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1036
So the motion to recommit was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the passage of the bill.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 213, nays
205, not voting 13, as follows:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 31]
YEAS—213
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost

VerDate Sep 11 2014

H907

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford

Crenshaw
Cuellar
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Gray
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)

Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Newhouse
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry

Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—205
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carter (LA)
Case
Casten
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio

PO 00000

Frm 00011

DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta

Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky

Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)

Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—13
Baird
Casar
Castor (FL)
Hunt
Mace

Moulton
Murphy
Nehls
Norcross
Norman

Swalwell
Van Orden
Womack

b 1043
Mr. MRVAN changed his vote from
‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Mr. WOMACK. Mr. Speaker, I was unavoidably absent and unable to vote. Had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call
No. 29, NAY on Roll Call No. 30, and YEA on
Roll Call No. 31.
f

ADJOURNMENT TO FRIDAY, JANUARY 16, 2026; AND ADJOURNMENT
FROM FRIDAY, JANUARY 16, 2026,
TO TUESDAY, JANUARY 20, 2026
Mr. MCCORMICK. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that when the
House adjourns today, it adjourn to
meet at 3 p.m. tomorrow, and further
when the House adjourns on that day,
it adjourn to meet at noon on Tuesday,
January 20, 2026, for morning-hour debate and 2 p.m. for legislative business.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Georgia?
There was no objection.
f

CELEBRATING
PASTORS
TODD
AND KELLY HUDNALL 20 YEARS
OF MINISTRY
(Mr. CRANK asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. CRANK. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to celebrate the 20 years of ministry of Pastors Todd and Kelly
Hudnall of Colorado Springs Radiant
Church. Pastor Todd’s compelling expository preaching of the Bible has
strengthened Radiant Church as well
as the broader Pikes Peak region.
The Hudnalls have raised their children in our community, and we admire
their testimony of a Christ-honoring
home. I thank the Hudnalls for courageously applying Bible teaching to

E:\CR\FM\A15JA7.015

H15JAPT1

H908

every sphere of life, including public
issues of concern.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you join me
in congratulating Pastors Todd and
Kelly Hudnall for their 20 years of ministry, and here is to the next 20.
f

WILSON PREP FOOTBALL
CHAMPIONSHIP
(Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, in a thrilling finish, Wilson
Prep claimed the 2025 North Carolina
High School Athletic Association’s 1A
Football State championship by defeating Robbinsville 9–8.
With just 25 seconds left on the clock
and down by 2 points, never having attempted a field goal all season, Ethan
Nelson got the call. He got sent and
successfully kicked a 28-yard field goal
winning the game.
Such a remarkable victory marked
the Tigers’ first State championship
title.
Senior quarterback and linebacker
Travon Usher was the MVP pick.
Congratulations to Coach Phil Dickens and the entire Tiger football team.
I thank the coach for living by Jeremiah 29:11, drawing inspiration from
the Scripture he keeps in his desk and
allowing me to tell his story—the Tiger
story—to the American people.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

RECOGNIZING PENNSYLVANIA
STATE WRESTLING
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize
the Penn State University wrestling
team which set a new NCAA record on
Saturday.
The Nittany Lions won 78 consecutive dual matches. This record surpasses the NCAA Division II record previously held by St. Cloud State.
The Nittany Lions’ current winning
streak began in February 2020 when
they defeated the University of Maryland. Since 2020, the team has won five
consecutive Big Ten regular season titles, three Big Ten championships, and
four NCAA championships.
This past weekend marked the
team’s first Big Ten conference match
of the 2025–2026 season. The Nittany
Lions won 46–0, performing in front of a
sellout crowd of more than 6,000 fans.
The team broke the NCAA Division I
record in December, which had been
held by Oklahoma State University
since 1951. The Nittany Lions are led
by Coach Cael Sanderson, who has been
with the team since 2009.
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the
Penn State wrestling team on this historic achievement.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

ICE ATROCITIES
(Mr. MCGARVEY asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. MCGARVEY. Mr. Speaker, today
I speak out of grave concern for my
neighbors in Louisville, in Minneapolis, across the country, and for
my colleagues here in Washington who
somehow continue to excuse, dismiss,
and ignore the atrocities that ICE exhibits each day.
Mr. Speaker, do not look away.
Watch as people in the freest country
on Earth get dragged from their cars
down the street by masked men. Watch
as parents are pinned to the ground in
the pick-up line outside their kids’
schools. Watch as Renee Nicole Good, a
37-year-old mother of three, is killed in
front of her wife.
Watch, because looking away will not
absolve you from the violence and
atrocities made possible when you
voted to hand over taxpayer money to
fund this government’s campaign of
terror.
Mr. Speaker, every single day you
look away from what this President is
doing is another day that our neighbors
face unimaginable cruelty at the hands
of their own government.
Mr. Speaker, do not look away.
f

HONORING THE LIFE OF SAM
CORYELL
(Mr. BURLISON asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. BURLISON. Mr. Speaker, today I
rise to honor the life of a remarkable
constituent and dedicated Missourian,
Sam Coryell, whose impact on Springfield and southwest Missouri will be remembered for generations.
Sam started his career as a teacher,
serving for 30 years as a college music
professor at Evangel University before
focusing his talents on entrepreneurship. In 1988 Sam cofounded TLC Properties, helping oversee the development
and management of thousands of residential units across southwest Missouri. What began as a local venture
grew into a family of businesses rooted
in service, integrity, and community
that created homes and opportunity for
countless families in Missouri’s Seventh District.
Those who knew Sam described him
as a visionary leader who believed in
helping others, always doing the right
thing, and serving the community. His
personality and flair will be missed,
but his impact will be felt for generations.
While he is welcomed into the glory
and presence of our Lord and Savior,
we who remain get to benefit from the
amazing and lasting legacy that he
leaves behind.
May you rest in peace, Sam. We look
forward to our reunion in Heaven.

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

b 1050
FSGG FEDERAL DEFENDERS
FUNDING
(Ms. BONAMICI asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to applaud the House passage of
full funding for the Federal Defender
Services. This is an issue I have worked
on for years. It affects the overall operation of the Federal criminal justice
system, and it continues to be nonpartisan.
Defendants have a constitutional
right to counsel in criminal cases, and
for indigent defendants, counsel is appointed from the Federal Defender
Service. If there aren’t enough Federal
defenders, justice could be delayed.
Panel attorneys can be hired, but from
the panel they could be more expensive.
In fiscal year 2024, there was an inadvertent budgeting error that resulted
in initial funding levels that were at
least $100 million less than what the
program needed. As a result of underfunding, Federal Defender Services
began fiscal year 2026 significantly in
the red. We just fixed that.
I thank Chair COLE, Ranking Member
DELAURO, Chair JOYCE, and Ranking
Member HOYER for leading this issue in
the House. I urge my Senate colleagues
to quickly advance this legislation because it is in everyone’s interests to
have an efficient, reliable, and fair
criminal justice system.
f

MILITARY ACADEMY
NOMINATIONS
(Mr. STUTZMAN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. STUTZMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize nine students from
Indiana’s Third District that I have
nominated to attend our Nation’s military academies: Christian Touzard
from Spencerville; Samantha Aselage
from Huntertown; Oliver Werling from
New Haven; Luke Wonderham from
Monroeville; and Allison Heine, Jacob
Levitt, Jacob Farrell, Jonah Haines,
and Hayden Oberlin, all from Fort
Wayne.
Our service academies breed the best
of the best, where strong leadership
and impeccable fortitude are forged in
service to our Nation.
Throughout our Nation’s history,
America has been a shining example to
the world for our commitment to democracy, individual liberty, and the
rule of law.
As we celebrate America’s 250th anniversary this year, I commend these
students for choosing to defend these
values foundational to our national
identity.
I am truly grateful to see that such
patriotism and dedication to service
thrives in the next generation.
These nine individuals have already
demonstrated excellence, and I know

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.023

H15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

they will continue to make our country and State proud.
f

ICE OPERATIONS
(Ms. SALINAS asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. SALINAS. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
call out President Trump for abusing
his power, acting in secrecy, and
threatening our safety, all while failing
to address the rising costs in America.
Trump is deploying ICE to our neighborhoods to terrorize our immigrant
communities. His operations rely on
brutal tactics, avoiding deescalation
and due process against U.S. citizens.
Although the administration claims it
is only targeting undocumented criminals who pose a threat, we know that is
an outright lie.
At every turn, the administration
erodes any trust it has ever had with
the public. That became even clearer
when Secretary Noem signed an order
barring Members of Congress from conducting oversight of ICE facilities
without 7 days’ notice.
I visited an ICE facility in Tacoma,
Washington. I did provide that 7 days’
notice, even though I was not legally
required to do so, and yet I was still denied access to meet with my constituents due to so-called scheduling issues.
This is not transparency. This is an
attempt to control access, suppress
oversight, and manipulate the narrative.
Instead of terrorizing our communities, Trump needs to get back to the
real work of solving the affordability
crisis.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
GOLDMAN of Texas). Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in
personalities toward the President.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING SHERIFF WESLEY
DOOLITTLE
(Mr. LUTTRELL asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LUTTRELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the law enforcement officers in my district, specifically in
Montgomery County. I thank Constable Chris Jones and his deputies and
actually to honor the Montgomery
County Sheriff, Wesley Doolittle,
whose extraordinary service exemplifies the best of law enforcement in
Texas’ Eighth Congressional District.
Just last year, shortly after his election, Sheriff Doolittle personally disarmed an individual during a road rage
incident. His acts are absolutely what
defines service, character, and fearlessness in law enforcement.
Sheriff Doolittle has led by example
to protect our communities for decades. His hands-on approach and unwavering commitment to public safety
has made Texas’ Eighth Congressional
District a safe place to live, work, and
raise a family.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

H909

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Our community, State, and Congress
continue to be thankful for Sheriff
Doolittle’s service.
f

PAYING TRIBUTE TO VICTIMS
(Mr. BELL asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. BELL. Mr. Speaker, on June 22,
2020, while serving as St. Louis County
prosecutor, we were notified of a crime
scene at a local restaurant by homicide
detectives. Myself and our outreach director at the time, Captain Clay Farmer, responded to that scene to support
the investigation that shortly after
would be issued by our office.
What I witnessed at this scene still
haunts me to this very day. I had intended this to be more celebratory to
honor posthumously the great Demetrius Johnson and the legendary St.
Louis American photographer Wiley
Price on his retirement, and I will in
the near future. In light of the conviction secured in this case yesterday, my
thoughts are with the family of Kimberly Pelton and my friends, Lakeshia
Finch and Arlydia Bufford.
Arlydia is a remarkable young
woman, full of energy, and she beat me
in UNO. Lakeshia, who has documented
her heroic recovery from this atrocity,
exemplifies courage, resiliency, and an
unrelenting determination.
These three victims are our St. Louis
stars.
f

HONORING GERALD ZEEK
(Mr. MILLS asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. MILLS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor the life and legacy of an incredible American, a devoted patriot,
and a pillar of the DeBary community
in Florida’s Seventh District, Mr. Gerald Zeek, who peacefully passed away
on January 5, 2026, at the remarkable
age of 96.
Gerald’s life was defined by the quintessential American values of hard
work, service, and family. Born on Halloween in 1929, he learned the value of
a dollar early, taking his first job
baling hay for just 25 cents an hour.
That work ethic stayed with him
throughout his entire life.
Following the Second World War,
Gerald answered the call of duty and
joined the United States Navy, completing an honorable tour of service,
but his commitment to our Nation’s
defense didn’t end there. He went on to
dedicate 34 years of his life to
Picatinny Arsenal, ensuring that freedom and servicemembers had the tools
that they needed to defend this Nation.
In the 1980s, Gerald and his beloved
wife, June, moved to DeBary, Florida.
He was a man who appreciated the simple and the classic, often found working on his 1929 Ford Model A, a car as
enduring and reliable as the man himself.

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Above all, Gerald was a man of profound devotion. He was a husband to
June for over 75 years, a testament to
a love and loyalty that is rare to find
in this world today. He was a father to
his sons, Dave and Dan; and a grandfather to Christopher, Jeffrey, Deanna,
Dave; and great-grandfather to eight
grandchildren.
Mr. Speaker, I have a personal connection to this family’s legacy of service. Gerald’s own grandson Dave, who
is with me today, is currently serving
as my U.S. Army War Fellow, carrying
forward the torch of excellence and patriotism that his grandfather lit nearly
a century ago as a command sergeant
major who has proudly served in our
Joint Special Operations Command,
75th Ranger Regiment, and other units.
Gerald Zeek was an honorable, compassionate, and hardworking man. He
was a great father, a great husband,
and a great American. From one soldier to another, I want to take a moment to salute him and his lifetime of
service.
May his memory be a blessing to his
family and an inspiration to our district.
Airborne.
f

b 1100
CHAMPIONS OF THE WEEK: DAVE
EWERS, MARK HARPER, DOMINIC
BAGNOLI
(Mrs. SYKES asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Mrs. SYKES. Mr. Speaker, today, I
rise to recognize Akron Fire Department Lieutenant Dave Ewers, retired
Akron Firefighter Mark Harper, and
Lynx EMS worker Dominic Bagnoli as
Ohio’s 13th Congressional District
champions of the week.
Late last year, a man went into cardiac arrest at a roller skating rink in
Jackson Township, Ohio. While not on
the job and simply enjoying the rink,
Lieutenant Ewers, retired Firefighter
Harper, and Mr. Bagnoli leapt into action, giving the man CPR and other
lifesaving support until Jackson Township EMS arrived.
Due to their quick response and effective CPR, the man made a full recovery and even started skating again
this past weekend.
The three were recognized this week
by Jackson Township with the EMS
Excellence Award for their quick response during the incident.
Lieutenant Ewers and retired Firefighter Harper, both avid skaters themselves, said they have come to know a
lot of the regulars at the roller rink,
including the man who went into cardiac arrest. They said their fellow
skaters are like family, so they were
glad to be able to help one of their own.
Again, I extend my sincere gratitude
to Akron Fire Department Lieutenant
Dave Ewers, retired Akron Firefighter
Mark Harper, and Lynx EMS worker

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.025

H15JAPT1

H910

Dominic Bagnoli for their heroic actions and for stepping in to help a
neighbor in need. They are just one
more reason as to why Ohio’s 13th Congressional District is the Birthplace of
Champions.
f

CONGRATULATING 2006 IOLA FILLIES ON DON BAIN HALL OF
FAME INDUCTION
(Mr. SCHMIDT asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. SCHMIDT. Mr. Speaker, 20 years
ago this spring, there was a Cinderella
moment in southeast Kansas. The Iola
High School girls’ basketball team,
known as the Fillies, won the 2006 Kansas State High School Activities Association Class 4A State basketball
championship. This came on top of a
remarkable 24–2 season.
As a Kansas State senator at the
time, I had the privilege of sponsoring
a resolution in our State legislature to
commend the team’s win and to host
the team at the Kansas State House to
see the resolution’s unanimous adoption.
A week ago, on the 20th anniversary,
the community in Iola came together
and inducted that 2006 team into the
Iola High School’s Don Bain Hall of
Fame. Believe me, Mr. Speaker, the
community has not forgotten what
they accomplished.
The auditorium was packed. Former
classmates and teachers came home to
join in the celebration. Back in 2006,
the student members of this outstanding basketball team received
statewide recognition for their fine
sportsmanship and athletic accomplishments. At the Hall of Fame induction last week, the team was also recognized for the ongoing camaraderie
and success of its members in the years
since.
As I said in the Kansas State House
back in 2006, the team did an outstanding job of representing Allen
County and southeast Kansas in the
State tournament. I am very proud of
their achievements, and I am honored
to say in the United States Capitol
today, 20 years later, I continue to be
very proud of this team, the young
women who composed it, and the community who supported it.
Congratulations, Fillies.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING THE LIFE OF BETTY
REID SOSKIN
(Mr. GARAMENDI asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of Betty Reid
Soskin, who used all 104 years of her
life to the fullest.
Betty lived in the East Bay since
1927, when her family moved from New
Orleans. As a young woman during
World War II, Betty worked as a ship-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

yard clerk for the all-Black auxiliary
lodge of the segregated Boilermakers
Union.
In 1945, she and her husband founded
one of the first Black-owned music
stores, which remained open until 2019.
Over the years, she has worked with
many elected officials, State senators,
and assembly members.
In the early 2000s, she became involved in the plans for opening the
Rosie the Riveter WWII/Home Front
National Historical Park. This led to
her later career as a park ranger,
which she began in 2007 at the age of 85.
Betty led talks explaining the importance of the park in memorializing the
contributions of women and African
Americans working in the war industries supporting the U.S. effort at the
home front.
Betty used her experiences and observations as a Black woman to bring
light to the untold stories of African
Americans during World War II and underscored the racism experienced by
her and countless other women of
color.
Through Betty’s hard work and storytelling, she has touched the lives of
thousands of park visitors and millions
of Americans. It was just 2 months ago
that she and I were together at one of
the premier facilities, the Mare Island
Dry Docks, where she was able to, once
again, call upon all of us.
Mr. Speaker, our thoughts and prayers are with Betty’s family. From all of
us, I thank Betty for her tireless service and dedication to the community.
We will deeply miss her.
f

CELEBRATING AKA FOUNDERS’
DAY
(Ms. SEWELL asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Ms. SEWELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today with great pride and profound
gratitude to celebrate Founders’ Day
2026 for Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority,
Incorporated, the first Greek letter organization established for AfricanAmerican college-educated women.
For 118 years, Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority has been a beacon of scholarship,
sisterhood, and service, lighting the
way for generations of women who
dared to lead and uplift their communities.
As proud members of Alpha Kappa
Alpha Sorority, we stand on the shoulders of visionary founders, who believed that excellence and service were
not just aspirations but obligations.
From advancing educational equity to
promoting economic empowerment and
civic engagement, the women of AKA
continue to answer the call to serve
with grace, compassion, and unwavering commitment.
Today, we honor our legacy, a 118year legacy that has shaped leaders in
every field and strengthened communities across this Nation. May we continue to carry forward our mission
with purpose and pride.

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Happy Founders’ Day 2026 to my beloved Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Incorporated. Let us continue to be of
service to all mankind.
f

UNITED STATES NATURALIZES
850,000 PEOPLE EVERY YEAR
(Mr. GROTHMAN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. GROTHMAN. Mr. Speaker, immigration is in the news again, and I
don’t feel the Republicans have done a
good enough job of explaining what is
going on here.
During the Biden administration—
people are going to argue—somewhere
between 8 million and 10 million people
were allowed in this country who were
not coming here legally.
Obviously, if we are going to have
immigration laws, in the future, we
have to make it clear that people who
broke the laws in the past are not allowed in the country.
What is going on is that we have
riots in Minnesota, and important
Democratic officials who are saying
something is wrong here.
Let us not forget: Every year in this
country, 850,000 people are naturalized.
They are sworn in as new citizens. We
are at an all-time record of the number
of foreign-born people in this country.
The United States has nothing to
apologize for about the number of people being allowed in this country, as we
try to remove people.
Right now, in Minnesota, the Governor and mayor aren’t even in favor of
ICE removing criminals, and we should
be removing other people who came
here.
In any event, remember in America,
we naturalize 850,000 people every year.
f

b 1110
CONSTITUENT OF THE WEEK
ALEXANDRA VAKOS
(Mr. VINDMAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. VINDMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate Alexandra Vakos
on being named the 2025 Distinguished
Assistant of the Year in a mediumsized office by the Virginia Association
of Commonwealth’s Attorneys.
Each year, this award honors just
three prosecutors across the Commonwealth. Alexandra was selected from
approximately 1,000 prosecutors who
were qualified. She stood out because
of her outstanding trial accomplishments and contributions to the Virginia Association of Commonwealth’s
Attorneys.
She played a pivotal role in establishing a regional behavioral health
docket in the Fredericksburg area.
This initiative helps connect individuals with serious mental health illness
and substance abuse disorders to treatment and support through evidencebased practices and judicial oversight.

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.027

H15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

As her Representative in Congress, I
am grateful for her commitment to
justice and strengthening our community. That is why I am proud to name
her Constituent of the Week.
f

CELEBRATING SCOUTING AMERICA
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, there is
a dynamic energy going on in my Westchester backyard in the world of scouting in the village of Port Chester. It deserves our attention and appreciation.
Boy Scout Troop 400 and Troop 420 are
growing in membership and service.
Under the tremendous leadership of
Modesto ‘‘Moe’’ Acevedo, the young
men and women of this community
have flocked to involvement like never
before.
Based at the Port Chester Carver
Center, home to many other worthwhile efforts, Troop 400 serves boys and
Troop 420 serves girls. This is a recent
change in Scouting America policies.
They are reaching kids growing up in
an urban village, who are now learning
the joys of outdoor life such as camping and hiking, expanding their sense
of citizenship with merit badges in a
host of disciplines that make for better
adults and better citizens.
The troops draw from the heavily
Hispanic youth of Port Chester and
have developed incredible numbers of
qualified Eagle Scouts who have taken
their oath to Eagle and completed
worthwhile Eagle Scout projects that
benefit the community.
I have attended five separate Eagle
Scout Courts of Honor to see five outstanding young people in the last year
alone make their first mark on responsible leadership. Moe assures me there
are more on the way.
From the floor of the House of Representatives, we salute Moe Acevedo,
his team of Scoutmasters, supportive
parents, and community leaders in
Port Chester that have shown Troop
400 and Troop 420 to be a sign that
scouting is thriving in the 21st century.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

DENOUNCING
IMMUNIZATION
STANCE OF ROBERT F. KENNEDY, JR.
(Ms. DEXTER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. DEXTER. Mr. Speaker, last week
RFK, Jr., upended the childhood immunization schedule, reducing the number
of universally recommended vaccines
without substantive input from relevant medical experts. One of the vaccines RFK, Jr., downgraded was the flu
vaccine.
The science is clear. This decision
will hurt our children, our elderly, and
our families. Science doesn’t care
about our feelings. Science doesn’t care

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

H911

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

about our politics. Science is built on
data, evidence, and facts.
RFK, Jr., seems to think if he ignores the science, it will simply go
away. It won’t. His decision will mean
fewer kids get vaccinated against preventable diseases. More children will
get sick, and more children will have
morbidity and mortality as a result.
It is shameful. RFK, Jr., is absolutely unfit and should resign. Let’s
give our kids the healthy future they
deserve.
f

DENOUNCING CANCELLATION OF
LONG BEACH PUBLIC LIBRARY
SEED PROGRAM
(Ms. BARRAGÁN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
her remarks.)
Ms. BARRAGÁN. Mr. Speaker, the
Trump administration continues to
take away access to STEM education
from students across the country, including hundreds of middle school students in my district.
For years, the Long Beach Public Library’s Youth SEED program delivered
hundreds of workshops in science, technology, engineering, and math to students in Long Beach, California.
Educators, mentors, and community
partners in these programs spark students’ curiosity and help them build
real-world skills. It is a place where
students dream of developing the next
cure or the latest cutting-edge technology.
These funding cuts mean less investments in American innovation, less opportunities for kids to pursue STEM
careers, and less investment in the
next generation.
Don’t cut programs like SEED. Expand them so every child has a fair
chance to thrive and excel.
f

GREENLAND IS NOT FOR SALE
(Ms. STANSBURY asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
her remarks.)
Ms. STANSBURY. Mr. Speaker, you
know you have lost in 2026 when Republicans in the United States House of
Representatives are openly talking
about impeaching the President of the
United States if he invades Greenland,
as one was quoted today in the press.
Let us be clear. Mr. President, Greenland is not for sale. Greenland is not
for war. Greenland is not to be invaded.
Greenland is for the Greenlandic people
and our NATO allies, and we in the
House of Representatives stand with
our allies.
You have been duly warned, Mr.
President. The American people want
the Epstein files, not Greenland. If you
violate the law and one of our longest
standing allyships on the planet, there
will be consequences. It is long overdue.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from en-

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

gaging in personalities toward the
President and address their comments
to the Chair.
f

HONORING LIFE OF MATEO
CAMARILLO
(Mr. VARGAS asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. VARGAS. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of Mateo
Camarillo, a great trailblazer and leader in San Diego, who passed away recently.
Mateo was born in 1941 in Tijuana
and immigrated to the United States
as a child. As a fierce advocate for social justice and civil rights, Mateo put
community at the heart of everything
he did.
He was the force behind many incredible organizations and efforts that
changed San Diego for the better.
Mateo began organizing and helped create Casa Familiar and the San Ysidro
Health Center. He fought to expand bilingual access in public institutions.
He also served as the executive director
of The Chicano Federation.
In addition to his public service, he
was a very successful entrepreneur and
educator. Despite his many accomplishments, his family—his family—
was his pride and joy.
Mateo was once asked what his biggest motivation was for his work. He
said it was helping immigrant communities reach for the American Dream of
equal opportunity for all. He did more
than that. He did great things. May
Mateo rest in peace. A job well done.
f

HONORING MARTIN LUTHER KING,
JR.
(Ms. SIMON asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Ms. SIMON. Mr. Speaker, in 1968, 75
percent of Americans disapproved of
Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Today is his birthday.
The FBI called him the most dangerous Negro in America. They wiretapped his home and his office. They
sent him a letter, suggesting that he
should take his own life. King kept
walking.
One year before Memphis, at Riverside Church, he said what cost him resources and allies. He said: ‘‘The greatest purveyor of violence in the world
today is my own government.’’ He said:
‘‘A nation that continues year after
year to spend more money on military
defense than on programs of social uplift is approaching spiritual death.’’
Then he built the Poor People’s Campaign. Black, White, and Brown came
together, demanding that Congress address poverty in the richest Nation on
this Earth.
This is the King that we must remember, not the safe icon but the dangerous peacemaker. He wrote: ‘‘I refuse
to accept despair as the final response
to the ambiguities of history.’’

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.029

H15JAPT1

H912

As we honor his legacy, let us refuse
what he refused. Let us walk where he
walked: Toward justice, toward the
oughtness that forever confronts us.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1120
WHERE DO YOU STAND
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. GREEN of
Texas was recognized for 60 minutes as
the designee of the minority leader.)
Mr. GREEN of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
and still I rise.
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to rise today
on this, the birth date of Dr. Martin
Luther King, a man so great in the
eyes of this country that we honor his
birthday as a holiday, but it is more
than a holiday. It is an opportunity for
us to do some introspection, to examine some of the many things that are
occurring within our country that
should be addressed in a King-like fashion.
Dr. King had something that many
other intellectuals of his time did not
have. He was an intellectual. He had
something that many of the persons
who did speak up did not have; he had
something called courage.
Many of the great intellectuals could
expose and expound on some of the
great issues of the time, but they
didn’t have the courage to take a
stand, as Dr. King did, to go out into
the public—into the streets, if you
will—with protest—peaceful protest—
to bring about a change in this country, and he did bring about a change.
So today, on his birthday, I want to
honor Dr. King by speaking from one of
his quotes. He had many quotes that
are quite quotable, to be quite honest.
It is difficult to single out just a few,
but today I will mention a couple. But
there is one that I will focus on, the
third one. He, of course, is known for
having said: ‘‘Injustice anywhere is a
threat to justice everywhere.’’
Injustice in Minnesota is a threat to
justice in every other State in the
Union.
He didn’t say that about Minnesota,
but he was giving us the words to help
us understand that what is happening
in Minnesota, if it is an injustice, it
can happen in your State. It can happen in Texas, my State. ‘‘Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.’’ I think that is probably one of
his most-quoted quotes.
But then he also had one that is not
quoted too often. This one is one that
people don’t like to associate with Dr.
King because it speaks to his militancy, in a sense, but it also speaks to
things that people don’t want us to do.
We have a State that has as its motto
Live Free or Die.
Well, it is all right for a State to
have that, but Dr. King’s quote was: ‘‘A
man who hasn’t found something worth
dying for isn’t fit to live.’’
A man, a person, who has not found
something worth dying for isn’t fit to
live. Very few people will cite Dr. King

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

for having said this. By the way, I paraphrase a lot of what I am saying in
terms of his quotes.
‘‘A man who hasn’t found something
worth dying for isn’t fit to live.’’
But the one that I would like to
quote today and say much about is his
quote that deals with the ultimate
measure. ‘‘The ultimate measure of a
man . . . ’’ is the way he put it, but I
will be paraphrasing.
The ultimate measure—the ultimate
measure of the person is not where the
person stands in times of comfort—
comfort, when all of your bills are paid
and you are living the high life—not
where the person stands in times of
comfort and convenience—when everything is at your fingertips. You have at
your fingertips all of the luxuries of
life, all of the things that make life
worth living.
The ultimate measure is not where
the person stands in times of comfort
and convenience, but, rather, where do
you stand in times of challenge—challenge, when you have a reckless, ruthless, lawless President who is breaching the Constitution, who is doing
things that we never expected to see in
our lifetimes. Where do you stand when
you have a President who is doing
things within and without the country
that we did not anticipate?
Dr. King says that the ultimate
measure of the person is not where you
stand in times of comfort and convenience, but where do you stand in times
of challenge and controversy—controversy because what he is doing is
being justified by many people who
stand in the corridors of power. What
he is doing is being justified by members of the clergy, who ordinarily
would take the righteous stand. Where
do you stand?
‘‘The ultimate measure of a man.
. . .’’ Where do you stand in times of
challenge and controversy?
Let’s talk about this. Where do you
stand when the President of the United
States has replaced Congress with corporate America; when the President of
the United States will consult corporate America before he consults Congress; and when the President of the
United States goes into another country, Venezuela, bombs this country,
and consults with corporate America
but does not consult with the Congress
of the United States of America? Where
do you stand?
Well, here is where the Senate has
taken a position. Here is where the
Senate stands. Let’s first read what the
Senate has in S.J. Res. 90. This is a resolution brought before the Senate and
has been voted on but was voted down.
Let’s examine briefly an excerpt
from the resolution.
The resolution reads: ‘‘A joint resolution to direct the removal of United
States Armed Forces from hostilities
within or against Venezuela that have
not been authorized by Congress.’’
Remember, this is the President, who
consulted with corporate America but
not the Congress of the United States

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

of America. The Senate has this resolution, S.J. Res. 90.
It continues in the Findings. ‘‘Congress makes the following findings.’’ I
will read a portion of one.
This is what Congress finds. This is
the United States Senate: ‘‘Congress
has the sole power to declare war under
Article I, Section 8, Clause 11 of the
United States Constitution.’’
Congress, the sole power to declare
war.
It goes on to say: ‘‘Congress has not
yet declared war upon Venezuela or
any person or organization within Venezuela. . . .’’
Mr. Speaker, Congress not having declared war, a President who has declared that he visited with corporate
America before taking kinetic activity
in Venezuela, where do we stand?
Well, the Members of the Senate, 50
of them, stood with this resolution. I
would stand with them. I stand with
them now, 50 of them who stood for
this resolution.
Mr. Speaker, 50 Members were antithetical to the resolution. When this
occurs, the Vice President of the
United States has a vote.
The Vice President of the United
States voted with those who were antithetical to this resolution, S.J. Res. 90.
You can research and pull up the entirety of it, and I beg that you would.
So where do you stand when the Senate of the United States of America
cannot reclaim its power to declare
war? And we ought to do it while we
can. We are losing it.
b 1130
The ultimate measure of the United
States Senate—what is the ultimate
measure of it when it has the opportunity to reclaim its power to declare
war and it doesn’t?
We are finding ourselves now with
the National Guard being sent into various cities around the country, various
States, without a request from the
Governors, without a request from the
mayors, without a request from the officials who are in a position to make
that request, without a request from
the people, we the people not making
that request. I know that we the people
don’t make the request; the Governor
makes the request. But the point is we
the people put the Governor in place.
So we the people are not making the
request by and through our official
agent, Governors, but the President
has decided he would do this. And he
always concocts some fallacious, some
fictitious means by which this should
be done, and he does it. And, unfortunately, we have to ask: Where do the
courts stand?
Some of the courts are yielding to
the President’s pressure. He has threatened judges. Where do we stand when
the President is threatening judges?
Where do we stand when the President
has decided that there is no separation
of powers, that he can determine when
a judge is right or wrong and if that
judge is wrong, that judge should be

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.030

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 15, 2026

impeached? Where do we stand when
the Senate holds a hearing to discuss
the impeachment of judges who differ
with the President of the United States
of America? It has been done. I saw it
myself. Where do we stand?
Where do we stand when, after the
President has sent the National Guard
into various places, more turmoil has
been committed as a result of the
Guard being there than was being committed before they arrived? The President is the person who is creating the
turmoil so that he can then say: I am
justified in sending the National
Guard.
Where do we stand when a woman
seated in her vehicle, a woman, Ms.
Renee Nicole Good, seated in her vehicle when she is approached by a member of the constabulary in a rather aggressive way—and I am being kind, because with that aggression was an insufficient amount of profanity, more
than sufficient. It was really insufficient, not necessary, profanity.
Now, do we expect the constabulary
to approach people and in this process
swear at them, or do we expect them to
be respectful, be respectful even when
the person that the member of the constabulary is approaching is disrespectful? That is our job. We are to be respectful, notwithstanding the disrespect we have to suffer.
I was a judge. I remember having a
man come before me in court and said
some very unkind things with profanity. I could have held him in contempt. All I had to do was say: Mr.
Bailiff, take this man over to a certain
area and hold him until I finish the
docket. I have to have a further discussion with him.
I could have held him in contempt,
but I had heard enough of that case to
know that he was right about the facts
in the case; he was wrong in how he expressed himself. I never held that man
in contempt. I had the black robe on. I
had the power.
How you use power determines
whether you are a person who should
possess power, whether you are the person that should be armed with
lethality such that you can change a
person’s family’s history and remove a
person from existence.
Where do we stand when officers approach a person such as Ms. Good was
situated and when Ms. Good says to
this person: Dude, in a sense, I am not
mad at you. I am not mad at you. To
the person approaching aggressively: I
am not mad at you. And as she is saying these things—it has been said that
these were her last words—another officer comes across, near her, in front of
her, and this officer with a video camera has his weapon just with him. This
officer, as she turns away, shoots her
and then, as she is passing by, shoots
again.
I assume the first shot hit her. I
don’t know whether it did or didn’t.
That is my assumption, so I am saying
that. But we do know this: There were
additional shots fired as she passed by

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

H913

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

through her window—the window was
not up; it was not elevated—through
her window. We do know that she died.
We do know because we have seen it.
Now, you can justify this if you
would like, but you can’t justify the
Justice Department concluding that it
would not cooperate with the local authorities with the investigation, not if
you want transparency. Where do we
stand when the Justice Department refuses to be transparent after we see
what appears to be an injustice to
many people? I am one of them. I believe that the killing of Ms. Renee Nicole Good was a grave, gross injustice.
Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. So where do we stand
when this is happening? Where do we
stand? Sent in armed persons, and they
have now taken a life in a way that is
quite questionable.
Well, where do we stand when the
President now is saying that he is declaring martial law? Well, he is not declaring it currently. He is saying that
he may have to, talking about martial
law. He talked about that some time
ago. Actually now he is talking about
the Insurrection Act, the Insurrection
Act. He is talking about the Insurrection Act. He has spoken of martial law
on other occasions long ago, a while
ago, but now the Insurrection Act. So
that means he is going to send in the
military, if he does it, and then the
next thing after that could be martial
law.
So are we going to just stand by and
witness the President replace Congress
with corporate America, decide that he
will send in the National Guard, send it
in to cities across the country without
a request from the Governor of the
State? When he decides that he is going
to talk about now the Insurrection Act
as his next tool, National Guard already in, using the Insurrection Act,
bring in the military, the only thing
left is martial law. He hasn’t said that
he will resort to martial law at this
time, but I want to say this: I have
been trying to warn you. I have been
trying to warn the American people
that this President is moving us toward a dictatorship. I was among the
very first, if not the first, to say publicly that this was an authoritarian,
among the first to say it. It is difficult
to be a part of the avant-garde when
you are trying to warn powerful people
about something that is taking place.
b 1140
I have been trying to warn you. I say
it is difficult because Voltaire was
right. It is dangerous to be right in affairs where established men are wrong.
It is dangerous to be right. It is dangerous to be right when the establishment in this country refuses to acknowledge what is taking place.
Thank God for people associated with
free speech for people. Thank God for
the impeach and removal coalition,
people who are willing to be a part of
the avant-garde, who are willing to
take the proper stand when they see

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

democracy at risk, when they see the
President absolutely disregarding the
separation of powers, absolutely disregarding the fact that the judiciary
has the authority to render opinions
about circumstances that have been
brought before the judiciary.
There are some people who are standing up. I am proud to say that, here in
the Congress of the United States of
America, there are people who are taking a stand against this President’s unconstitutional behavior. They are taking a stand.
I am proud to tell you that many Articles of Impeachment have been filed
since the first was filed. Many have
been filed, and I am on every one of
them.
December 9, a stand was taken. Articles of Impeachment were filed. I am
on those articles.
December 10, a stand was taken. Articles of Impeachment were filed. I am
on those articles.
January 14, a stand was taken. I am
on these Articles of Impeachment.
I do not require people to stand with
me when I take a stand, because I sincerely believe, as I have said here at
this microphone many times, on some
issues it is better to stand alone than
not stand at all. I don’t lead by telling
people you have to follow me. No, I am
an example. If you think I am a good
example, then you can embrace the example.
I am not out whipping people for
votes. I am not going to demand that
people do something that I think is appropriate. I lead by example, and I try
to be a good example. I am not always
a good example, so no one should claim
that I claim perfection because I do
not.
I do claim this: On these issues related to the Constitution, I refuse to
stand by and see what is happening in
my country as it devolves into what I
perceive as a dictatorship. I refuse to
stand by and see that and say nothing.
The truest and the ultimate measure
of the person is not where you stand in
times of comfort and convenience when
you have all of these things happening
that I have cited, but where do you
stand in times of challenge and controversy when these things are happening—not when all is right with the
world, but where you stand in times of
challenge and controversy.
Do you stand with the President who
is behaving in an unlawful fashion as it
relates to the Constitution, or do you
stand with the Constitution? Do you
stand with the Constitution of the
United States of America?
This is where we Members of Congress now have to make a decision. Are
we going to stand with the reckless,
ruthless, lawless President, or are we
going to stand with the Constitution of
the United States of America?
I am proud to tell you that when we
filed the last Articles of Impeachment—and I have filed many. I plan to
file more, just for edification purposes.
I will say more about that at a later
time.

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.033

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H914

When the last Articles of Impeachment were filed, it was H. Res. 939.
With these Articles of Impeachment,
there was a vote. I believe that we
ought to take a stand. We ought to
take a stand. These are times of challenge and controversy. We were elected
to take a stand in times of challenge
and controversy.
Yes, I know that it can put my career
at risk. There are people trying to get
me out of office, and they are doing a
pretty good job. I never know what my
next day will bring.
I do know this: I will have my record
show that I fought all the way out. I
didn’t come to stay forever, but I did
come to make a difference while here
on the great issues of our time.
Where do we stand? On H. Res. 939,
140 persons voted for H. Res. 939, 140
Members of Congress, not one from the
other side of the aisle—140, Members
who hold high positions. I am not calling anybody out.
As a result, we have identified all of
them in this document. This is my
copy. But all 140 Members who voted
for H. Res. 939 will receive a similar
copy, and their names are all listed.
Each person’s name is going to be highlighted one time, and that one time
will be the time that we will acknowledge this person as being in the document by highlighting the name. That
will be given to that person. Each person will have his or her name highlighted on the page when no other
names are highlighted but that one
person’s.
It is important now for me to read a
bit from H. Res. 939. It reads: ‘‘Impeaching Donald John Trump, President of the United States, for high
crimes and misdemeanors.’’
I have to pause a minute and say
this. The President said just recently
that ‘‘they will find a reason to impeach me.’’ Mr. President, we don’t
have to find a reason. You are giving
reasons. You are providing reasons on a
daily basis almost. I said ‘‘almost.’’
On a daily basis, you are providing
reasons for people to file Articles of
Impeachment against you. The question is not whether the reasons are
there. You are providing them. The
question is, Mr. President, will we have
the courage to bring you to justice?
This is the bar of justice for you, Mr.
President. You will be brought before
this bar of justice, the House of Representatives, where impeachment is
the indictment that will bring you to
justice.
So, it reads: ‘‘Impeaching Donald
John Trump, President of the United
States, for high crimes and misdemeanors.’’
It goes on to read: ‘‘Resolved, That
Donald John Trump, President of the
United States, is an abuser of Presidential power who, if left in office, will
continue to promote the incitement of
violence’’—and he has a done a job—I
almost said ‘‘a good job,’’ but I hate to
use ‘‘good’’ in this context. He has
‘‘engender[ed]
invidious
hate,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

undermine[d] our democracy, and
dissolve[d] our Republic, that he is impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors, and that the following Articles of Impeachment be exhibited to
the United States Senate.’’
They were first exhibited to the
House. The House took a vote. One
hundred forty persons voted for the impeachment. We had another 47, I believe, who chose to vote ‘‘present.’’
For these 140, I have the courage to
present to you this document in this
fine piece of cover that has a very soft
texture to it. We will present this to
you. I want to read what it says above
the patriotic 140.
b 1150
It reads: Patriotism means to stand.
Where do you stand in times of challenging controversy? Remember Dr.
King.
Patriotism means to stand by the
country in times of challenging controversy.
That is what patriotism means:
Stand by the country. Patriotism
means to stand by the country. It does
not mean to stand by the President.
Patriotism means to stand by the
country. It does not mean to stand by
the President.
Dr. King, today we honor your profound words in the ultimate measure of
the man. As it was said at that time,
the ultimate measure of the person is
not where the person stands in times of
comfort and convenience but where
does a person stand in times of challenge and controversy.
The answer is from Theodore Roosevelt. I am a bipartisan guy. The answer is: Patriotism means to stand by
the country. It does not mean to stand
by the President.
This is Dr. King’s birthday. I thought
it most appropriate to pay tribute to
the 140 patriotic Americans who took a
stand.
For those who have concluded that
there will not be impeachment: You
are wrong.
It is the only solution available to
prevent the next Donald Trump, the
next would-be, from assuming the position that this Donald Trump has taken
and imposed the kinds of horrific
atrocities on society that this Donald
Trump is the imposing.
We need to impeach right here and
send it over to the Senate. The Senate
would have a trial. Impeach, convict—
conviction takes place in the Senate—
and remove. The Senate has the power
to do this. This is the solution.
I understand that the network television programs, for the most part—
there are some exceptions, but for the
most part, they stand with Donald
Trump. Donald Trump does not want to
be impeached. He as much as said so,
and the networks don’t want him impeached. They have said so. I have listened to many persons associated with
the networks, and they said so. They
don’t want to see impeachment.
I differ with them. By the way, when
you differ with them, they won’t let

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

you say that. This is a free-speech
country when people will allow you to
speak broadly on their networks. So
they are not going to let you do that.
You won’t see me on CNN. You won’t
see me on MSNBC, but you will hear
from me here as long as I am allowed
to speak because I just believe in
speaking truth about power, not just
speak truth to power, but speak truth
about power.
Speak truth to power, you say:
Power, there is a problem. Let’s solve
it.
Speak truth about power, you say:
Power, there is a problem, and you are
it.
That is just as I did from that seat
right over to my right when the President was up at that podium and I told
him he didn’t have a mandate to cut
Medicaid, Medicare, and Social Security.
The networks are a status quo institution for the most part. They want to
maintain things as they are. I am not
a status quo Representative. I want to
see change, positive change, change
that can make a difference in the lives
of people.
I tell you this, Mr. Speaker, if we
don’t speak up, stand up, and meet the
ultimate measure of the person that
Dr. King calls to our attention, it may
be too late at some point within the
next 3 years for us to do so. Because
this President is showing us that he intends to become a dictator. To a certain extent, he is already, to a limited
extent, a dictator.
So we have to take back our power to
declare war while we can before it is
too late. We have got to take back the
authority in the Constitution to have a
separation of powers while we can before it is too late. We have got to stand
up to this President.
Dr. King, that is what you would
have us do. I believe you would have us
take a stand.
I believe that Dr. King would not sit
silently by and witness what has taken
place now and do it without taking a
stand.
Not everybody has to take a stand to
impeach. Some people decided that
they would peacefully protest. I am a
peaceful protester. I will stand by people who peacefully protest. I will not
stand by people who do not peacefully
protest. If you introduce violence, then
you just lost me. I am not with you. It
doesn’t matter who you are, I am not
with you.
The ultimate measure of the person
in times of challenge and controversy
is with the Constitution of the United
States of America. That is where I am,
and that is where I stand. I assure you
as I stand here, I want you to know,
Mr. Speaker, that we who believe that
Dr. King should be commemorated
ought to commemorate his life respectfully.
There is nothing wrong with commemorating his life by engaging in
peaceful protest. There is nothing
wrong with commemorating his life by

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.034

H15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

standing on the authority vested in the
Constitution of the United States of
America which is imparted to us. The
words are without us they just become
words. We give meaning to the Constitution.
So there is nothing wrong with taking that stand. Stand on the Constitution of the United States of America.
Dr. King, I know that is what you
would have us do.
That is what I encourage others to
do.
I assure you, Dr. King, I am going to
bring additional Articles of Impeachment to a vote on the floor of the
House of Representatives.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
SCHMIDT). Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the President and to direct their
remarks to the Chair.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1200
MISGUIDED POLICY IN
CALIFORNIA
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. KILEY of
California was recognized for 60 minutes as the designee of the majority
leader. )
Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, every so often there comes along a
policy so misguided, so self-destructive, so just utterly stupid that it has
catastrophic consequences before it is
even adopted.
Such is the case with the newly proposed wealth tax in the State of California, a proposal that is the height of
folly, the height of insanity. The proposal would seize the assets, 5 percent
of the net worth of citizens of our
State who are purported to have a net
worth over a billion dollars. Of course,
that will simply be the first line that is
drawn, with inevitably lower net worth
levels ensnared in the future.
This measure, which would be adopted this November and put into effect
next year, has a peculiar provision in it
stating that it would apply even to
people who are no longer residents of
the State at the time of its enactment.
It would apply to anyone who was a
resident of California up until January
1 of this year, even though it doesn’t
take effect until January 1 of next
year.
Those who would be affected by it got
word that this is coming. Guess what
they did? They made sure that they
were not here as of January 1 of this
year. For example, Larry Page and
Sergey Brin, the founders of Google,
have relocated from California because
one analysis suggests that under this
proposal the government could seize
$60 billion from each of them.
There are reports now that already $1
trillion in net worth has exited California simply in anticipation of this
policy being adopted. They simply
can’t take the risk. One person with

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

H915

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

knowledge of the affected individuals
said that 80 to 90 percent of them either will leave the State or have left
already, not to mention those who
don’t quite meet that threshold but
know that they will be next, who have
already left or are looking at an exit
strategy.
The consequences of this growing exodus cannot be overstated when it
comes to the future of our State. Number one, with all of these high-networth individuals leaving, they are, of
course, taking all of the taxes that
they pay with them, so the State
Treasury no longer receives anything.
Now, obviously, this is a drain on the
Treasury. It would be in any State, but
in particular in California because of
the unusual extent to which our State
relies on the highest earners.
In some years, our State budget, our
State income tax revenue gets 50 percent of its total revenues from the top
1 percent of earners. When you see
those people leaving the State, it
means that the house of cards that is
our State’s finances will come tumbling down.
We also should note the impact this
is going to have on the startup community in California, which is so central
to our State’s identity, vitality, and
economic prosperity and so central to
what has made California such a vital
part of the American economy and
such a driving force in progress all
around the world.
However, because this proposal would
seize liquid assets, would demand 5 percent of an individual’s net worth even
though they are assessing assets of all
kinds, what that would mean for a
startup that has a very high paper
value—based simply upon the way that
startups receive their valuation, for example, based upon a multiple of an initial seed investment—then essentially
you would have startups that would be
forced to liquefy their assets or would
simply not be able to pay this bill.
Therefore, it would no longer be viable
to be a startup in California. The entire ecosystem would cease to function
as it does now.
It is worth mentioning, by the way,
that this exodus has been an ongoing
phenomenon in California. It is not
just limited to those who are of a high
net worth. For the sixth straight year,
U-Haul has just ranked California as
number one in the country in outbound
U-Haul rentals, in people leaving the
State. It is usually not the wealthiest
people. It is people who simply can’t afford to get by in California because of
the inordinately high cost of living.
This proposed wealth tax would take
this trend to an entirely new level in a
way that would make it so California is
a failed State, is no longer viable as a
political entity. That is why we need to
make sure that this provision does not
pass. In addition, importantly, we need
to make sure that the unconstitutional
scheme whereby former residents
would be ensnared is not allowed to
even begin to be executed.

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

That is why I am working on legislation here in the House of Representatives, Federal legislation to preempt
that provision, which I believe is unconstitutional under the Commerce
Clause, but we need to have express
preemption in law to make sure that at
the very least people do not feel the
need to leave in anticipation of this
measure or a future such measure passing.
Now that we have discussed this absolutely insane proposal, I want to
take a closer look at the California
State budget as it now stands because
this last week we got an announcement
from the Governor that the State will
be spending $348.9 billion in the coming
fiscal year.
Now, notably, that is a massive increase over what the State spent just
last year, and it is nearly double what
the budget was when Gavin Newsom
became Governor in 2019. At the time
Newsom was sworn in, our State budget was $197.5 billion, already quite
high. During his tenure, he has increased the budget to $348.9 billion, in
the process putting the State’s finances in dire straits.
A columnist for the San Francisco
Chronicle noted that Newsom’s gift to
his successor is a $22 billion deficit.
The State’s nonpartisan legislative analyst came out with an absolutely
scathing report, calling the State’s financial situation and the Governor’s
budget ‘‘alarming.’’ The report raised
‘‘serious concerns about the State’s fiscal sustainability’’ and noted that the
Governor’s budget does not materially
address those concerns.
This, by the way, isn’t even to mention the massive around $1 trillion—
shortfall when it comes to funding the
State’s long-term liabilities, the unfunded liabilities that we have in the
State.
Let’s just look at this increase in the
size of the budget. Remember, this
wealth tax is being offered on the
premise that we need even more revenue. Over the course of this Governor’s tenure, California’s budget has
grown by 75.7 percent.
Now, you might say, well, maybe
that is what other States are doing,
too. Surely, other States have increased their budget. However, they
have not increased their budget nearly
as much as California has.
Florida, for example, has a $78.6 billion budget. That is compared to $349
billion in California. Over that same
period, Florida’s budget grew by 56 percent, Ohio’s budget grew by 36 percent.
You might say, well, those are red
States, what about comparing California to other blue States? Well, Massachusetts’ budget grew by 44 percent,
New York’s budget grew by 37 percent,
while California’s budget grew by 75.7
percent during that time period.
Now, you might say, okay, we are
spending more, but surely the people of
California
are
getting
something
worthwhile in return for this massive
increase in tax revenue, this massive

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.036

H15JAPT1

H916

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

increase in public expenditures. Surely,
we are seeing major gains in the
achievement of our students in schools.
Surely, we have gotten beautiful new
roads and transit systems. Surely, we
are seeing the cost of living go down
and the quality of life go up.
However, no, quite the opposite has
happened. Infrastructure in California
remains among the worst in the country. Our roads are routinely rated
among the three worst roads in terms
of their condition anywhere in the
country. We pay the highest gas taxes,
yet drive over the deepest potholes.
Despite tens of billions of dollars
more being spent every year on education, educational achievement in
California has flatlined, and we continue to have some of the most glaring
achievement gaps of any State in the
country.
Meanwhile, the cost of living in California is the highest anywhere in the
United States. We have the highest
taxes. We have the highest cost of
housing of any State other than Hawaii. We have the highest gas prices.
We have the highest electricity prices,
including the highest increase in electricity prices during Newsom’s tenure
as Governor compared to any other
State. We are among the top two or
three in the country when it comes to
water bills. In every single dimension
of affordability, California is the Nation’s least affordable State.
b 1210
Mr. Speaker, the Governor has utterly failed to justify asking our citizens to pay even more when they receive a historically, unfathomably low
return on that investment. The fact is,
the people of California continue to
sacrifice more and more and get less
and less in return.
Now, Mr. Speaker, I will examine one
of the reasons why that is the case. I
will take a moment today to look at
the vast waste, fraud, and abuse that
exists in the State of California and
the proposal that I am working on to
bring the full scale, extent, and
breadth of it to light so that we can
work to address it using every tool
that we have here at the Federal level
and to compel changes at the State
level.
This is the simple reality: Every single time there has been any sort of
independent audit of a program in California, the results have been the same.
There has been mind-boggling waste
and fraud identified, and the causality
has been identified as unbelievable negligence and neglect on the part of the
State, its agencies, and its government.
I will list just a few examples. During
the COVID years, California had, at a
bare minimum, $32.6 billion in unemployment fraud through our EDD agency. A State audit that I initially requested, as a member of the legislature, and that Governor Newsom initially killed, found that the State
spent $24 billion on homelessness over

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

a 5-year span and failed to track the
actual uses of those funds or whether
they made any measurable improvement on the homelessness problem in
our State. By the way, they didn’t. The
homeless population increased by some
50,000 individuals.
We have already seen charges
brought in both San Francisco and
Florida when it comes to fraud in relation to the expenditure of funds that
were earmarked for homelessness. We
have also seen convictions in Orange
County in connection, for example,
with workers’ compensation fraud.
The State auditor also just came out
with a scathing high-risk audit identifying the agencies in California that
qualify as high risk, meaning they exhibit a serious risk of waste, fraud,
abuse, or mismanagement, and have
failed to take corrective steps.
The number of these high-risk agencies is now at an all-time high. It has
doubled during the course of Governor
Newsom’s tenure. Among the findings
were error rates when it comes to food
assistance benefits that could cost a
loss of $2.5 billion in Federal funds.
Billions more are at risk of being lost
or are being lost through improper
Medi-Cal determinations and through
ongoing EDD fraud, which continues at
staggering levels even after the $32.6
billion lost during the COVID years.
The audit also found that California
has missed six straight financial reporting deadlines, putting the State’s
very credit rating at risk. Then, of
course, there is the matter of the highspeed rail, which was supposed to be
completed, a full, functioning, highspeed rail line from San Francisco to
Los Angeles in 2020, 6 years ago. Yet,
here we are in 2026, $18 billion spent.
The overall cost is now projected to be
$128 billion, and literally nothing has
been built. No track has been laid, and
not a single passenger has ridden this
nonexistent train, which raises the
question: Where has all of this money
gone?
Even an audit during the Biden administration from President Biden’s
Health and Human Services agency
found
that
California
improperly
claimed $52.7 million in Medicaid reimbursement for noncitizens, which, of
course, raises many questions about
how pervasive these improper payments might be in our Medi-Cal system
more broadly.
Mr. Speaker, this is just a snapshot
into certain programs in the State of
California. What we need is a comprehensive review to see just how staggering the problem is, just how many
tens of billions of dollars our citizens
are losing. Maybe that would be a better way to give Californians a higher
return on their investments.
Rather than increasing the budget to
$349 billion, rather than imposing an
absolutely ruinous wealth tax that will
give our State government the unprecedented authority to simply confiscate
the assets of anyone they choose,
maybe it would be better to make it so

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

California is no longer the fraud capital of the United States.
HONORING AN EXTRAORDINARY AMERICAN,
RICHARD ‘‘DICK’’ BURBINE

Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor an extraordinary American, a man whose life
story reflects the very best of our Nation’s character, courage, and commitment to service. Richard ‘‘Dick’’
Burbine represents a generation that
answered history’s call with quiet resolve and uncommon bravery.
Dick Burbine was born on January 9,
1926, in Melrose, Massachusetts. Like
so many young Americans of his time,
his life was forever changed by the
events of World War II.
In the wake of the attack on Pearl
Harbor, while most teenagers were still
in high school, Dick Burbine chose
service. At just 16 years old, he enlisted
in the United States Merchant Marine,
trained at Gallops Island in Boston
Harbor, and soon found himself at sea,
supporting Allied operations in both
the Atlantic and Pacific theaters.
One of the most defining chapters of
his service came aboard the Liberty
ship SS Henry Bacon. Dick served during the infamous Murmansk Run, an
Arctic supply route widely regarded as
one of the most dangerous missions of
the war. Sailors faced brutal weather,
freezing seas, and constant enemy attack, all to ensure vital supplies
reached those fighting tyranny.
On February 23, 1945, tragedy struck
when the Henry Bacon was attacked by
enemy aircraft in the Barents Sea and
ultimately sank. Dick Burbine was
only 18 years old when he was thrown
into icy, subzero waters. What he did
next defines heroism.
At great personal risk, he righted a
capsized lifeboat, pulled fellow sailors
to safety, and helped rescue Norwegian
women and children who were fleeing
the war. Despite the loss of 28 crewmembers, every one of the 19 Norwegian refugees survived, making this
a powerful testament to the courage
and selflessness of Dick Burbine and
his shipmates.
His service did not end with World
War II. Dick continued to serve during
the early Cold War and later enlisted in
the United States Marine Corps. During the Korean war, he served with distinction as a helicopter mechanic and
crew chief, eventually earning the rank
of staff sergeant.
After leaving the military, Dick
Burbine remained dedicated to protecting others. He served in law enforcement with the Contra Costa Sheriff’s Department, the Danville Constable’s Office, and the University of
California Police Department at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
In 1987, he retired as a sergeant and
watch commander, concluding yet another chapter of public service.
Even in retirement, Dick did not step
away from giving back. He volunteered
with the U.S. Forest Service in the
Bridgeport Ranger District, helping
maintain campgrounds for the benefit
of residents and visitors alike.

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.038

H15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

Remarkably, even as he approaches
his 100th birthday, he continues to harvest and donate firewood each winter
to neighbors in need, quiet acts of
kindness that say as much about his
character as any medal ever could.
His legacy of service lives on through
his family, including his son, Joseph,
who also served in the United States
Marine Corps and in law enforcement.
On January 9, 2026, just a few days
ago, Richard ‘‘Dick’’ Burbine celebrated his centennial birthday, 100
years defined by courage under fire, unwavering devotion to country, and a
lifelong commitment to community.
On behalf of a grateful nation and
with deep respect and admiration, we
thank Dick Burbine for his heroic military service, his distinguished public
safety career, and his enduring example of what it means to serve others. It
is an honor to represent exemplary individuals like Dick Burbine in Congress.
Mr. Speaker, I offer our heartfelt
congratulations and best wishes as he
reaches this remarkable milestone. We
say, simply and sincerely, thank you.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

SENATE ENROLLED BILL SIGNED
The Speaker announced his signature
to an enrolled bill of the Senate of the
following title:
S. 269.—An act to improve coordination between Federal and State agencies and the Do
Not Pay working system.
f

ADJOURNMENT
Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do now adjourn.
The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 12 o’clock and 20 minutes
p.m.), under its previous order, the
House adjourned until tomorrow, Friday, January 16, 2026, at 3 p.m.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS,
ETC.
Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive
communications were taken from the
Speaker’s table and referred as follows:
EC–2674. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Application for Presidential Permit Authorizing the Construction, Connection, Operation, and Maintenance of Facilities for
Transmission of Electric Energy at International
Boundaries
[DOE-HQ-2025-0011]
(RIN: 1901-AB68) received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2675. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Clean Energy for New Federal Buildings and
Major Renovations of Federal Buildings;
Stay [EERE-2010-BT-STD-0031] (RIN: 1904AB96) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

H917

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2676. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s rescission of
policy statement — Rescission of Policy
Statement on Export Commencement Deadlines in Authorizations To Export Natural
Gas to Non-Free Trade Agreement Countries
received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2677. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Energy Conservation Program: Energy Conservation Standards and Test Procedures for
Certain Consumer Products and Commercial
Equipment; Corrections [EERE-2023-BT-CE0001] received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2678. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Energy Conservation Program: Final Withdrawal of Determination of Miscellaneous
Gas Products as a Covered Consumer Product [EERE-2025-BT-DET-0002] (RIN: 1904AF70) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2679. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Collection of Information Under the
Energy Supply and Environmental Coordination Act of 1974 [EERE-2025-OT-0033] (RIN:
1904-AG04) received January 9, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
EC–2680. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Rescinding Obsolete Transfer of Proceedings
Regulations
[DOE-HQ-2025-0018]
(RIN: 1990-AA53) received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2681. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Rescinding New Construction Requirements Related to Nondiscrimination in
Federally Assisted Programs or Activities
[DOE-HQ-2025-0015] (RIN: 1903-AA24) received
January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2682. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Repeal of the Definition of Showerhead
[EERE-2025-BT-DET-0005] (RIN: 1904-AF75)
received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2683. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Energy Conservation Program: Test Procedure for Central Air Conditioners and Heat
Pumps [EERE-2022-BT-TP-0028] (RIN: 1904-

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

AF49) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2684. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Energy Conservation Standards for Manufactured Housing [EERE-2009-BT-BC-0021] (RIN:
1904-AF73) received January 9, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
EC–2685. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Rescinding Regulations Related to
Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Sex in
Education Programs or Activities Receiving
Federal Financial Assistance [DOE-HQ-20250025] (RIN: 1903-AA22) received January 9,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2686. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Rescinding Regulations Related to
Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted
Programs or Activities (General Provisions)
[DOE-HQ-2025-0024] (RIN: 1903-AA20) received
January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2687. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s final rule —
Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Sex in
Sports Programs Arising Out of Federal Financial Assistance [DOE-HQ-2025-0016] (RIN:
1903-AA25) received January 9, 2026, pursuant
to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121,
Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
EC–2688. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Nondiscrimination on the Basis of
Sex in Sports Programs Arising Out of Federal Financial Assistance [DOE-HQ-2025-0016]
(RIN: 1903-AA25) received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2689. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Rescinding Regulations for Loans for
Minority Business Enterprises Seeking DOE
Contracts and Assistance [DOE-HQ-2025-0014]
(RIN: 1903-AA23) received January 9, 2026,
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law
104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2690. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Rescinding Obsolete Financial Assistance Rules [DOE-HQ-2025-0017] (RIN: 1991AC20) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2691. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Procedures for Acquisition of Petroleum for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve
[DOE-HQ-2025-0009] (RIN: 1901-AB66) received

E:\CR\FM\K15JA7.040

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H918

January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2692. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Revisions to the Office of Hearings
and Appeals Procedural Regulations [DOEHQ-2025-0013] (RIN: 1910-AA57) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2693. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s interim final
rule — Energy Dominance Financing Amendments [DOE-HQ-2025-0174] (RIN: 1901-AB72)
received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2694. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Amending the Administrative Procedures With Respect to the Import and Export
of Natural Gas [DOE-HQ-2025-0010] (RIN: 1901AB67) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2695. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s interim final
rule — Implementing Voluntary Agreements
Under the Defense Production Act [DOE-HQ2025-0175] (RIN: 1901-AB73) received January
9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2696. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and
Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s direct final
rule — Revisions to the Office of Hearings
and Appeals Procedural Regulations for the
DOE Contractor Employee Protection Program [DOE-HQ-2025-0012] (RIN: 1910-AA56) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2697. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule — Pyriofenone;
Pesticide Tolerances [EPA-HQ-OPP-2024-0239;
FRL-13069-01-OCSPP] received January 13,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2698. A letter from the Agency Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule — Permethrin;
Pesticide Tolerances [EPA-HQ-OPP-2024-0201;
FRL-13107-01-OCSPP] received January 13,
2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public
Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
EC–2699. A letter from the Acting Branch
Supervisor, Regulatory Management Branch,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting the Agency’s final rule — New Source
Performance Standards Review for Stationary Combustion Turbines and Stationary
Gas Turbines [EPA-HQ-OAR-2024-0419; FRL11542-02-OAR] (RIN: 2060-AW21) received January 13, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110
Stat. 868); to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
EC–2700. A letter from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

Energy Efficiency, Department of Energy,
transmitting the Department’s interim final
rule — Revision of National Environmental
Policy Act Implementing Procedures [DOEHQ-2025-0026] (RIN: 1990-AA52) received January 9, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Natural Resources.
EC–2701. A letter from the Director, Regulations and Disclosure Law Division, U.S.
Customs and Border Protection, Department
of Homeland Security, transmitting the Department’s final rule — Extension of Import
Restrictions on Archaeological Material of
Costa Rica [CBP Dec.: 26-03] (RIN: 1685-AA40)
received January 13, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Ways and Means.
EC–2702. A letter from the Director, Regulations and Disclosure Law Division, U.S.
Customs and Boarder Protection, Department of Homeland Security, transmitting
the Department’s final rule — Extension of
Import Restrictions Imposed on Categories
of Archaeological Material of Italy [CBP
Dec.: 26-01] (RIN: 1685-AA37) received January 18, 2026, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A);
Public Law 104-121, Sec. 251; (110 Stat. 868); to
the Committee on Ways and Means.
EC–2703. A letter from the Director, Regulations and Disclosure Law Division, U.S.
Customs and Boarder Protection, Department of Homeland Security, transmitting
the Department’s final rule — Extension of
Import Restrictions on Categories of Archaeological and Ethnological Material From
Morocco [CBP Dec.: 26-02] (RIN: 1685-AA39)
received January 13, 2026, pursuant to 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A); Public Law 104-121, Sec.
251; (110 Stat. 868); to the Committee on
Ways and Means.
f

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES ON
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XIII, reports of
committees were delivered to the Clerk
for printing and reference to the proper
calendar, as follows:
Mr. Hill of Arkansas: Committee On Financial Services. H.R. 5577. A bill to amend the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 to reauthorize the National Flood Insurance Program; with an amendment (Rept. 119–456).
Referred to the Committee of the Whole
House on the state of the Union.
Mr. HILL of Arkansas: Committee on Financial Services. H.R. 6644. A bill a bill to increase the supply of housing in America, and
for other purposes; with amendments (Rept.
119–457, Pt. 1). Referred to the Committee of
the Whole House on the State of the Union.
DISCHARGE OF COMMITTEE

Pursuant to clause 2 of rule XIII, the
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs discharged from further consideration.
H.R. 6644 referred to the Committee of
the Whole House on the state of the
Union.
f

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following
titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:
By Mr. MACKENZIE:
H.R. 7082. A bill to amend the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act of 1965 in order
to provide for greater flexibility in the Federal programs supporting the planning and
implementation of charter schools; to the
Committee on Education and Workforce.

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

By Mr. BARRETT:
H.R. 7083. A bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to make certain improvements
in the process of the Department of Veterans
Affairs for making payments to automobile
sellers for automobiles purchased for certain
disabled veterans, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. PFLUGER (for himself, Mr.
CARBAJAL, Ms. SEWELL, Mr. MANN,
and Mr. EDWARDS):
H.R. 7084. A bill to amend title 46, United
States Code, with respect to the types of vessels that may enter or operate in navigable
waters of the United States or transfer cargo
in any port or place under the jurisdiction of
the United States, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
By Mr. HUIZENGA:
H.R. 7085. A bill to amend the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 to repeal certain disclosure requirements related to conflict minerals, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. CISCOMANI (for himself and
Mr. BISHOP):
H.R. 7086. A bill to support the creation
and implementation of State policies, as well
as the expansion of existing State policies,
for improving the quality and affordability
of charter school facilities and to authorize
the provision of technical assistance to support the growth and expansion of high-quality charter schools; to the Committee on
Education and Workforce.
By Mr. MORAN (for himself and Ms.
SEWELL):
H.R. 7087. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow for deductions for
transfers from estates or gifts to certain
cemeteries; to the Committee on Ways and
Means.
By Mr. AMO (for himself, Mr. BOYLE of
Mr.
Pennsylvania,
Mr.
HOYER,
KEATING, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania,
Mr. DOGGETT, Mr. GARAMENDI, Ms.
GARCIA of Texas, Mr. GOLDMAN of
New York, Ms. HOYLE of Oregon, Mr.
JACKSON of Illinois, Ms. MCBRIDE, Mr.
MOULTON, Ms. NORTON, Mr. PALLONE,
Mr. PANETTA, Mr. QUIGLEY, Ms. SCANLON, and Mr. SWALWELL):
H.R. 7088. A bill to prohibit actions or expenditure of funds to purchase a North Atlantic Treaty Organization member country
or NATO-protected territory; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. AMO (for himself, Ms.
VELÁZQUEZ, Ms. SEWELL, Mr. COHEN,
Ms. NORTON, Ms. LOFGREN, Mr. GOLDMAN of New York, and Mr. HUFFMAN):
H.R. 7089. A bill to prohibit National Park
System entrance fee waivers commemorating the birthday of a sitting President,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Natural Resources.
By Mr. BACON (for himself, Mr. FLOOD,
Mr. SMITH of Nebraska, Mr. FONG,
Mr. HURD of Colorado, Mr. EZELL, Mr.
BABIN, Ms. KING-HINDS, and Mr.
CARBAJAL):
H.R. 7090. A bill to designate the portion of
Interstate Route 680 in Omaha, Nebraska, as
the ‘‘Hal Daub Freeway’’; to the Committee
on Transportation and Infrastructure.
By Mr. BERGMAN (for himself and Mr.
CORREA):
H.R. 7091. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs to establish an investigational research and extended access treatment program utilizing innovative treatments and emerging therapies to address
conditions with unmet medical needs, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. CARTER of Louisiana (for himself, Ms. ADAMS, Mr. MOYLAN, and
Mr. MACKENZIE):

E:\CR\FM\L15JA7.000

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 15, 2026

H.R. 7092. A bill to amend the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act of 1965 to require local educational agencies to include
mental health and suicide prevention information on student identification cards, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Education and Workforce.
By Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas (for herself
and Mr. MACKENZIE):
H.R. 7093. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide a charitable deduction for the contribution of the use of
certain property by community learning centers; to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mr. DOGGETT (for himself, Mr.
BACON, Mr. BILIRAKIS, Mr. COHEN, Mr.
FITZPATRICK, Mr. GOLDMAN of New
York, Mr. KEAN, Ms. NORTON, and Mr.
QUIGLEY):
H.R. 7094. A bill to prohibit United States
persons from providing petroleum equipment
or services in the energy sector of the Russian Federation; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and in addition to the Committee on the Judiciary, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. DOGGETT (for himself, Mr.
BACON, Mr. BILIRAKIS, Mr. COHEN, Mr.
FITZPATRICK, Mr. MCCORMICK, Ms.
MOORE of Wisconsin, Mr. NORCROSS,
Ms. NORTON, Mr. QUIGLEY, Mr.
SCHNEIDER, Mr. SMITH of New Jersey,
and Mr. WILSON of South Carolina):
H.R. 7095. A bill to amend the Ending Importation of Russian Oil Act to provide for a
prohibition on importation of energy products produced at refineries outside the Russian Federation; to the Committee on Ways
and Means, and in addition to the Committee
on Rules, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. ESTES (for himself and Mr.
HARDER of California):
H.R. 7096. A bill to amend titles XVIII and
XIX of the Social Security Act ensure appropriate approval for certain skilled nursing
facility and nursing facility nursing aide
training and competency evaluation programs under the Medicare and Medicaid program; to the Committee on Ways and Means,
and in addition to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Mr. FEENSTRA (for himself and
Mr. HUNT):
H.R. 7097. A bill to prohibit international
wire transfers by public assistance recipients, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. TONY GONZALES of Texas:
H.R. 7098. A bill to amend the Homeland
Security Act of 2002 to authorize the deployment and assistance of CBP relating to investigations of certain violent acts, shootings, and mass killings, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Ms. GOODLANDER (for herself, Mr.
VAN DREW, Ms. WILSON of Florida,
Mr. FITZPATRICK, Mr. KEAN, and Ms.
MCDONALD RIVET):
H.R. 7099. A bill to increase access to higher education and center-based Head Start
programs by providing public transit grants;
to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
By Mr. GOTTHEIMER (for himself and
Mr. VALADAO):
H.R. 7100. A bill to direct the Attorney
General to establish a task force on anti-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:12 Jan 16, 2026

H919

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Sikh hate and discrimination; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mrs. GRIJALVA (for herself, Ms.
ANSARI, Ms. BALINT, Mr. CARBAJAL,
Mr. CISNEROS, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania, Ms. DELAURO, Mrs. DINGELL,
Mr. DOGGETT, Ms. ELFRETH, Mrs.
FOUSHEE, Mr. GARCIA of California,
Ms. GARCIA of Texas, Mr. GOLDMAN of
New York, Mrs. HAYES, Ms. NORTON,
Mr. KENNEDY of New York, Ms.
LEGER FERNANDEZ, Mr. LEVIN, Mr.
Mr.
MANNION,
Mr.
LICCARDO,
OLSZEWSKI, Ms. POU, Ms. RANDALL,
Mrs. RAMIREZ, Ms. RIVAS, Ms. ROSS,
Mr.
STANTON,
Mr.
Ms.
SIMON,
THANEDAR, Ms. TLAIB, Mr. TONKO, Ms.
WILLIAMS of Georgia, and Mr. FROST):
H.R. 7101. A bill to require that an individual elected to fill a vacancy in the House
of Representatives pursuant to a special
election shall be provided an opportunity to
have the oath of office administered and
seated as a member of that body not later
than five legislative days after the day that
the results of the special election are certified, and for other purposes; to the Committee on House Administration.
By Mr. HAMADEH of Arizona:
H.R. 7102. A bill to amend title 5, United
States Code, to require Federal civilian career employees to pass a citizenship test as a
condition of employment, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform.
By Mr. HAMADEH of Arizona:
H.R. 7103. A bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to provide greater opportunities
for veterans to pursue education programs
involving emerging technologies, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, and in addition to the Committee on Armed Services, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mrs. HARSHBARGER:
H.R. 7104. A bill to amend title II of the Social Security Act to allow disabled individuals with incurable terminal illnesses listed
on the Compassionate Allowance list to receive disability insurance benefits without a
waiting period, to prohibit concurrent receipt of disability insurance benefits and unemployment insurance, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mr. HUNT:
H.R. 7105. A bill to amend the Immigration
and Nationality Act to provide authority to
suspend entry and immigration benefits during a declared invasion at the southern border of the United States, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia (for herself and Mrs. DINGELL):
H.R. 7106. A bill to amend titles XVIII and
XIX of the Social Security Act to streamline
care delivery in skilled nursing facilities and
nursing facilities under the Medicare and
Medicaid programs; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, and in addition to the
Committee on Ways and Means, for a period
to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7107. A bill to require the Inspector
General of the Department of Housing and
Urban Development to provide a report to
the Congress on the non-compliance of the
New York City Housing Authority, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7108. A bill to improve public housing
agency accountability; to the Committee on
Financial Services.

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

By Ms. LEE of Nevada (for herself and
Mr. STAUBER):
H.R. 7109. A bill to allow nonprofit child
care providers to participate in certain loan
programs of the Small Business Administration, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Small Business.
By Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania (for herself, Ms. NORTON, Ms. TLAIB, Mrs. RAMIREZ, Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia, Mr.
THANEDAR, Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi, Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania,
Ms. BONAMICI, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN,
Mrs. FOUSHEE, and Mr. GREEN of
Texas):
H.R. 7110. A bill to require agencies that
use, fund, or oversee algorithms to have an
office of civil rights focused on bias, discrimination, and other harms of algorithms,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
By Mr. LIEU (for himself and Mr.
WEBER of Texas):
H.R. 7111. A bill to require the Bureau of
Prisons to submit to Congress an annual
summary report of disaster damage, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS:
H.R. 7112. A bill to require the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs to carry out efforts to inform veterans of their rights with regards to
the receipt of health care, benefits, and services furnished under provisions of law administered by the Secretary, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, and in addition to the Committee on
Armed Services, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Mr. MILLS:
H.R. 7113. A bill to redesignate the Congressional Budget Office as the ‘‘China Budget Office’’; to the Committee on the Budget.
By Mr. MOORE of North Carolina (for
himself, Mr. EZELL, Mr. NEHLS, Mr.
BUCHANAN, Mr. CRAWFORD, and Mr.
RUTHERFORD):
H.R. 7114. A bill to amend title 18, United
States Code, to authorize awards for the arrest or conviction of individuals that deliberately target law enforcement officials with
acts of violence or intimidation, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MOORE of West Virginia (for
himself, Mr. RULLI, Mrs. HINSON, Mr.
GOLDMAN of Texas, and Mr. MOORE of
Alabama):
H.R. 7115. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to establish Jumpstart
Programs for saving for apprenticeship and
trade occupation training, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mr. NORCROSS (for himself and
Mr. KEAN):
H.R. 7116. A bill to establish programs to
reduce rates of sepsis; to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. OLSZEWSKI (for himself and
Mr. MOYLAN):
H.R. 7117. A bill to increase rates of college
completion and reduce college costs by accelerating time to degree, aligning secondary and postsecondary education, and improving postsecondary credit transfer; to the
Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Mr. PETERS (for himself, Mr. BILIRAKIS, Mr. VEASEY, Mr. BALDERSON,
Mr.
CAREY,
Ms.
Mr.
MULLIN,
HOULAHAN, and Ms. SALAZAR):
H.R. 7118. A bill to amend title XIX of the
Social Security Act to clarify that whole genome and whole exome sequencing for children with certain medical needs is covered
under the Medicaid program; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.

E:\CR\FM\L15JA7.100

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H920

By Mrs. RAMIREZ (for herself, Mr.
MAGAZINER, Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi, Ms. NORTON, Mr. THANEDAR,
Mr. CARTER of Louisiana, Ms.
ELFRETH, Ms. CROCKETT, Mr. GREEN
of Texas, Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mr.
GOLDMAN of New York, Ms. SEWELL,
Ms. GARCIA of Texas, Mrs. FOUSHEE,
Ms. SCHAKOWSKY, Mr. JACKSON of Illinois, Mr. NEGUSE, Mrs. BEATTY, and
Mr. LARSON of Connecticut):
H.R. 7119. A bill to amend the Homeland
Security Act of 2002 to require a policy on
use of force and deescalation by law enforcement officers, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Homeland Security, and in addition to the Committee on the Judiciary,
for a period to be subsequently determined
by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia:
H.R. 7120. A bill to amend title II of the Social Security Act to establish a disability
benefit offset for Purple Heart recipients,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Ways and Means.
By Mr. SHREVE (for himself and Mr.
HARRIGAN):
H.R. 7121. A bill to prohibit the download
or use of a Chinese application on any Federal Government device; to the Committee
on Oversight and Government Reform.
By Mr. STEUBE (for himself, Mr. SOTO,
and Mr. DONALDS):
H.R. 7122. A bill to amend the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to specify that
a food shall be considered misbranded if the
value of nutrients on its labeling deviates by
more than 5 percent of the value specified on
such labeling, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. THANEDAR:
H.R. 7123. A bill to abolish U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement; to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to
the Committees on Ways and Means, and
Homeland Security, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi (for
himself, Mr. CORREA, Mr. THANEDAR,
Ms. CLARKE of New York, Ms. MENG,
and Mr. ESPAILLAT):
H.R. 7124. A bill to prohibit the use of facial recognition mobile phone applications
outside ports of entry, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Homeland Security.
By Ms. TLAIB (for herself, Ms. CLARKE
of New York, Mr. ESPAILLAT, Mr.
EVANS of Pennsylvania, Mr. GARCÍA
of Illinois, Mrs. GRIJALVA, Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia, Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania, Mrs. MCIVER, Mr. NORCROSS,
Ms.
OMAR,
Ms.
Ms.
NORTON,
PRESSLEY, Mrs. RAMIREZ, Ms. SIMON,
Ms. STANSBURY, and Ms. VELÁZQUEZ):
H.R. 7125. A bill to prohibit charging for
access to certain camera video footage; to
the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. WITTMAN (for himself and Mr.
MOOLENAAR):
H.R. 7126. A bill to establish a Strategic
Resilience Reserve of the United States, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on Natural Resources, and in addition to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. KHANNA (for himself and Mr.
BACON):
H. Con. Res. 70. Concurrent resolution affirming the partnership between the United

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

States and Denmark and Greenland; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Ms. BONAMICI (for herself, Mr.
Ms.
WASSERMAN
FITZPATRICK,
SCHULTZ, Mr. KELLY of Pennsylvania,
Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas, Ms. LOIS
FRANKEL of Florida, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY, Ms. GARCIA of Texas, Mr.
COHEN, Mrs. DINGELL, Mr. BISHOP,
Ms. NORTON, Mr. MCGOVERN, Mr. PANETTA,
Ms.
STEVENS,
and
Mr.
MORELLE):
H. Res. 1002. A resolution recognizing the
value of the Older Americans Act of 1965 nutrition program in addressing hunger, malnutrition, and isolation, and improving the
health and quality of life for millions of our
Nations seniors each year; to the Committee
on Education and Workforce.
By Mr. BEYER:
H. Res. 1003. A resolution expressing the
sense of the House of Representatives that
corporations should commit to utilizing the
benefits of women in boards of directors and
other senior management positions; to the
Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Ms. BROWN (for herself, Mr.
BISHOP, Mr. IVEY, Mr. FIGURES, Ms.
ANSARI, Mrs. RAMIREZ, Mr. TONKO,
Mr. CONAWAY, Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI,
Ms. NORTON, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania, Mr. GARAMENDI, Mrs. WATSON
COLEMAN, Ms. WILSON of Florida,
Mrs. BEATTY, Mr. ESPAILLAT, Mr.
CLEAVER, Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi, Mr. FOSTER, Mr. MULLIN, Ms.
TLAIB, Mrs. MCBATH, Mr. CARTER of
Louisiana, Mr. JACKSON of Illinois,
Ms. KELLY of Illinois, Ms. CLARKE of
New York, Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia,
Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE, Ms. STRICKLAND, Ms. TOKUDA, Mr. MRVAN, Mr.
FROST, Mr. VEASEY, Ms. TITUS, Mr.
KENNEDY of New York, Mr. COURTNEY, Ms. MENG, Ms. SIMON, Ms. SCANLON, Mr. PANETTA, Mr. GREEN of
Texas, Ms. WILLIAMS of Georgia, Mrs.
SYKES, Ms. SEWELL, Mr. MEEKS, Ms.
BYNUM, Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY, and
Mr. LANDSMAN):
H. Res. 1004. A resolution honoring Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., by celebrating diversity, promoting tolerance, and
condemning hate; to the Committee on the
Judiciary.
By Mr. KHANNA:
H. Res. 1005. A resolution expressing the
sense of the House of Representatives that
creators and digital workers, as a distinct
and growing class of small businesses and
independent economic contributors, deserve
fair treatment, transparency, and economic
opportunity in the modern platform-based
economy; to the Committee on Education
and Workforce, and in addition to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. MILLS:
H. Res. 1006. A resolution removing the Director of the Congressional Budget Office; to
the Committee on the Budget.
f

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers
granted to Congress in the Constitution to enact the accompanying bill or
joint resolution.

PO 00000

By Mr. MACKENZIE:
H.R. 7082.

Frm 00024

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
By Mr. BARRETT:
H.R. 7083.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. PFLUGER:
H.R. 7084.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. HUIZENGA:
H.R. 7085.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 3 (relating to
the power to regulate interstate commerce).
By Mr. CISCOMANI:
H.R. 7086.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. MORAN:
H.R. 7087.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. AMO:
H.R. 7088.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Artile I
By Mr. AMO:
H.R. 7089.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I
By Mr. BACON:
H.R. 7090.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 3
By Mr. BERGMAN:
H.R. 7091.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 of the United
States Constitution
By Mr. CARTER of Louisiana:
H.R. 7092.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
General Welfare Clause (Art. 1 Sec. 8 Cl. 1),
and the Necessary and Proper Clause (Art 1
Sec. 8 Cl. 18)
By Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas:
H.R. 7093.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
This bill is enacted pursuant to the power
granted to Congress under Article I, Section
8 of the United States Constitution.
By Mr. DOGGETT:
H.R. 7094.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Clause 1 of Section 8 of Article I of the
United States Constitution.
By Mr. DOGGETT:
H.R. 7095.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Clause 1 of Section 8 of Article I of the
United States Constitution.
By Mr. ESTES:
H.R. 7096.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution
By Mr. FEENSTRA:
H.R. 7097.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. TONY GONZALES of Texas:
H.R. 7098.

E:\CR\FM\L15JA7.100

H15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 15, 2026

Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. GOODLANDER:
H.R. 7099.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution
By Mr. GOTTHEIMER:
H.R. 7100.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mrs. GRIJALVA:
H.R. 7101.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Aricle 1 § 1 and § 8
By Mr. HAMADEH of Arizona:
H.R. 7102.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution.
By Mr. HAMADEH of Arizona:
H.R. 7103.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 12 of the U.S.
Constitution:
‘To raise and support Armies, but no Appropriation of Money to that Use shall be for
a longer Term than two Years.’
Article I, Section 8, Clause 13 of the U.S.
Constitution:
‘To provide and maintain a Navy.’
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 of the U.S.
Constitution:
‘To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other
Powers vested by this Constitution in the
Government of the United States, or in any
Department or Officer thereof.’
By Mrs. HARSHBARGER:
H.R. 7104.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I; Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mr. HUNT:
H.R. 7105.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Sec. 8 and Sec. 9
By Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia:
H.R. 7106.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article One Section Eight of the United
States Constitution.
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7107.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 Clause 18 of the U.S.
Constitution
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7108.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 Clause 18 of the U.S.
Constitution
By Ms. LEE of Nevada:
H.R. 7109.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 1 provides Congress with the power to ‘‘lay and collect
Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises’’
By Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania:
H.R. 7110.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Fourteenth Amendment, Section 5 provides Congress the power ‘‘to enforce’’ the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

H921

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

substantive guarantees of the amendment,
including the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses, by enacting ‘‘appropriate legislation.’’ The Supreme Court has recognized
that, under Section 5, Congress may both
proscribe unconstitutional conduct, as well
as enact legislation that remedies and deters
violations of rights guaranteed under the
Fourteenth Amendment. See Nev. Dep’t of
Human Res. v. Hibbs, 538 U.S. 721, 728 (2003).
By Mr. LIEU:
H.R. 7111.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS:
H.R. 7112.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution: ‘‘to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution
the foregoing powers, and all other powers
vested by this constitution in the government of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof.’’
By Mr. MILLS:
H.R. 7113.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the US Constitution
By Mr. MOORE of North Carolina:
H.R. 7114.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8 of the U.S. constitution.
By Mr. MOORE of West Virginia:
H.R. 7115.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1
By Mr. NORCROSS:
H.R. 7116.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Necessary and Proper Clause (Art. 1, Sec. 8,
Cl. 18)
By Mr. OLSZEWSKI:
H.R. 7117.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. PETERS:
H.R. 7118.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mrs. RAMIREZ:
H.R. 7119.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution of
the United States.
By Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia:
H.R. 7120.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1
By Mr. SHREVE:
H.R. 7121.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 of the US Constitution.
By Mr. STEUBE:
H.R. 7122.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. THANEDAR:
H.R. 7123.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
This bill is enacted pursuant to the power
granted to Congress under Clause 18 of Article I, Section 8 of the United States Constitution.
By Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi:
H.R. 7124.

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, section 8
By Ms. TLAIB:
H.R. 7125.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 1 of the Constitution.
By Mr. WITTMAN:
H.R. 7126.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Congress has the power to provide for protection of critical minerals supply chains
and rare earth elements as enacted this legislation is pursuant to clause 1 of section 8 of
article I of the Constitution.
f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H.R. 41: Mr. HURD of Colorado.
H.R. 479: Mr. STUTZMAN.
H.R. 485: Ms. CASTOR of Florida.
H.R. 539: Mr. CRAWFORD and Mrs. BIGGS of
South Carolina.
H.R. 722: Mr. TIMMONS.
H.R. 1065: Mr. SCHNEIDER.
H.R. 1189: Mr. MACKENZIE.
H.R. 1207: Mr. MCCORMICK.
H.R. 1329: Mr. WALBERG.
H.R. 1330: Mrs. FLETCHER and Ms.
KAMLAGER-DOVE.
H.R. 1496: Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 1522: Mr. TRAN.
H.R. 1583: Mr. CAREY.
H.R. 1700: Mr. KENNEDY of New York.
H.R. 1810: Ms. DELAURO.
H.R. 2189: Mr. MOORE of North Carolina.
H.R. 2231: Mr. HORSFORD.
H.R. 2672: Mr. HURD of Colorado.
H.R. 2727: Mr. NEGUSE.
H.R. 2784: Mr. CALVERT.
H.R. 2821: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas.
H.R. 2928: Mr. LIEU.
H.R. 3206: Mr. STEUBE.
H.R. 3243: Mr. THOMPSON of California.
H.R. 3562: Mr. GOODEN and Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 3602: Mr. MCGOVERN.
H.R. 3757: Mrs. MCBATH.
H.R. 4099: Mr. HIMES.
H.R. 4146: Mr. HERN of Oklahoma.
H.R. 4242: Ms. CLARKE of New York.
H.R. 4294: Ms. MALOY.
H.R. 4351: Mr. GUEST.
H.R. 4406: Mr. MFUME.
H.R. 4445: Mr. BACON and Mr. HARDER of
California.
H.R. 4504: Mr. HUFFMAN.
H.R. 4667: Mr. TORRES of New York.
H.R. 4792: Ms. NORTON and Mr. OBERNOLTE.
H.R. 4849: Ms. CROCKETT.
H.R. 5018: Ms. BONAMICI.
H.R. 5106: Mr. VAN DREW.
H.R. 5309: Ms. BYNUM.
H.R. 5519: Mr. GOTTHEIMER.
H.R. 5545: Ms. LOFGREN and Ms. PINGREE.
H.R. 5722: Mr. HARIDOPOLOS.
H.R. 5828: Ms. WILLIAMS of Georgia.
H.R. 5944: Ms. MCCOLLUM.
H.R. 5973: Ms. MCCOLLUM.
H.R. 6011: Mr. MOSKOWITZ.
H.R. 6249: Mr. MOSKOWITZ.
H.R. 6318: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas.
H.R. 6392: Mr. EVANS of Colorado.
H.R. 6423: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM.
H.R. 6469: Mr. PETERS.
H.R. 6601: Mr. MOSKOWITZ.
H.R. 6644: Mr. SESSIONS, Ms. VELÁZQUEZ,
Mr. ROSE, Mr. SHERMAN, Mr. STEIL, Mr.
DAVID SCOTT of Georgia, Mr. STUTZMAN, Mrs.
BEATTY, Mr. MEUSER, Ms. PRESSLEY, Mrs.
KIM, Ms. TLAIB, Mr. GARBARINO, Mr. TORRES
of New York, Mr. LAWLER, Ms. GARCIA of

E:\CR\FM\A15JA7.003

H15JAPT1

H922

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Texas, Ms. DE LA CRUZ, Ms. PETTERSEN, Mr.
NUNN of Iowa, Mr. FIELDS, Ms. SALAZAR, Ms.
BYNUM, Mr. DOWNING, Mr. LICCARDO, Mr.
HARIDOPOLOS, Mr. MOSKOWITZ, and Mr.
MOORE of North Carolina.
H.R. 6684: Ms. MATSUI.
H.R. 6731: Mr. SOTO.
H.R. 6766: Ms. SEWELL and Ms. BARRAGÁN.
H.R. 6854: Mr. DONALDS.
H.R. 6867: Ms. JAYAPAL.
H.R. 6931: Mr. CISCOMANI.
H.R. 6959: Ms. BOEBERT.
H.R. 6972: Mr. WALBERG.
H.R. 7016: Mr. PALLONE, Mr. TRAN, Mr.
MFUME, and Mr. LYNCH.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:03 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

H.R. 7038: Mrs. TRAHAN and Mr. GARCIA of
California.
H.R. 7040: Mr. CLINE.
H.R. 7046: Mr. FROST.
H.R. 7051: Mr. MESSMER.
H.R. 7074: Mr. FULCHER, Mr. KENNEDY of
Utah, Mr. OBERNOLTE, and Mrs. KIGGANS of
Virginia.
H.R. 7077: Mr. MOSKOWITZ.
H. Con. Res. 68: Mr. FIELDS.
H. Res. 100: Ms. HOYLE of Oregon.
H. Res. 935: Mr. GREEN of Texas.
H. Res. 990: Mr. CARSON.
H. Res. 993: Ms. LEE of Florida, Mr.
GOTTHEIMER, Ms. BONAMICI, Mr. BACON, Mrs.

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

LUNA, Mr. KELLY of Mississippi, Mr. FONG,
Mr. SUBRAMANYAM, Mr. STEIL, Mr. WEBER of
Texas, Mr. FEENSTRA, Mrs. HOUCHIN, Mr.
ALFORD, Mr. ROUZER, Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of
Georgia, Mr. EZELL, Mr. SMITH of New Jersey, Ms. STEFANIK, Mr. COLE, and Mr. LUCAS.
H. Res. 996: Mr. GOLDMAN of New York, Mr.
GREEN of Texas, Mr. MCGOVERN, Mr. TAKANO,
Mr. HUFFMAN, and Mr. CORREA.
H. Res. 998: Mr. GUEST, Mr. SMITH of New
Jersey, and Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia.
H. Res. 1001: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM and Mr.
GOLDMAN of New York.

E:\CR\FM\A15JA7.006

H15JAPT1

UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, JANUARY 15, 2026

No. 11

Senate
The Senate met at 10 a.m. and was
called to order by the Honorable
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, a Senator from
the State of Oklahoma.
f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
Sovereign God, our hope for the years
to come, we magnify Your Name.
Lord, we sense that our battles are
not simply with flesh and blood but
against principalities and powers.
Thank You for providing us with spiritual weapons to defeat carnal foes.
Lord, forgive us when we chase the
temporary and flee from the permanent. Forgive us when we major in minors and minor in majors. Forgive us
when we refuse to set our affections on
things above but focus, instead, on the
things of Earth.
Today, give our lawmakers an awareness of the complexity of the warfare
between good and evil as they remember the words of Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr.—that ‘‘truth crushed to earth
will rise again.’’
We pray in Your victorious Name.
Amen.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The Presiding Officer led the Pledge
of Allegiance, as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

APPOINTMENT OF ACTING
PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will please read a communication
to the Senate from the President pro
tempore (Mr. GRASSLEY).
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read the following letter:

U.S. SENATE,
PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE,
Washington, DC, January 15, 2026.
To the Senate:
Under the provisions of rule I, paragraph 3,
of the Standing Rules of the Senate, I hereby
appoint the Honorable MARKWAYNE MULLIN,
a Senator from the State of Oklahoma, to
perform the duties of the Chair.
CHUCK GRASSLEY,
President pro tempore.

Mr. MULLIN thereupon assumed the
Chair as Acting President pro tempore.
f

RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Under the previous order, the
leadership time is reserved.
f

CONCLUSION OF MORNING
BUSINESS
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Morning business is closed.
f

LEGISLATIVE SESSION
COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE;
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026—Resumed
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Under the previous order, the
Senate will resume consideration of
H.R. 6938, which the clerk will report.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
A bill (H.R. 6938) making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.

Pending:
Thune amendment No. 4208, to change the
date of the enactment.
Thune amendment No. 4209 (to amendment
No. 4208), of a perfecting nature.
Thune motion to commit the bill to the
Committee on Appropriations, with instructions, amendment No. 4210, to change the enactment date.

Thune amendment No. 4211 (to the instructions (amendment No. 4210)), of a perfecting
nature.
Thune amendment No. 4212 (to amendment
No. 4211), of a perfecting nature.

The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The majority whip.
IRAN

Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I rise
today to stand with the brave people of
Iran. These are people who have been
in a fight for their freedom. For the
past 2 weeks, they have taken to the
streets in 185 different cities in all 31 of
the Provinces in Iran. It is unlike anything their country has seen in a generation. Iranians are rejecting the poverty, the repression, and the ruin that
have been brought forth by four decades of tyranny.
Americans stand with them. I think
free people everywhere are watching.
From Europe and South America to
right here in the United States, we
bear witness to the contrast—and it is
a dramatic contrast—between the Iranian people’s bravery and the Iranian
regime’s brutality. The regime’s answer to these legitimate protests—we
have seen it—has been mass murder.
Ayatollah Khamenei has unleashed his
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps,
and they are doing tremendous damage. He has unleashed them to massacre his own citizens.
Credible reports estimate that thousands—perhaps tens of thousands—are
dead in Iran. This surpasses the death
toll of previous crackdowns throughout
the Iranian regime’s history of bloodshed. Tens of thousands of protesters
have been thrown into prison, we understand. The regime has shut off
internet and phone access.
And the regime is doing that because
it is anxious to hide its crimes. It has
failed. The truth has gotten out. The
world is seeing it.
For decades, Iran’s government has
been the world’s leading state sponsor
of terrorism. The world knows it. And
now it has turned that same terror
onto its own people.

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S227

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:38 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.000

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S228

I applaud President Trump’s leadership on Iran. President Trump’s strategy has brought Iran to this breaking
point. He withdrew from a failed nuclear deal. He destroyed Iran’s nuclear
program. He rebuilt the sanctions the
previous administration had torn
down. President Trump has made a significant difference around the world
and certainly in Iran. Maximum pressure has strangled the regime’s revenue, and it exposed its weakness. A
weak Iran is a safer America.
The Ayatollah has a history of paying his henchmen—Hamas, Hezbollah,
the Houthis, and other terrorist
groups. Iran kidnaps American citizens
and holds them for ransom. We have
seen this. Iranian-backed militias
killed one in six American troops during the war in Iraq. Today, it continues
to target our troops throughout the
Middle East.
Iran’s allies and enablers today are in
Beijing and in Moscow. They share
Iran’s hatred of our freedom and our
people. They share its determination to
undermine our strength. That is why it
is important for us to stand with the
people of Iran. Their coconspirator
from Venezuela, Nicolas Maduro, is
now behind bars, thanks to a brave
military action led by our Commander
in Chief.
What is happening in Iran today will
determine the future of this entire axis
of aggression. It is opposed to what we
do as Americans, as free people.
President Trump has made it very
clear where the United States stands:
Those who massacre innocent citizens
will be held to account.
This week, President Trump announced that any country that trades
with Iran will face tariffs of 25 percent.
We must continue to take action to
help the people of Iran. In recent
weeks, the United States has successfully seized several tankers that were
smuggling oil from Venezuela.
What were they doing? They were
smuggling it in violation of international sanctions.
Well, we must now do the same with
Iran’s vast so-called ghost fleet and
stop them with the same resolve. Those
vessels smuggle Iranian oil in defiance
of sanctions. Cash from the oil fills the
regime’s war chest. It funds its murderous ways. Every dollar that we deny
Iran’s government is one less bullet
that they can fire at their own people.
The regime in Iran today is weaker,
and it is weaker than it has been at
any time since their revolution of 1979.
The Iranian grip on power is slipping.
The world sees Iran as true evil, and we
must stand with those who risk everything for freedom.
That is what it means when we talk
about
American
peace
through
strength. When America stands for
freedom, our Nation and the entire
world is safer.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The clerk will call the roll.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

01:38 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered.
RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY LEADER

The majority leader is recognized.
APPROPRIATIONS

Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, the work
of the Appropriations Committee never
seems to stop, and that has certainly
been true over this past year. Under
the leadership of Chair COLLINS, our
colleagues on the Appropriations Committee have held hearings and markups
and done the hard work of writing legislation to fund the government.
They reported eight full-year bills
from the committee, most of them
with broad bipartisan support. That
put us in a position to be able to pass
three appropriations bills here in the
Senate before the August State work
period last year.
We hadn’t passed a single government funding bill in this Chamber before August since 2018. In 2025, we
passed three of them, and we were able
to reconcile those three bills with the
House and get them signed into law in
November. That is the way we should
be
passing
appropriations
bills,
through regular order—a process that
gives all Senators the opportunity to
make their voices and the voices of
their constituents heard.
That is a far cry from how things
have too often been done around here
in the past. In too many years, we have
had massive omnibus bills written behind closed doors. That is not how I
wanted to operate. When I became majority leader, I said appropriations
would be a priority. I said that I wanted to take bills through regular order
to open up the process and ensure we
were making the best use of taxpayer
dollars.
We made considerable progress this
past year getting back to regular
order. I hope that progress will continue as we look ahead to the next appropriations cycle, but we have to finish this one first. We have a January 30
deadline to fund the remainder of the
Federal Government, and we are on
track to do that.
Before we leave this week, the Senate
will send another package of three bills
to the President’s desk. This package
received a big bipartisan vote in the
House last week. We had a big bipartisan vote here in the Senate earlier
this week, and we are on track to pass
it later today, and President Trump is
expected to sign it into law.
Yesterday, the House passed another
package of two bills, again with broad
bipartisan support. I want to point out
that this package, like the three-bill
package we are considering in the Senate, actually spends less money than if
we were to do just another continuing
resolution. It cuts $10 billion or more
than 10 percent from what we would ex-

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

pect to spend on these Agencies under
a continuing resolution. That is thanks
to our appropriators doing the hard
work of going through the budget and
making the tough budgeting decisions
all Americans are familiar with,
whether they are running a business or
managing their household budget. That
is the result of a better process, and it
is what happens when we make government funding a priority.
Appropriators are working on another package of the four remaining
bills, which I hope will receive the
same bipartisan backing that has characterized the appropriations cycle thus
far. Before the end of the month, the
Senate will need to process all of these
funding bills and get them to the President’s desk.
Appropriations doesn’t always make
headlines, but it is an important responsibility. So I want to thank our
colleagues on the Appropriations Committee again for their diligence in
crafting these bills.
I know that when we finish this
cycle, the next one is coming in right
on its heels. My hope is that we will be
able to build on the progress we have
made this past year to get the appropriations process back to what it
should be—an open process that every
Senator can participate in.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered.
RECOGNITION OF THE MINORITY LEADER

The Democratic leader is recognized.
HOUSING COSTS

Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I just
got back from an event at the Center
for American Progress. I joined with
Senator
DUCKWORTH
and
Senator
SCHATZ to roll out Senate Democrats’
new vision to tackle the housing crisis,
lowering housing costs for every single
American. We call our housing agenda:
Opportunity Starts at Home—Opportunity Starts at Home.
Democrats are going to focus on
costs like a laser in 2026 and beyond.
We are going to lay out, over the next
few weeks and months, detailed platforms and plans on many issues related
to costs.
In a few weeks, it will be groceries;
then, a few weeks later, issues like
childcare;
then,
energy
costs,
healthcare, and more. We talked about
these issues in depth this morning, and
I will get to that in a moment.
But, first, I just want to respond to
an outrageous thing that happened
with the Trump administration yesterday, showing how much of a clueless
bubble these people are in. Hold on to
your seats. It is hard to believe that

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.002

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

Donald Trump’s Secretary Of Agriculture said this—oh yes, a very bold
solution to the grocery costs.
She said, basically: Just eat less and
spend less. Can you imagine the solution to higher grocery costs, eat less
and spend less?
Now, it is hard for people to believe
she said it. So let me read the quote.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

We’ve run over 1,000 simulations. It can
cost around $3 a meal for a piece of chicken,
a piece of broccoli, corn tortilla, and one
other thing.

Do you hear that, America? This is
what Donald Trump’s golden age looks
like: a piece of chicken, a piece of broccoli, a tortilla, and something else that
the Secretary of Agriculture forgot.
The people who run this administration are just not serious. This is an insulting way to talk to the American
people, telling them: Just get by with
less, and stop complaining about affordability.
The American people have had
enough of this. So as I just said, Democrats—every day, every week, every
month this year—are going to put
costs front and center in our agenda.
This spring and over the next few
months and throughout 2026, Democrats will talk about precisely how a
Democratic majority would lower costs
for everyday Americans.
We are going to go issue by issue,
spending weeks at a time rolling out a
plan to lower grocery costs. Then a few
weeks later, we will unveil a vision for
electricity and energy costs. We will
roll out a plan to help people afford
childcare and healthcare.
Lower costs is going to be the North
Star now and throughout all of 2026.
And when it comes to costs, it is important to begin with housing because
it quite literally is the closest to home
for most people.
For millions of Americans, owning a
home is the most important part of the
American dream. Young families, when
they own a home, know they are building equity and they are building a future, knowing they have something
they can give to their kids.
But as we all know, over the last few
decades, the American dream of finding
a home has become more of a mirage.
The median price of a home is up 55
percent since COVID—55 percent. Rent
is up by a third.
Listen to this horrifying statistic.
This should shake every legislator in
their boots because, it is so awful, we
have to work to change it. The average
first-time home buyer is now 40 years
old. That is a record high.
And, again, what has Donald Trump
done about all of this? Well, his tariffs
have raised housing construction costs
by $17,000 per home. He is launching a
criminal investigation against the
Chair of the Federal Reserve. And when
there is chaos and politicization at the
Fed, interest rates are more likely to
go higher and stay higher because lending institutions, when they are not
sure of the future, keep rates high to
avoid any sudden downside.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:38 Jan 16, 2026

S229

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Then, Donald Trump, of all things,
proposed 50-year mortgages, an idea so
inane and unserious it was ridiculed by
the right, left, and center, right after
he issued it.
Ironically, the only decent idea Donald Trump has floated recently on
housing is one he stole from Democrats, calling for an end to institutional investors gobbling up homes and
crowding out individual families.
Democrats tried to get it done last
year. Every Democrat voted for it, but
the Republicans in Congress voted
against it, and we didn’t get it passed.
The American people have had
enough. What they want isn’t rocket
science. They simply want lower costs.
They want opportunity. And Democrats believe that when it comes to creating opportunity, opportunity must
start at home. So that is what I am
calling our housing agenda: Opportunity Starts at Home.
The Democratic majority will tackle
the housing affordability crisis by
working to reduce rent, boost home
ownership, stop predatory corporations, supercharge construction, and
provide housing security for all Americans. We spoke about these proposals
and other things earlier this morning,
like passing the ROAD to Housing Act,
which Senator WARREN put together
with great mastery, and it passed the
Senate by unanimous consent—unanimously. In her bill, there are many
things that Senate Democrats have
fought for, many bills that other Members have introduced.
Democrats also want to expand
downpayment assistance. We want to
encourage local zoning reform by providing new incentives and disincentives—carrots and sticks—to localities
to reform outdated rules that stand in
the way of building housing. We want
to stop institutional investors from
gobbling up entire neighborhoods for
profit.
We want to empower HUD to invoke
the Defense Production Act, something
Senator DUCKWORTH has emphasized,
guaranteeing the purchase of housing
materials in short supply and scaling
production of modular and manufactured housing. And we want to create
an ARPA Home to bring down housing
costs. Just as DARPA was able to
lower defense costs, we need an ARPA
for housing. It is a national crisis, just
as important as defense. So let’s get an
ARPA for housing.
And this isn’t just talk. Democrats
have delivered on housing relief when
we had the majority. When I was majority leader, we delivered the largest
rental relief package ever, and we expanded rental assistance and emergency housing vouchers. We saved millions from eviction in the depths of the
COVID crisis.
Now, we need expanded rental relief
to help during the housing crisis faced
by so many Americans. It is not
COVID. It is not happening all at once
every place, but it is happening in so
many places throughout America. We

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

need the same kind of large rental relief package.
In the weeks and months to come,
the American people will also hear
from Democrats on other areas where
we are fighting to lower costs. As I
mentioned, food costs, energy costs,
groceries, healthcare, childcare, and so
many other things Americans pay for
every day.
Democrats are ready to get to work,
and as I said, cost—the high cost of living—and the affordability crisis will be
our focus throughout 2026 because that
is what the American people are demanding. And we will show that the
Trump administration and Republicans
have made costs even worse, and what
Democrats will do, when we get power,
to reduce those costs in a very significant way that will affect every single
American.
VERIZON OUTAGE

Mr. President, now, on the Verizon
outage, yesterday, more than 100,000
Verizon users experienced outages and
disruptions to their cell service for
roughly 10 hours. Obviously, this
caused real confusion and disruption
for many Americans relying on service
for work or emergencies. It is encouraging that Verizon said it will give account credits to customers affected by
the outage, but this raises a very serious point.
At a time of high costs, consumers
must always be automatically compensated for service disruptions, fully
and completely. Last month, I led Senate Democrats in urging Chairman
Carr of the FCC to ensure that when
outages happen, customers are automatically compensated.
Full compensation to customers for
service disruption should be mandated,
not just a courtesy, not just a suggestion, not just when the company decides to do it, it is OK, and when they
decide not to do it, it is OK, too, because that is wrong.
And, again, at a time when Americans want lower costs, automatic refunds when disruptions occur should be
the norm for all telecommunication
companies, and the FCC has a responsibility to require just that. Americans
already facing high costs shouldn’t be
the ones paying the price for service
disruptions, and the FCC must ensure
that.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mrs. MOODY. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered.
The Senator from Florida.
Mrs. MOODY. I ask unanimous consent to speak for up to 5 minutes prior
to the scheduled rollcall vote.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered.

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.004

S15JAPT1

S230
WAIVING QUORUM CALL

Mrs. MOODY. I ask unanimous consent to waive the mandatory quorum
call with respect to cloture on Calendar No. 299, H.R. 6938.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered.
TAMPA POLICE DEPARTMENT

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Mrs. MOODY. Mr. President, I am
honored to rise on the floor today to
recognize some of Florida’s—the Sunshine State—very best.
As you know, last week we celebrated Law Enforcement Appreciation
Day, and I wanted to recognize two
great officers from the Tampa Bay
area, where I, as one of the newest U.S.
Senators, hail from.
Last month, Tampa Police Department Officers Jason Sikoski and Kaleb
Girard saved an 86-year-old man who
was found dangling off of his roof.
The senior had gotten to the roof to
clear foliage, lost his balance, and had
inched his way, with no success, to
climb back up to the edge of the roof.
When the officers found him, he was already dangling and was almost falling
off the roof.
And so you can imagine the quick response from Tampa Police Officers
Sikoski and Girard, along with fire rescue, who showed up. They acted timely, without hesitation, and they were
able to save this Florida man from falling.
And it was obvious from the situation that they found, had they not
shown up, had they delayed in any way,
had they not responded swiftly and
acted quickly, that Floridian would
have fallen 30 feet to the ground, where
no doubt this story would have ended
with a very tragic conclusion.
So I am very proud today to rise to
recognize Officer Sikoski and Officer
Girard on the Senate floor as some of
Florida’s finest and present them with
our Florida’s Finest Award.
Certainly, as attorney general of
Florida before I came to the Senate a
year ago, I had always recognized law
enforcement for their courage, for dedicating their professional lives to enforcing the people’s law. Certainly
without that brave commitment by
them, our society would not function
as we know it. It has been important to
me to honor the extraordinary work of
those selfless officers that protect Floridians.
Our Florida’s Finest Award honors
those Floridians and law enforcement
officers who demonstrate selfless courage, who go above and beyond to save
lives. I am so thankful that these
Tampa police officers saved this man’s
life and for all they do every day to
keep the Tampa community safe.
Congratulations to Officers Sikoski
and Girard for helping us make Florida
stronger and safer. I am so honored to
recognize them today on the Senate
floor.
I will end by saying that each and
every one of our law enforcement officers is essential to upholding the rule

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:38 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

of law, the people’s law. Without them
showing up day after day, faithfully
executing their duties without obstruction or threats or attacks, certainly
government and the people’s government could not function the way it is
intended to.
I will keep standing up for the men
and women of law enforcement, every
law enforcement officer, because we
know that they are essential not only
for a stronger and safer Florida but for
a stronger and safer United States of
America.
I yield the floor.
CLOTURE MOTION

The

PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SHEEHY). Pursuant to rule XXII, the
Chair lays before the Senate the pending cloture motion, which the clerk
will state.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
CLOTURE MOTION
We, the undersigned Senators, in accordance with the provisions of rule XXII of the
Standing Rules of the Senate, do hereby
move to bring to a close debate on Calendar
No. 299, H.R. 6938, a bill making consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
John Thune, Susan M. Collins, Tom Cotton, Mike Rounds, Mike Crapo, Katie
Boyd Britt, Jim Banks, Tommy
Tuberville, David McCormick, Steve
Daines, Markwayne Mullin, John Barrasso, John R. Curtis, Roger F. Wicker,
Deb Fischer, Jon A. Husted, Pete
Ricketts.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. By unanimous consent, the mandatory quorum
call has been waived.
The question is, Is it the sense of the
Senate that debate on the bill, H.R.
6938, making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes,
shall be brought to a close?
The yeas and nays are mandatory
under the rule.
The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk called the roll.
Mr. DURBIN. I announce that the
Senator from Michigan (Mr. PETERS) is
necessarily absent.
The yeas and nays resulted—yeas 85,
nays 14, as follows:
[Rollcall Vote No. 10 Leg.]
YEAS—85
Alsobrooks
Baldwin
Banks
Barrasso
Blackburn
Blumenthal
Blunt Rochester
Boozman
Britt
Budd
Cantwell
Capito
Cassidy
Collins
Coons
Cornyn
Cortez Masto
Cotton
Cramer
Crapo
Cruz
Curtis
Daines
Duckworth
Durbin

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Ernst
Fetterman
Fischer
Gallego
Gillibrand
Graham
Grassley
Hagerty
Hassan
Hawley
Heinrich
Hirono
Hoeven
Husted
Hyde-Smith
Justice
Kaine
Kelly
Kennedy
King
Klobuchar
Lankford
Luján
Lummis
Marshall

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

McConnell
McCormick
Merkley
Moody
Moran
Moreno
Mullin
Murkowski
Murray
Ossoff
Reed
Ricketts
Risch
Rosen
Rounds
Schatz
Schmitt
Schumer
Scott (SC)
Shaheen
Sheehy
Slotkin
Smith
Sullivan
Thune

Tillis
Tuberville
Van Hollen
Warner

Warnock
Welch
Whitehouse
Wicker

Bennet
Booker
Hickenlooper
Johnson
Kim

Lee
Markey
Murphy
Padilla
Paul

Wyden
Young

NAYS—14
Sanders
Schiff
Scott (FL)
Warren

NOT VOTING—1
Peters

The PRESIDING OFFICER. On this
vote, the yeas are 85, the nays are 14.
Three-fifths of the Senators duly chosen and sworn having voted in the affirmative, the motion is agreed to.
The motion was agreed to.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Cloture
having been invoked, the motion to
commit and the amendments pending
thereto fall.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
HAGERTY). The Senator from Illinois.
CREDIT CARD COMPETITION ACT

Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, I am
trying to remember what year it was.
It could have been 15 years ago in the
Senate when I walked into a hearing
chaired by Senator Arlen Specter of
Pennsylvania. It was the Senate Judiciary Committee. I didn’t know what
the topic of the hearing was, but as a
member of the committee, I was curious, so I sat down and listened, and I
learned about something I really
wasn’t aware of.
Testifying were retailers across the
United States, talking about something called a swipe fee, interchange
fee. I didn’t know what that was. Turns
out it is the fee that is paid to the
banks that issue credit cards when you
engage in a transaction. It is not identified to the ordinary consumer, but
the retailer who is using the credit
card certainly knows quite a bit about
it. It is the fee that he is charged, he
the retailer is charged, for the use of
banks’ credit cards.
They were complaining—the retailers
were—that the terms in the agreement,
the interchange fee between Visa and
MasterCard, which, of course, dominate
the credit card world, were so opaque
that they couldn’t even get a copy of
the actual contract between Visa,
MasterCard, and this retailer sitting at
the table.
They had a stack of papers in front of
them which was part of the contract
and agreement for the interchange fee
but not the complete agreement. They
were frustrated because they had no
control whatsoever in terms of what
Visa and MasterCard were going to
charge.
I took an interest in it and asked
Chairman Specter at the time: Is the
Senate Judiciary Committee going to
do something?
He said: Of course.
The honest answer was no. We had a
hearing, and that was the end of it.
But I took an interest in the issue
and decided to author a study to see
what the impact was on small businesses and retailers of these interchange fees and swipe fees charged by

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.005

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

the banks that issue Visa and
MasterCard.
The industry had no interest in any
study on any aspect of it. They made it
clear to me they were going to oppose
every effort I had to try to get to understand this issue better by a credible
study.
I was frustrated by this and decided
to make an offer of a change in the law
when it came to debit cards. Debit
cards are different than credit cards because they are virtually a checking account. You can only charge as much as
you have on balance to pay. And the
question of credit is not as paramount
as it is with the credit cards.
So I came to the floor and offered
with Dodd-Frank, the banking reform,
an amendment on debit card swipe fees
and interchange fees.
Just to show you what a different
time it was in the U.S. Senate, this was
a bill that was being offered by Senator
Dodd in the Senate and a Republican
Senator as well on a bipartisan basis.
I offered this amendment on the floor
and got into the queue. I was about the
25th amendment that was considered.
And it wasn’t approved by the Banking
Committee; I was just offering this on
the floor. What I was trying to establish was the actual fee that was being
charged for debit cards.
As I said, I was about the 25th
amendment to be offered. It turned out
that there were so many controversial
amendments in Dodd-Frank that I
didn’t rise to the top as the most controversial.
And so the issue was called and, at
the last minute, the chairman of the
committee, Senator Dodd said: Of
course, that would require 60 votes. His
belief was, if he required 60 votes, the
Durbin amendment would go away,
would be defeated.
It turned out he was wrong. The retailers of America came together in a
way they had never come together before to raise questions about debit
cards and the fees that are being
charged to them.
The amendment passed with more
than 60 votes, to the surprise of this
sponsor, as well as the other Members
of the Senate.
As luck would have it, the House of
Representatives
decided—Barney
Frank, in particular—that this issue
showed enough support in the Senate
not to be part of any meaningful negotiations in conference, and the socalled
Durbin
amendment
went
through.
Since then, there have been several
efforts on the floor of the Senate, over
the years, to remove the Durbin
amendment on debit cards, where the
fee was established with the cooperation of the Federal Reserve, and they
have failed. So we have debit card
world semiregulated or somewhat regulated, not so much on the credit card
side.
ROGER MARSHALL is a colleague of
mine—a Republican colleague—in the
Senate today, from Kansas. He and I

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:38 Jan 16, 2026

S231

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

and PETER WELCH of Vermont have cosponsored legislation to extend the
coverage of this issue to credit cards.
Senator MARSHALL and I agreed,
whichever of us had the majority party
at the time would be the lead sponsor.
So it is the Marshall-Durbin-Welch
bill, today, that is considered when we
discuss credit cards.
I give this lengthy introduction to
show you there is a deep history on
this issue, and it continues to this day,
and it has particular relevance at this
moment for several reasons. Let me explain.
Data released this week by the Bureau of Labor Statistics confirms what
many in the Chamber already know
from our daily lives: Americans feel,
every day, prices are just too high.
Consumer prices—from rent to groceries, to utilities and more—are up
nearly 3 percent compared to last year.
Affordability is real. It is a concern
that supercedes virtually every other
political concern with basic American
families. While costs continue to go up
and everyday Americans are struggling, big banks are rolling in cash,
with profit margins around 30 percent.
That is right. Big banks have profit
margins in this economy of over 30 percent.
Why are banks making so much
money? It is because they profit off of
something called a swipe fee, or an
interchange fee. Every time you use
your credit card, Visa or Mastercard
charge the merchant what is essentially a service fee. The merchant pays
a fee of 2 percent to 3 percent on each
transaction, meaning, if you spend
$100, the merchant gets $97 or $98.
While Visa and Mastercard keep some
of the $2 or $3 themselves, most is
pocketed by the big banks that issue
the cards. A few bucks here, a few
bucks there, and you have yourself a
pretty good haul if you are a big bank.
How good? In 2024, the year before
last, Visa and Mastercard and their big
bank partners raked in $111 billion in
credit card swipe fees. These swipe fees
are crushing small businesses and their
customers through higher prices.
If you don’t believe me, listen to
what a constituent of mine in Chicago
wrote. Rick is his name. He owns a gas
station. He pays $50,000 to $60,000 a year
in swipe fees. He says:
These fees have [an] impact on pricing in
the store.

Small business owners like Rick have
little recourse. Visa and Mastercard
have a near-virtual grasp on the credit
card network market, controlling 85
percent of it. That is right. Visa and
Mastercard control 85 percent of the
credit card market.
I will give you an example of some
other businesses that wrote to me in
relation to this issue. Credit processing
fees are crushing businesses, taking up
to 4 percent for credit card sales. ‘‘Currently,’’ this individual wrote to me
and said, ‘‘88% of my sales are credit
card.’’
It has become, literally, the coin of
the realm.

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

This individual, Laura, says she owns
a coffee shop:
My per ticket amounts are low, roughly $5,
yet each transaction can take up to 25 cents
in swipe a fee [to the credit cards].
We need competition in the credit card
marketplace and options to choose from.
Just like small businesses have to compete
for customers, credit card companies should
have to compete for our business.

Laura has a coffee business in Elmhurst, IL.
Why are banks making so much
money? The swipe fees are virtually
unregulated. We would like to change
that.
Another source of information is
from Sesser, IL, which is in Downstate
Southern Illinois. Greg Kelly writes
me:
When combined with basic merchant processing fees and set monthly access fees, credit card fees can add up to nearly 5 percent of
total transactions.

Greg writes:
This is insane. This prevents hiring and
hinders business growth, as well as being
able to compete. Credit card reform is needed now.

Small business owners like Rick have
no recourse. Visa and Mastercard have
a near-virtual death grasp on the credit
card network market, controlling 85
percent of it. Because of this, Visa and
Mastercard are free to set fee rates on
credit cards wherever they like. For
their retailers, take it or leave it.
This allows them to tell small business owners like Rick that they are
going to set the standard. He has no negotiating power. There is no competition unless the Marshall-Durbin-Welch
bill passes. This is not how our system
and our economy are supposed to work.
It is time we bring back real competition to the credit card industry, the
kind that encourages growth and
brings about lower prices.
This bipartisan bill that I described
to you, the Credit Card Competition
Act, was endorsed by President Trump
this week. It was kind of a pleasant
surprise. I didn’t know it was coming.
He was unequivocal in supporting it. It
would address the outrageous swipe
fees being charged to retailers.
Talk about a hidden cost of business.
Every time you use your credit card, if
it is for a transaction, for a meal at a
restaurant, for a contribution to a
charity, the swipe fee is being taken
out of it, 5 percent or more. My bill
would require the largest 30 or so
banks—only the largest banks—to enable at least two credit card networks
to be used on the credit cards they
issue, with at least one being outside
the Visa-Mastercard duopoly. That
would create real competition.
The banking industry hates the Marshall-Durbin-Welch amendment like
the devil hates holy water. To them,
any kind of regulation is unacceptable.
By injecting competition into the credit card market, this bill would help
bring down swipe fees that small businesses pay and that ultimately get
passed on to working families in the
form of higher prices.

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.009

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S232

Opponents of our bill have falsely
claimed such provisions would squeeze
Visa and Mastercard and the big banks,
and force them to scale back reward
programs.
I learned something recently in lobbying on this bill. The major airlines
all oppose this bill that would limit the
swipe fees and interchange fees. I was
curious why the airlines would be so
interested in it. It turns out, for most
of the major airlines, they make more
money off their credit cards that they
issue than they do off air operations.
That is right—more money off the little square plastic than they do on the
actual airplane passengers.
So when I go into Reagan National
Airport, I am not surprised that they
have banners flashing: Stop the Durbin
amendment. Stop anything that might
affect your frequent flier plan.
I often wonder in an airplane—I pay
attention to this; most people don’t—
when they give the announcements
from the flight attendants about their
credit cards, as soon as you reach a
point where they completed all their
safety announcements and told you to
buckle up and shut up because we are
about to take off, then they announce
their credit card program and want you
to sign up for it. That is the reality of
it.
Watch next time you get on an airplane when they do this. These poor
flight attendants have to bring applications up and down the aisles, trying to
get people to sign up for credit cards.
Visa and Mastercard and card-issuing
banks have plenty of room for reform.
In 2024, banks netted about $378 billion
in revenue from debit and credit cards,
but they pay only $47 billion in rewards.
I value frequent flier miles like everyone else, but the program will not
even be touched. I am no mathematician, but banks have plenty of revenue
to continue offering rewards without
hurting their bottom line.
Those worried about airline miles
and cash back, an analysis by payments consulting firm CMSPI found rewards would be reduced by less than
one-tenth of 1 percent, at most, because of the Credit Card Competition
Act.
They are crying wolf. This bill has
the support of a conservative Republican Senator from Kansas, Senator
MARSHALL, and a liberal Democrat,
PETER WELCH from Vermont, and myself, of course. I urge my Senate colleagues: Let’s come together and get
this done on behalf of consumers and
small businesses. You want to do something that really makes a difference to
the bottom line and debt of families?
Address the outrageous interest rates
being charged on credit cards and address the swipe fees being charged to
retailers that are fed into the inflationary aspects of this economy.
This is the time to do it, if we are
going to meaningfully address the real
expenses that families face. I urge my
colleagues to take a look at this meas-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

01:38 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

ure—this bipartisan measure, this commonsense measure—that will make a
difference in the families that we represent.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from California.
CAMPAIGN FINANCE

Mr. PADILLA. Mr. President, I rise
today to join Senator KELLY and many
of our colleagues who spoke just yesterday afternoon to highlight the enduring damage done to our democracy,
nearly 16 years ago, when a single decision handed down by the Supreme
Court of the United States gave corporations and billionaires in our country unlimited spending power to influence our elections.
The case is referred to as Citizens
United, and the ruling didn’t just
change campaign finance law. It fundamentally altered our democracy. It
truly was a turning point. It was a moment where the voices of everyday
Americans began to be drowned out
every election cycle by a small and
powerful few, armed with unlimited
money and unprecedented access.
We see the consequences of it to this
day. Just one example—this may shock
you: a billionaire like Elon Musk, who
was not shy nor discreet about spending nearly $300 million to support
President Trump’s candidacy in 2024.
Others were similarly involved, but he
was not shy about it.
So it wasn’t a surprise, it was not a
coincidence, when early in the Trump
administration, he was basically given
the keys to the Federal Government
and allowed to run roughshod through
Federal Departments and Agencies and
budgets through this experiment called
DOGE.
That is just one of many, many examples of how those with a lot of
money—corporations and individuals—
can now influence elections and the
election outcomes and then take folks
into offices that were their preference
to reap benefits, all while this administration continues to ignore the needs
of America’s working families, who are
facing increasing electric bills, grocery
bills, and certainly health insurance
costs, among so much more.
Senator KELLY and others spoke to
this eloquently yesterday afternoon. I
wanted to add to that conversation and
add to the picture of what is happening
with campaign finance in America at
this moment.
The American people are increasingly concerned with the influence of
money in politics because they also see
fewer efforts and resources being committed to enforcing what is left of campaign finance oversight and accountability on this administration.
What is left of campaign finance systems and accountability is also under
further attack. President Trump has
completely silenced our country’s top
campaign finance watchdog, the Federal Election Commission. Just last
year, President Trump fired one of the
Commissioners, Ellen Weintraub, with-

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

out cause or without justification. It
was clear retaliation for her attempts
to hold him accountable during his
first term as President. Removing an
FEC Commissioner like this was not
only unlawful and without precedent,
but it was soon followed by Republican
members of the Commission also leaving voluntarily to pursue other jobs.
Under normal circumstances, when
there is a vacancy or vacancies to the
FEC, an administration would consult
with the Senate on nominations to fill
these vacancies quickly and on a bipartisan basis—but not with this administration. Now there are just two Commissioners who remain, and the Agency has lacked a quorum for 260 days
and counting, with no end in sight. It is
not an oversight. It is clearly intentional by the White House. President
Trump is purposely leaving these vacancies open, refusing to send bipartisan nominees to the Senate for consideration and confirmation.
The reason it is so critical and the
reason it is so urgent is that we are
quickly entering the midterm election
season. So imagine that. We are entering a midterm election—a very consequential midterm election—that will
undoubtedly be met with unlimited
spending not just by candidates but
through super PACs and other dark
forces without our having the tools of
campaign finance oversight, regulation, and accountability. That should
concern all of us as it concerns the
American people.
Colleagues, we have the power to fix
this. We can legislatively fix the
wrongs of the Citizens United case by
the Supreme Court, and we must immediately restore a quorum to the FEC
so they can do their critical and important job in the months ahead.
I will continue to be a leading voice
in this fight, and I look forward to
working with all of you on both sides
of the aisle to do what is right.
TRIBUTE TO TESS OSWALD

Mr. President, I rise today with the
bittersweet task of saying goodbye and
paying tribute to my communications
director Tess Oswald.
Tess has done such outstanding work
not just for me but on behalf of the
people of California. She has been
alongside me since my first days here
in the Senate 5 years ago. I know I
speak for our entire team when I say
that we are honored to have had the
privilege of working alongside her and
that we are going to miss her.
She is a proud daughter of California
and of parents who served the public as
Federal prosecutors, so public service
is in her blood. She has brought remarkable drive and passion to every
facet of her work.
She has both led the communications
team and has mentored so many of the
communications team members with
her heart and her presence of mind,
which is not surprising to me given her
tremendous past experience both in
serving multiple Members of Congress

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.011

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

but also in working on political campaigns—to include a Presidential campaign many years ago—of the Members
she has worked for in the past, to include that of my now colleague’s, Senator ADAM SCHIFF, who also represents
California.
I could go on and on about her resume and on and on about her contributions to different issues and to different engagements with the people of
California—speaking
engagements,
speeches, et cetera—but of the many,
many moments that were so impactful,
I think the best example of her insights
and value of her advice was in the
aftermath of what has become known
as an infamous incident at a Department of Homeland Security press conference that I attended last year in Los
Angeles.
With the visuals of that incident that
shook some across California and
across the country, Tess, in her wisdom, took the worst of circumstances
and both properly and successfully
pivoted the attention and the message
to where it rightfully belonged—in
highlighting the cruelty of this administration and how it was terrorizing
communities throughout the Los Angeles region and, soon, elsewhere around
the country.
This administration has been targeting indiscriminately and in an increasingly cruel fashion immigrants
and not just the worst of the worst—
the dangerous, violent criminals that
the administration likes to talk about
so often. What we have seen in reality
is so many of the immigrants being arrested, detained, and even deported
without due process. The undocumented or otherwise hard-working people who contribute to our country are
the vast majority of the victims of this
administration’s mass deportation efforts. Tess has helped to correct that
narrative and to emphasize and highlight that narrative as part of her public service.
On a personal note, as a husband and
as a father myself, I know—and I share
it very frequently—that public service
is not without personal sacrifice. Tess’s
family has seen nothing different. I
have seen her in some of her personal
milestones over the last few years—
from an engagement, to marriage, to
becoming a mother.
So I thank Quinn, her daughter; Justin, her husband; and her entire family
for sharing Tess with us over these last
4 years and certainly throughout her
career. Quinn may not appreciate it
today, but I hope she one day learns to
appreciate not just the value of that
sacrifice but the importance of Tess’s
work to me, to our office, to the people
of California, and to the Nation.
To Tess and her entire family, I just
want to say that we thank you. We appreciate everything that you have done
for me, for Angela, for our office, for
California, and for our Nation. It is
with a heavy heart that we both say
thank you and send you off into your
next chapter knowing that you won’t

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S233

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

be that far away. We will have to call
you back into action from time to time
as life needs it, but we just so truly,
truly appreciate everything you have
done and how you have done it.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Indiana.
VENEZUELA

Mr. YOUNG. Mr. President, since the
beginning of this year, there has been a
lot of conversation both here in Washington and around the country about
the future of American involvement in
Venezuela and how that relates to the
War Powers Act. So, as we head into
the recess and as my colleagues head
back to their respective States and to
other locales, I just wanted to take a
minute and update my constituents on
how this U.S. Senator is approaching
the situation.
First, I want to reiterate that I support President Trump’s decision to
bring Nicolas Maduro to justice for his
many crimes. I know I speak for countless Hoosiers in expressing my gratitude that after years of oppression, the
Venezuelan people now have new hope.
In fact, I have taken meetings in recent days with diplomats, national security luminaries, business people,
expats, and others. Those meetings
have reinforced the reality for me that
right now we have an opportunity for
brighter days ahead in Venezuela, and I
know the administration is working
with multiple stakeholders to effect
that sort of positive change that we are
all hoping for.
I, of course, also want to commend
the bravery and the professionalism of
the U.S. service personnel who carried
out this successful law enforcement
mission in Venezuela earlier this
month—highly impressive, highly sophisticated. I am awestruck by the
mission and all that it accomplished,
and I thank the men who were a part of
that.
Now, while I applaud and stand with
the President and his team on the law
enforcement action taken in Venezuela
to remove Nicolas Maduro, that law enforcement mission is now complete. I
just want to clarify that for many of
my constituents.
I have also expressed concerns about
the possibility of American military
involvement in Venezuela as we move
forward. The President and members of
his national security team have openly
stated that the United States now runs
Venezuela, and because we can’t predict the future, no one can guarantee
with certainty that an American military presence won’t be required to stabilize the country.
So I, along with whom I believe to be
the majority of Hoosiers, am not prepared to commit American troops to
that mission. I strongly believe that
any such commitment of U.S. forces in
Venezuela must be subject to debate
and authorization from Congress. That
is what has animated so much of my
activity in recent days and weeks.
That belief is not a new one to this
situation or to this President. In fact,

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

for over a decade and under multiple
Presidents, I have pushed for Congress
to fulfill its role as defined in the Constitution on matters involving the use
of military force. Since U.S. involvement in Venezuela began last year, I
have pushed for briefings and other
forms of congressional engagement.
Just last week, because of those concerns, I ultimately voted to advance a
War Powers Resolution to make my
concerns crystal clear to the administration and to my colleagues.
The reality, though, is this: Even if
the Senate had adopted that resolution, had it not been derailed through a
procedural vote, it likely would have
died in the House of Representatives—
very likely—or at a minimum have
been vetoed by the President of the
United States. That much was clear.
Given that stark, incontrovertible,
unavoidable reality, I have had numerous conversations with senior national
security officials over the past week
and since the first vote took place, and
in those conversations—some in person, some by phone—I received assurances that there were, No. 1, no longer
any American troops in Venezuela. I
also received a commitment that if
President Trump were to determine
American forces were needed in any
major military operation in Venezuela,
the administration would come to Congress in advance—in advance—to ask
for a formal authorization on the use of
military force.
Lastly, Secretary Rubio has agreed
to my request to appear before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to
provide a public update on Venezuela
immediately after the recess, facilitating the very type of public debate
and, if necessary someday, authorization around these matters, hopefully
working the muscle memory of this institution and its various committees
on issues of war powers so that they
might be more inclined to operate
those prerogatives—to exercise those
prerogatives in the future.
For those like me who want Congress
to perform its longstanding role on
these issues, the commitments I have
secured are major commitments that
will help keep Congress better informed, help ensure we make better decisions, and ensure in this situation
that any future commitment of U.S.
forces in Venezuela is subject to public
debate and authorization here in this
body.
Let me just end by saying that President Trump campaigned against forever wars. Millions of people strongly
supported him in that position. I
strongly support him in that position
still today, and I believe that a drawnout campaign in Venezuela involving
the American military, even if unintended, would be the opposite of President Trump’s goal of ending foreign entanglements. But I also make that
statement
with
humility,
understanding that world events are fluid,
that the world is complicated, and that
circumstances can change.

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.015

S15JAPT1

S234

What all of us in this body should
want is the opportunity to perform
oversight and provide input on these
critical foreign policy issues on behalf
of those we represent. If we must make
a decision—a very difficult decision—at
some point in the future, our constituents should be able to hold us accountable for those decisions.
Regardless of who serves as President
or which party controls the White
House, Congress must get back to carefully fulfilling its constitutional responsibilities. I am pleased that we
have a path forward toward that goal
now, and I look forward to the next
steps in the weeks ahead.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Washington.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

APPROPRIATIONS

Ms. CANTWELL. Mr. President, I
come to the floor this afternoon to congratulate the appropriations colleagues
who have got us to this point of voting
today on final passage of three important appropriations bills.
I want to congratulate specifically
Senator COLLINS and Senator MURRAY
from my home State of Washington.
They have done an admirable job, and
I certainly want to compliment Senator MURRAY for her hard work and attention on policies that affect our
State, particularly in the areas of
water. But we are here today because
we want to say to our fellow colleagues: These are three important
bills to preserving science and the role
that science plays in moving our Nation forward.
Last May, I hosted an online roundtable with Senator VAN HOLLEN, a lead
appropriator—and I thank him and the
rest of the appropriators on the committee, both on the Democrat and Republican side—because we wanted to
speak out about how Federal Agencies
and scientists, including some from my
State, were here to decry the impacts
that we would see if the Trump administration was successful at cutting the
National Science Foundation particularly, cutting NOAA, cutting NASA.
These participants made it clear that
industry depends on strong partnerships with the government to conduct
basic and applied science and that they
can’t do it on their own. Important
people also were convened in a group in
June—meteorologists from around the
country—to specifically home in on
how cuts to the NOAA budget would
endanger Americans on issues like
peak hurricane and wildfire season.
And we called on the administration
to restore the Agencies to their full capacity. So I am very happy that these
three bills, I think, represent a win for
science as was recently reported in the
New York Times. But it also was specifically important for the science
NOAA research budget: $634 million so
that NOAA can continue to improve
weather forecasting and development
of tools that actually save lives and
save money.
I know my colleagues from all over
the country are plagued by weather

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

events. It could be a hurricane; it could
be a tornado; it could be a flood. We obviously were just impacted in the Pacific Northwest, but we need the tools.
We need new hurricane hunters. We
need new radar systems. We need the
meteorologists.
We need the people on the ground,
like what happened in Texas, so that
you can take weather information
about how warmer events are creating
more precipitation, and that precipitation could lead to record flooding. We
need the whole system to work with
the emergency responders, and we need
the ability to get people out of harm’s
way.
These bills also maintain NOAA’s
fishery funding and increase investment in salmon hatcheries and the Columbia River, and it protects the Pacific Coastal Salmon Recovery Fund
from being zeroed out.
I see my colleague from Oregon here.
I know, as an appropriator, he knows
how well and important the Pacific
Coastal Salmon Recovery Fund is, just
as my colleagues from Alaska, Oregon,
California, Idaho, and Montana know.
The whole region knows how important
these funds are.
Congress has rejected the administration’s attempts in the NOAA budget to
cut $1.7 billion out of the NOAA budget. It literally wanted to slash the entire R&D arm of NOAA and slash the
NOAA fisheries budget by 29 percent,
and these three bills today obviously
reject that.
We are also sending a strong message
that we believe in our scientists in
other Agencies, and I will get to NASA
in a minute. But just on this continued
improvement of sensors and instruments, this bill invests in NOAA’s critical research and lifesaving Agencies.
During the last month of record
flooding in my State, over 100,000 people were forced to evacuate their
homes, and now, 73 landslides have
been reported. So these important reminders, like weather events, are why
we sent a five-point plan to the President saying funding for research, technology, tools, buoys, and other information are important to modernizing
the Nation’s weather forecasting capabilities.
In addition, as I mentioned, there
were other Agencies where the President thought we should make massive
cuts. Thank God our bipartisan efforts
by appropriators and our colleagues
represented by the earlier votes on
these bills show that we don’t agree
with that.
We will double the request for funding for the National Science Foundation, and we support the NSF fundamental applied research investment in
universities across our Nation. This is
important work in all sorts of medical
devices, insulin pumps, pacemakers,
important things for healthcare and for
manufacturing competitiveness.
We also with this bill send a strong
message that we stand by our NASA
Agency. This legislation funds all

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

NASA mission areas and avoids jeopardizing our exploration of the moon
and solar system. We are not going to
put aviation safety at risk or leadership in aerospace technology such as
advanced composites.
It restores NASA’s budget from
under $19 billion, as proposed by the
Trump administration, to $24 billion to
ensure that we can return to the Moon
before China and sustain America’s
presence there.
So I am very happy that all of these
things are really important investments, generational investments in
science programs, rejecting the cuts by
the administration, and instead fueling
the innovation economy that is so important for America’s competitiveness.
While I am very happy to celebrate
these three bills, we also have more
work to do. This week, it is clear that
the economic numbers point to the fact
that we are not lowering costs in
America. The Bureau of Labor Statistics said this week that consumer
prices are up 2.7 percent higher than a
year ago. It has been a full year since
this administration has set in motion
its economic policies, and now, we
know the prices of groceries are up 2.4
percent, the price of shelter is up 3.2
percent, the price of medical services is
up 3.5 percent, the price of electricity
is up 6.7 percent, and the price of natural gas is up 10.8 percent.
So the reality is, is that tariffs are
having an impact. They are adding to
the sticker shock on American families, and they are affecting the price of
everything from coffee to clothes to
cameras to furniture.
A team of Harvard economists have
been tracking retail prices using
realtime barcode data. So one thing I
want to show is just look at this chart
that we are presenting here, ‘‘Tariffs
are Raising Prices for Americans.’’
With January 2024 retail prices as a
benchmark, you can see that, during
2024, retail prices were trending down
on both domestic goods and imported
goods.
These two lines here—these two lines
on domestic and imported goods were
basically
trending
downward—this
upper line: domestic, imported goods.
So here we are all the way through
2024; these numbers are going down.
But all of the sudden, in 2025 and particularly here in April, all of the sudden, the numbers for both imported
and domestic products start going back
up, all the way to where we are today,
so 2024 policies of the last administration driving prices down. All of the
sudden, tariff implementation and
these policies, prices now going back
up.
This is when so-called ‘‘Liberation
Day’’ tariffs were announced. Americans started getting squeezed. I don’t
think they are feeling very liberated.
This has been the centerpiece of the
President’s economic policies, and it
remains, in my mind, a broken promise
on trying to lower costs.
Inflation does remain a consistent
problem. American businesses know it;

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.016

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

American families know it; and they
are being squeezed by it. So I am hopeful the Supreme Court will act soon
and help Americans by lowering the
prices they are feeling because of the
Trump tariffs and the fact that they
are being imposed on manufacturers,
on households, and consumers that are
having an effect on our economy.
But I want Congress to act. I hope
that, as the Supreme Court takes a
look at this, that my colleagues will
realize that it is their constitutional
duty to play a role here and be responsible, similar to what the CantwellGrassley Trade Review Act says. That
is, that we are saying Congress has the
dutiful constitutional authority on tariffs and you have to have all trade policies come before Congress in a transparent and consistent fashion.
I hope that my colleagues will respond to this as the Supreme Court
acts, and hopefully, we will get more
attention to the oversight demanded
on high costs being impacted by tariffs.
We also must work harder to stop inflation and support policies that my
colleagues on our side of the aisle have
been talking about: how we want to
have more affordable housing, how we
want to lower the cost on household
goods in general, how we want to address energy prices, and how we want
Americans to feel like they can keep
pace.
Yet here we are on one of the biggest
crisis that we could do something
about right now—healthcare—and we
are
not
doing
anything
about
healthcare, the expired ACA—the Affordable Care Act—enhanced premium
tax credits, the commonsense solution
that we would have had, many Americans—millions of Americans—still having affordable insurance.
Our colleagues have not chosen to address this issue. The House passed an
extension, a 3-year extension, and yet
here we are, about to leave for a week,
and our colleagues in the Senate will
not even bring that extension up for a
vote.
Mr. President, 80,000 people in my
State are now at risk of losing their
health insurance. So I asked our colleagues to do something about this. I
see the President released a one-page
healthcare framework today, and I am
glad he is getting in that, but today is
the end of enrollment. We need more
than a one-page plan. There are a lot of
details that go into something that is
18 percent of U.S. GDP. This is almost
1 in every $5 spent in the American
economy.
And after 15 years, we have heard
nothing really from our Republican
colleagues on how they are going to
drive down the cost of healthcare. So
my constituents now looking at these
increased inflation numbers also know
that they can’t afford to get sick. If
they are going to lose this healthcare,
they can’t afford the impacts of the
economy, and they can’t afford the impacts of healthcare disappearing out
from under them.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S235

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

It is time we address inflation on a
daily basis here. It is time we really
think about what we can do to help the
U.S. economy, help Americans keep
pace, and help Americans restore the
healthcare that they deserve to have.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon.
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, I
thank my colleague from Washington
State for her fierce advocacy on
healthcare and on so much more in
terms of the affordability of living in
America. Our families are oppressed.
Mr. President, we are considering a
trio of appropriations bills, and one of
those is the appropriation bill, or
spending bill, for Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies. I believe
that this Interior bill for fiscal year
2026 is an important step toward Congress reclaiming its constitutional
power of the purse.
The bill protects funding for public
lands, including national parks, wildlife refuges, conservation lands, and
national forests.
President Trump’s proposed budget
slashed $1 billion from the National
Park Service and created the opportunity to transfer or sell off our national park treasures. This bill rejects
that vision. It has a better plan: full
staffing capacity for our national
parks, full complement of seasonal
staff, State and Tribal historic preservation offices funded, and needed park
maintenance and repairs funded.
President Trump proposed massive
cuts to the U.S. Forest Service, which
would be devastating, $1.4 billion in
cuts. Those of us who live in the West
who have significant amounts of Federal forests know how much investment it takes to appropriately manage
these lands.
So this bill presents a better plan. It
funds the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. It preserves State forestry grants and programs for research and forest health
management. It invests in hazardous
fuels reduction projects and wildfire
preparedness and suppression efforts. It
ensures that Federal wildlife firefighters are fully paid. The bill funds
the Land and Water Conservation Fund
at $900 million instead of a much smaller amount proposed by the President.
And this bill requires that all projects
get funded, not simply projects that
the President favors.
The bill fully funds Payments in Lieu
of Taxes, normally known as PILT, to
ensure counties across the country, especially rural communities, have resources they need. The bill upholds our
commitment and treaty obligations to
Tribes. It rejects President Trump’s attempt to slash $1 billion from Tribal
programs. It boosts funding for the Indian Health Services. It provides resources to staff newly opened hospitals
and clinics, and it preserves the Indian
Health Services advanced appropriations for fiscal year 2027 to ensure that,
if there is a government shutdown,

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

healthcare through the Indian Health
Service will not shut down. That is
protection for 2.5 million people across
Indian Country.
President Trump proposed gutting
the Environmental Protection Agency.
This bill has a better plan. It provides
almost $5 billion above his budget. It
protects the Energy Star Program, the
water and wastewater State Revolving
Funds—so important to so many communities across the land—and the
WIFIA Program, the Water Infrastructure Finance Innovation Act, that provides low-cost loans for large water
projects across the country that would
otherwise be unaffordable.
It preserves programs for air quality
management and pollution control.
And the bill includes more than $1.7
billion
for
community
initiated
projects. Now, these are projects where
communities said, Here is our top priority, and Senators then advocated and
House Members advocated that those
projects be included in this budget.
That is a powerful vision of a local understanding of the best and the most
important
need
being
addressed
through this bill. Often, that involves
replacing wastewater treatment plants
or restoring critical watersheds.
This bill, in addition to these programs, takes another critical step forward. When programs are included in
an appropriations bill, the details of
how Congress intends for those funds
to be spent are traditionally laid out in
report language. The report language
doesn’t have the force of law, but in
the understanding of the separation of
powers, the administrations of the past
respected and operated according to
that report language.
Every single former Presidential administration has honored those directives, but not the Trump administration. That is why we have included 140
new line items in legislative text, moving items that used to be in report language into the actual language of the
law.
It is a challenge if the administration
does not respect the visions laid out
through the language of our spending
bills. How can Members of Congress negotiate a compromise that includes the
priorities of different Senators from
different parts of the country, different
House Members from all over the country, if a President is going to say, Well,
you know what, I have decided I am
simply not going to act on some of
those projects; maybe I will only implement the projects for red States and
not blue States?
Or maybe a different President might
say: I will to the projects for blue
States but not red States—or Senators
I like rather than Senators I don’t like.
No. That is unacceptable. Every time
you hear the phrase of the administration saying—a Cabinet Member or the
President himself, We are going to cut
programs that don’t align with the administration’s priorities, that is an authoritarian strongman state comment

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.039

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S236

that breaks the law and guts the Constitution. That is the administration
stealing the power of the purse.
The Founders deliberately placed the
power of the purse—the spending
power—with Congress. You can read it
in article I of the Constitution because
it is therefore the people’s representatives who decide the design of the programs and how much money they will
receive. If just the Chief Executive
makes those decisions, then we don’t
have a President; we have a King; we
have a tyrant. And we here in Congress
have failed our responsibility to defend
the Constitution—yes, that Constitution, the one we took an oath to defend.
It is the vision of a democratic republic that we come together from all over
the country, from different walks of
life, and work together to forge spending bills and authorizing bills that
serve interests across this Nation.
In a continuing resolution last year,
Congress abdicated that responsibility.
We failed in defending the Constitution
and effectively handed the President a
blank check. That is exactly what
Trump wanted this year, another blank
check to operate as a tyrant instead of
a constitutional President.
But he is not getting it. We have protections in these spending bills that
take a significant stride toward defense
of our constitutional responsibility and
the power of the purse. Now, it is not
as strong a language as I would have
liked, and yes, there is vulnerability to
slow-walking or freezing or transferring, but we have taken a strong step
in the right direction.
There is more we need to do in that,
more than we ever thought we had to
do, but it is going to take the majority
and minority parties working together
to fully restore our responsibility
under the Constitution.
A huge thank you to the chair of the
committee, the subcommittee, Senator
MURKOWSKI. She is a great partner to
work with. We come from different
sides of the aisle, but we both come
from States full of BLM lands—Bureau
of Land Management lands, that is—
full of forests, full of challenges that
are addressed in this bill. We both care
a great deal about the environment,
that we have a responsibility to defend
now and hand to the next generation in
healthy condition. The bill that we
worked on together here in the Senate,
it passed the Senate committee 26 to 2.
That says a lot.
To summarize, the bill before us
today rejects the President’s disastrous
cuts. It defends our public lands and
our Tribal programs and our environment. It keeps out new poison pill riders—and there were a lot of them in
the House version of this bill.
Together, let’s proceed to do more of
this kind of bipartisan work and to enable the responsibilities invested in
Congress to be fulfilled in responsibility to our constituents across the
Nation and the structure of our democratic republic.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Michigan.
FLINT, MICHIGAN

Ms. SLOTKIN. Mr. President, I rise
today as the new Senator from the
State of Michigan and in particular to
recognize the 10-year anniversary of
the declaration of emergency in the
city of Flint, MI, 10 years on.
In April of 2014, the city of Flint decided to switch the city’s water source
from Lake Huron to the Flint River. It
was a decision made by State officials
to save money at the time, but neither
the city nor the State made sure to
treat the new water before it came into
Flint’s taps.
Because of that, an American city
was poisoned. In less than 2 years,
100,000 people were exposed to toxic levels of lead, bacteria, heavy metals like
iron, and chemicals known to cause
cancer. That includes about 10,000 children. Imagine the Big House at U of M
packed on game day, and that is how
many people were poisoned.
Ten years ago this week, President
Barack Obama declared a Federal state
of emergency for the city of Flint, and
that declaration wasn’t necessarily the
beginning of the crisis, but it was supposed to be the beginning of the end, a
turning point where Flint could begin
to recover.
But let me be clear, the crisis in
Flint has not ended—not in Flint, not
in Michigan, and as a Michigander and
Flint’s Senator, not for me. Flint is a
community still in pain, still seeking
justice, still seeking accountability. As
Flint’s newest Senator, I wanted to be
here on the 10-year anniversary to
make sure Michiganders and Americans don’t forget what happened.
Like I said, let’s review the bidding.
Flint is an apocalyptic poisoning of an
American city, and it should be a warning to all Americans on what happens
when there is not accountability. It is
a story of government’s failure to protect its citizens, and more than that, it
is a human tragedy of ordinary people
living ordinary lives, people like
Brittney Thomas.
Brittney lives in Flint. She has two
children, Jabari and Janiyah. Janiyah
was just a year old when the city of
Flint switched their water from the
Flint River. Jabari was 4. Around her,
Brittney’s neighbors began seeing foam
coming out of their taps. Their water
was yellow or brown or rust-colored. It
smelled metallic. Visible particles were
floating around in the water.
Soon, Brittney and her children
started developing unexplained rashes.
Janiyah’s soft baby skin was streaked
with red, riddled with bumps. Concerned, Brittney, of course, reached out
to her pediatrician. Then her children
started having seizures. For months,
they were in and out of the hospital.
Brittney didn’t know why. She could
only watch in panic as her kids grew
sicker.
To the parents watching this, imagine your 1-year-old baby, this tiny,
helpless life that you are supposed to

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

protect, seizing again and again, and
you have no idea what is going on.
There are no words to describe that
terror.
Being in and out of the hospital had
other consequences. Brittney lost multiple jobs. She began struggling with
her bills. She was forced to borrow
money from loved ones, and the effects
of these unexplainable illnesses seeped
into every aspect of their lives.
For the rest of 2014, more and more
families in Flint began to experience
sudden, strange symptoms: thinning
hair, rashes, seizures, pain, and chronic
conditions. Kids began developing
speech impediments, seemingly out of
nowhere. Students consistently getting
As and Bs were suddenly having a hard
time being able to read or think clearly. Their grades slipped. Some developed learning disabilities. Many kids
started showing changes in their behavior, where once they were calm,
sweet, and curious, they became extremely anxious, emotional, and aggressive.
Their parents had no idea why. There
was no visible reasons, no obvious explanation. Water, even when it is
poisoned, leaves very few visible scars.
It wasn’t until doctors ran blood
tests that Brittney discovered that her
children had lead poisoning. Families
across the city started to get the same
diagnosis. But that wasn’t enough of an
explanation. Brittney knew it. So did
other parents. And they suspected
there was a link between their kids
getting sick and the brown water coming out of their tap, so they began demanding answers. They raised issues
with the city council, with county
leadership, with State officials. Every
time, they got the same response: Our
tests are showing that the water is just
fine.
Others waved off the signs. Flint is a
poor city. Its residents are mostly African American. It was way too easy for
leaders to just shrug and look away.
Sometimes, people actually laughed.
Some parents were spending days at
a time in the hospital. They were living a nightmare, and they were asking
their leaders for help. Instead of getting answers and support, they were
dismissed.
Brittney and other parents, including
Melissa Mays and Leeanne Walters,
wondered if the city’s tests were actually accurate. They decided to test the
water for themselves. So in January of
2015, they got boxes of test kits and instructions from a lab supervisor at
Flint’s water treatment plant. They
paid for it with Melissa’s tax refund.
The accepted limit for lead in drinking water is 15 parts per billion. One
home, the home of Leanne Walters,
showed a test reading 104 parts per billion. Leanne tested her water again a
few weeks later. This time, it jumped
to 400 parts per billion. The water her
kids were drinking, bathing in, and
brushing their teeth with contained
more than 25 times the amount of lead
that is safe for children.

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.017

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

Terrified and frustrated, she called
the EPA to complain. She reached a researcher named Miguel Del Toral, who
began investigating. Over the next few
weeks, Miguel asked Michigan’s Department of Environmental Quality
over and over again whether Flint’s
water had been treated properly. First,
they said it had been treated. Then
they admitted it hadn’t.
Miguel couldn’t believe what he was
hearing. Flint was an older city, which
meant their plumbing was mostly lead
pipes. In his field, it was common
knowledge that corrosion control was
needed to prevent exactly this type of
crisis.
Brittney, Melissa, and other parents
organized marches and protests almost
every week. In July, over 500 people
marched 70 miles from Detroit to Flint.
Everyone, from local media, to international press, to Hollywood directors,
started paying more attention. Yet,
when Michigan outlets reached out to
the State’s environmental department,
their spokesman said the following:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Anyone who is concerned about lead in the
drinking water in Flint can relax.

Doctors like Dr. Mona Hanna, a pediatrician, compared the results to her
own patients’ records from the last 2
years. The results matched exactly.
Flint was being poisoned by its own
drinking water. Dr. Mona and other
doctors teamed up with parents to
shine a light on these results, and they
talked to anyone who would listen.
It is an important lesson in banging
pots and pans until you get the help
you need. But it took almost 2 full
years of advocacy and fight from
Flint’s parents for their kids to get
this declaration of an emergency.
During those 2 years and beyond, the
scale of the government’s deception
started coming out. Detroit press reported that the city had known about
the risk to the water before they even
switched the source. A city report back
in 2011 had identified the Flint River as
corrosive, in need of special chemicals.
Both city and State officials reported
that as early as 2013—a year before the
city water was switched.
But Michigan’s own State environmental department had been doing exactly what they accused others of
doing—manipulating data. They had
changed city reports to make the lead
levels look within acceptable levels.
The State’s tests, which they had cited
for months to discredit the Flint parents, were revealed to have been cherry-picked.
Meanwhile, Federal reports of lead in
Flint’s water had been buried by senior
officials at the Environmental Protection Agency until Miguel—that one researcher we spoke about—risked his
job and leaked the reports to the press.
Starting things off, 12 people died
from Legionnaire’s disease alone.
In fact, Flint knew how to fix these
problems before they even changed the
water and did it anyway. Treating
Flint’s water would have cost approximately $60 a day. For $60 a day, offi-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S237

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

cials could have prevented 100,000 people from getting poisoned.
Now, what has that led to? Flint’s advocacy changed more than just the
city’s water source; it changed Michigan. Michigan is the Great Lakes
State. Water is part of our core identity. We have always seen ourselves as
protectors of our Nation’s water.
Threats to our water are threats to
our very identity as Michiganders. To
be frightened of our water hits at the
core of who we are. But Flint helped us
realize that protecting water doesn’t
start and stop at the Great Lakes; it
includes the water around us—in our
rivers and in our taps. Because of
Flint, Michigan is now a powerful voice
speaking out on issues like PFAS,
chemical contamination, and river pollution.
Republican
or
Democrat,
Michiganders see themselves as stewards of all of America’s water no matter where it flows, and it is no exaggeration to say that Flint changed our
country.
More than 10 years after the crisis in
Flint, billions of dollars have been
spent, going to American cities to swap
out lead pipes, including hundreds of
millions for Michigan secured by Senators Debbie Stabenow and GARY
PETERS.
The issue of aging lead pipes drew national attention. Cities in New Jersey,
Colorado, and Kentucky began replacing their aging pipes. In 2018, Michigan
became the first State to require the
removal of all lead pipes. And citizens
were empowered to hold elected officials accountable for environmental
negligence rather than just companies.
But all of that is, frankly, cold comfort to the people of Flint. In their
community, the damage has been done.
More than a decade later, it is still ongoing.
An entire generation of Flint’s children still live with the long-term effects of lead poisoning. It never leaves
the body. There are learning disabilities, ADHD, anxiety and depression,
not to mention PTSD. Studies estimate that roughly 3,000 children have
been diagnosed with these conditions
and more. The actual number could be
much higher.
Flint’s schools paid a heavy price.
Test scores dropped dramatically. Special needs requests spiked. Enrollment
in Flint schools plummeted from 8,500
students in 2012 to less than 3,000 this
year. More than 20 school buildings are
sitting empty.
Both Brittney’s kids still suffer from
recurring seizures almost 12 years after
the crisis began. Her son Jabari has extreme anxiety and issues with his
memory. He began struggling in
school.
Around her, Brittney’s friends and
loved ones now have chronic, incurable
conditions. There are children whose
kidneys are so damaged that they are
in constant risk of severe dehydration;
women with repeated and above-normal miscarriage rates; teenagers with
hardened heavy metal deposits in their

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

heels and in their knees, making it
painful to sit or stand; parents with a
slew of autoimmune disorders—lupus,
rheumatoid arthritis.
With every hospital stay, every specialist’s visit, every missed day of
school, Brittney and her loved ones are
forced to relive that trauma—helplessness, panic, and confusion, not to mention pain in their everyday lives.
The story is not over yet even 10
years on. They are still fighting to be
heard. Flint wants accountability. Who
wouldn’t? They deserve nothing less
after an American city is poisoned.
People died. Children lost their parents. People lost their siblings, neighbors, friends. So nearly 10 years later,
Flint residents have brought charges,
criminal and civil, against everyone involved in this catastrophe. They sued
the city. They sued the county. They
sued the engineering firms that
switched Flint’s water. They sued the
State of Michigan, including Gov. Rick
Snyder at the time, for their staggering lack of oversight. They sued the
EPA, which was supposed to be the
backstop for everything, which consistently buried reports of lead poisoning
instead of holding officials accountable.
Most of these cases have been settled,
with one notable exception: the EPA.
More than a decade later, the EPA is
denying, deflecting, and dragging out
this cause in court. In fact, the Trump
administration, just like the Biden administration, has the ability to settle
this case without Congress or anyone
else. They should either take their day
in court or settle fairly.
But it was never really about money
for Flint. People wanted someone to
take responsibility.
Unfortunately, Flint residents have
yet to see anything from a settlement
over the last decade. Timeliness for the
rest of their payouts are vague and always changing, and estimated amounts
of initial payments are unacceptably
small.
It is possible that Flint families will
not see the dollars they are owed. No
apology, no amount of assigning blame,
and certainly no amount of money can
make Flint whole, but even after all
they have endured over the past decade, this community is being denied
what little they were promised, and
that should make every American furious.
Now, as Flint’s newest Federal Senator, I see my responsibility to fight
for Flint. It is not their job to push,
prod, or hope a decade later. Flint deserves someone who actually is up for
that fight. I am determined to follow in
the footsteps of the leaders who have
come before me—former Congressman
Dan Kildee, former Senator Debbie
Stabenow, GARY PETERS, Jim Ananich,
Mayor Sheldon Neeley, who is now still
in office. These are people who have
fought for Flint in Michigan and in
this very building. I will take that
torch proudly and strive to be worthy
of the appreciation of Flint residents.

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.019

S15JAPT1

S238

I know there will be more fights and
setbacks for Flint. There will be consistent fights for dollars, to get over
promises broken, for accountability
and apologies. But I want to say here
on the floor of the Senate directly to
Flint:
No matter what is coming, I have
your back, and it is my responsibility
to fight for you.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Before
the Chair recognizes the Senator, I
would like to note that the floor has
been held open as a courtesy to the
Senator from Colorado.
Mr. BENNET. I am grateful for that.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank you
for holding open the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Colorado.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

NATIONAL CENTER FOR ATMOSPHERIC RESEARCH

Mr. BENNET. Mr. President, last
night, President Trump announced his
attempt to disassemble the National
Center for Atmospheric Research, or
NCAR, which is based in Boulder, CO.
NCAR is the leading atmospheric research institution and a central part of
our Nation’s scientific infrastructure.
Its research forms the backbone of
weather forecasts, disaster preparedness, water planning, wildfire prevention, and aviation safety all across our
country. Its work even protects American troops overseas by providing nextgeneration weather prediction for military operation.
NCAR scientists, engineers, and meteorologists equip emergency responders, airline pilots, farmers, local utility
managers, and military planners with
the tools they need to protect American lives, property, and our national
security.
The President has blown all that up.
But as he tries to shut down this institution, the world has not gotten any
less dangerous. We can’t wish away extreme drought or pause seasonal
wildfires, which, as my colleagues from
other Western States know, don’t stop
at State lines and barely have a season
at all anymore because they are so
present. You can’t rebuild decades of
scientific research and expertise once
it is destroyed.
That is why, today, my colleague
Senator HICKENLOOPER and I are offering an amendment to the appropriations package that would protect funding for NCAR. This isn’t about one lab,
one institution, or even one State. It is
about protecting the foundation of our
national research capacity, a capacity
built over decades—decades—and generations of taxpayer investment and
public service, capacity that once lost
can’t be replaced and may never be replaced.
But we know from painful experience
that this attack on NCAR is just another instance of senseless destruction
and political retribution, one we have
all watched take place over the past
year, time and again.
Colorado has been singled out by the
President. The people of Colorado have

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

found themselves the victims of political retaliation. That is why he vetoed
the bill to finally finish the Arkansas
Valley Conduit and deliver to 50,000
rural Coloradans access to clean drinking water. This legislation would finally fulfill Washington’s promise to
deliver clean drinking water to farmers
and ranchers in Southeastern Colorado,
a promise made over 64 years ago by
John F. Kennedy. The conduit has always been a partnership between the
Federal and local governments, driven
by the leadership of the Southeastern
Colorado Water Conservancy District.
In the face of rising costs of materials and labor, once again, Southeastern Coloradans came together and
put forward an inventive solution to
lower costs by changing the project’s
financing, with no increase to Federal
spending.
The bill passed both Chambers of
Congress unanimously, with the most
bipartisan support anybody could have.
But President Trump used his first
Presidential veto of his second term to
deny Coloradans what should be a basic
fundamental right—the access to clean
drinking water.
This retaliation campaign is why he
continues to delay Colorado disaster
relief and is working to cancel hundreds of millions of dollars in Federal
grants for childcare, for energy, for
wildlife, and for transportation funding. That is why the President is interfering in the State’s ability to decide
how we clean up our air and deal with
the aging costly energy infrastructure
that we have. That is why the President has doubled down on his attacks,
not just in Colorado but in other
places, on food assistance programs,
and, sadly, why he moved Space Command out of Colorado to a State that
had voted for him.
But these attacks are just the beginning, when it comes to this singular
lawlessness and recklessness of President Trump. As soon as he returned to
power, President Trump weaponized his
office, punishing political opponents,
rewarding loyal allies, working tirelessly not for the benefit of the American people but for those—only those—
who supported him and for himself and
for his family.
That is not the American way. It is
not how an American President should
make decisions about anything. An
election is one thing, but once we hold
office, we have a responsibility to represent every citizen, regardless of their
politics, regardless of who they voted
for.
This President has taken the opposite approach, unleashing mayhem on
American citizens, based primarily on
whether they live in a State that voted
for him or one that didn’t vote for him.
We have seen a President send a
surge of ICE agents to occupy Minnesota and deploy the National Guard
into one American city after another.
We have all watched the videos of the
chaos and fear and heartbreak these
decisions have wrought.

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

No matter your views on our immigration problems, I don’t believe any
person in America should have to wonder whether masked men in unmarked
cars, carrying guns, might, at any moment, snatch them from the street or
break their car windows or leave them
bloodied on the side of the road.
That is not the country that I grew
up in. That is not the country that we
want to live in. But it is happening
today in American cities all over our
country.
We have seen the President, without
congressional authorization or even notification, send helicopters to seize a
foreign dictator and the next day tout
the investment opportunities that he
has created by this incursion—investment opportunities, by the way, that
few American companies seem excited
about and which promise only to flood
the international oil market at a time
when oil prices are the lowest that
they have been in years.
When one oil company decided to
dare to tell the truth—to say what any
sane executive would be thinking, what
any sane observer of the market would
be thinking, what anybody who understood the oil markets would say, which
is that a country that has a history of
expropriating property is not the first
investment choice—they were quickly
punished. And that should come as no
surprise.
President Trump’s Federal Communications Commission attempted to silence a late-night comedian because he
didn’t like the criticism. That, itself,
would be laughable if it weren’t so
troubling.
For decades—for decades—the United
States has stood up for the freedom of
expression and freedom of the press, for
the right of journalists and authors and
comedians to not hide their opinions in
underground newspapers and in hidden
leaflets but instead to deliver it honestly and widely; to hold power to account; to undergird an important public debate that is the root of our democracy. But those same rights are
under threat today here in America.
Even the Federal Reserve is not immune from efforts to control or curtail
its independence. The United States
boasts the largest and most dynamic
economy in the world, with the deepest
and most appealing and most attractive capital markets. We print the
global reserve currency here in America. We are the envy and the first destination of every entrepreneur and innovator in the world. But President
Trump seems eager to throw all of that
away through lawsuits and investigations designed not to deliver justice
but to squeeze the Federal Reserve
Chair until he gives President Trump
what he wants—lower interest rates.
With every action like this, President Trump is undermining the American economy and driving up costs for
communities all over our State, and he
is doing it in almost every way imaginable.
Not even 6 months ago, I was here on
the Senate floor during the longest

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.020

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

government shutdown in American history, all because President Trump refused to extend tax insurance, premium
tax credits, and provide reliable, affordable healthcare that the American
people deserve. Now healthcare premiums are set to double, to triple, and
in some cases to quadruple. That comes
on top of other price pressures that
families all over this country are facing, which have been caused in part by
the President’s trade war with the entire world.
The dollar has depreciated sharply
since March as investors hedge against
the effects of the President’s tariffs.
Hiring has stagnated, and the unemployment rate has risen. Residential
electricity prices increased over 10 percent in the first 8 months of 2025. The
price of beef has risen 16 percent over
the last year, and coffee is up almost 20
percent. The Agriculture Department
expects grocery prices, which are already out of sight, to increase even
more in the coming year.
Families and small businesses all
across America are struggling to afford
housing and struggling to afford groceries and other basics, and the President has only made things harder.
At the same time, President Trump
has worked to withdraw our country
from the world—at least when it comes
to diplomacy.
One of his first acts as President was
to shut down the U.S. Agency for International Development, which provided
things like medical supplies, lifesaving
vaccines, and clean water infrastructure to the most vulnerable populations around the world.
When his trade war with China began
to go badly, he quickly capitulated in
exchange for a relatively paltry
amount of agricultural purchases. He
gave our greatest strategic competitor
access to cutting-edge technology.
They didn’t even ask for the semiconductors.
After aiding our adversary, he has
turned his attention to our allies. He is
threatening to annex Greenland—a
NATO country’s territory—and take
military action against Colombia and
Mexico, which are longstanding U.S.
partners. In the case of Greenland,
President Trump’s threats risk the
unity of NATO—the most successful alliance in human history. This dangerous behavior makes clear to our adversaries and to our allies that the
United States is more focused on extracting concessions from its friends
than in protecting our collective security.
His continued abandonment of basic
principles of international law and
order will eventually reverberate
against American national interests.
The only question is when.
Coloradoans don’t need to look
abroad to understand the President’s
destructive impulses; they have all the
evidence they need here at home. When
Coloradoans open a newspaper, they
might see that the Federal Government has rescinded childcare funding

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S239

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

for themselves and for their neighbors;
they might see that transportation
funding that this Congress has appropriated has been canceled or that energy investments that this Congress
has passed have been pulled back.
They feel like they are under attack
from a Federal Government whose obligation is to protect them, to support
them. This is a belief that is felt very
strongly by the people of my State, and
I think everybody here should understand that if it is happening to Colorado, it could happen anywhere in
America, for any reason.
The Trump administration’s announcement that it was dismantling
NCAR was made on the evening of December 16. Over the next 2 days, my office received over 2,000 pieces of mail.
By the end of the new year, we had received 500 phone calls on the same
topic. We have since surpassed 4,000 letters. I know Senator HICKENLOOPER has
had the same, especially in those first
2 days of outreach when fierce windstorms were sweeping across the Front
Range of Colorado and creating an
enormous wildfire risk.
Numerous citizens wrote to me as
they recognized the important role
that NCAR scientists play not just in
Colorado but in the Nation and in the
world. They identify communities that
are in the greatest danger. They inform
a power company’s decision about
where to shut off electricity to keep
people safe. People in Colorado and
throughout the West and I think
throughout this country understand
the value of NCAR, and they know that
sort of essential information and those
emergency services are at risk of disappearing possibly forever.
I really want to thank everybody
who has written in, and I want to highlight some of the stories they took the
time to share with me. I am going to
read some of those letters now.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that these letters be printed in the
RECORD.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
LETTER FROM DENVER WATER CEO, ALAN
SALAZAR
On behalf of Denver Water, I want to express our deep appreciation for your collective efforts to prevent any effort to dismantle or degrade the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR). This worldclass facility plays an absolutely vital role
in climate and weather research that has a
direct impact on water management, not
just in Colorado but across the country.
Denver Water provides safe, secure, treated
drinking water to 1.5 million people in Denver and surrounding suburbs, accounting for
roughly one quarter of Colorado’s population. To fulfill its mission, 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, Denver Water necessarily
relies on expertise far beyond its own highly
skilled and knowledgeable staff. NCAR is a
key source of this critical expertise.
NCAR’s value to Denver Water and other
water utilities in the western United States
includes flood and drought forecasting,
streamflow assessment, ongoing study of
major river systems, supercomputing, under-

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

standing of atmospheric rivers and their role
in catastrophic flooding, maintaining open
data platforms important to water supply
managers, climate modeling for longterm
forecasting, and other functions essential to
managing and allocating scarce water supplies.
We have collaborated with NCAR for many
years, both directly and indirectly, including
on the preeminent report on Colorado River
science. NCAR is considered among the most
trusted and well-respected voices on weather, atmospheric and climate science, and we
consider NCAR an invaluable partner in our
role in providing a critical, life-giving resource to the people living in the Denver region.
A more detailed snapshot of NCAR’s value
to western water providers. NCAR:
Saves lives and protects property through
operational hydrologic forecasting. NCAR
created and maintains WRF–Hydro, the community hydrologic modeling system that underpins NOAA’s National Water Model—the
nation’s backbone for streamflow and flood
guidance across 2.7 million river reaches. Removing NCAR would directly degrade nationwide flood and drought intelligence that
water utilities and emergency managers rely
on.
Makes active improvements to streamflow
forecasting skill for snow, runoff, and seasonal flows. NCAR’s research teams improve
sub-seasonal to seasonal streamflow forecasts for the West by integrating temperature predictions with snowpack and precipitation—capabilities that directly inform reservoir operations and demand management.
Produces authoritative reports and syntheses that are crucial to understanding
major river systems such as the Colorado
River. These reports integrate atmospheric
science, hydrology, and water management
insights, enabling utilities and policymakers
to make informed decisions on allocation,
infrastructure, and long-term resilience. A
key example of a report co-produced by
NCAR is the Colorado River Basin Climate
and Hydrology: State of the Science’ report,
which is considered the preeminent scientific
report on the Colorado River.
Provides
world-class
computing
that
makes actionable water intelligence possible. NCAR’s Derecho supercomputer (19.87
petaflops, GPU-accelerated) is explicitly designed for data assimilation, machine learning, and high-resolution modeling used in
hydrology and extreme-event prediction.
Dismantling NCAR would strand this public
investment and slow or halt models critical
to water planning in complex terrain.
Advances understanding of atmospheric
rivers—a major source of risk for catastrophic flooding. NCAR advances our understanding of atmospheric river precipitation
extremes, giving utilities the science they
need for forecast-informed reservoir operations and infrastructure design.
Sustains the open data platforms water
managers depend on. NCAR’s Research Data
Archive (RDA), Geoscience Data Exchange
(GDEX), and the Climate Data Guide are
trusted, expert-curated sources for re-analyses, climate indices, and down-scaled products that are core to utility planning efforts.
Defunding NCAR would jeopardize access and
stewardship of these datasets.
Bridges research-to-operations (R20) across
agencies. NCAR is a partner with NOAA’s
National Water Center, collaborates with regional centers like the Center for Western
Weather and Water Extremes (CW3E), and
partners directly with local water utilities
through various workgroups and projectbased efforts. These collaborative efforts
help to bring cutting-edge coupled weather–
hydrology models into practice for western
basins as well as advance science to assist

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.022

S15JAPT1

S240

general water management planning and operations.
Supplies climate models that utilities use
for long-range planning. NCAR’s Community
Earth System Model (CESM) enables utilities and states to explore credible ranges of
future hydrologic conditions, with recent
work evaluating CESM from a water manager perspective and adding explicit human
water use modules directly relevant to western water scarcity.
Defunding NCAR would create immediate,
material harm to water supply operations,
flood control operations, economic resilience, and national competitiveness. Dismantling NCAR’s vital functions would disrupt operational forecasting, strand modern
high performance computing investments,
endanger
crucial
water
management
datasets, and harm research-to-operations
collaborations that water utilities depend on
every day.
Dismantling an organization of such importance to water supply, weather forecasting, drought and flood preparation,
would make it harder and more expensive to
plan for the challenges we face today and
into the future, and will likely end up costing the American people more money due to
water supply disruptions and the reduced
ability to anticipate and plan for extreme
weather events.
I am confident that we at Denver Water
are not alone in our concern about the future
of NCAR. The importance of NCAR to water
planning and delivery across the country
will be compromised by this proposal.
Thank you for your efforts. We look forward to working with you to ensure that
NCAR’s important work continues without
disruption.
Other statements in support of the Arkansas Valley Conduit:
Norman Noe, manager South Swink Water
Company: ‘‘The Arkansas Valley Conduit is
important to South Swink not only to meet
radionuclide standards and compliance orders, but also it would give us another source
of water other than the deep wells we rely
on.’’
Kevin Karney, former Otero County Commissioner and Southeastern District Director: ‘‘We’ve waited for so many years for the
Arkansas Valley Conduit to be built. It’s
really the only way to resolve long-standing
water quality and water supply issues in the
Lower Arkansas Valley, and the longer we
delay it the more expensive it becomes. Now
that we finally have some momentum, this is
not the time to stall the AVC project.’’
Rick Jones, manager of May Valley Water
Company: ‘‘The Arkansas Valley Conduit is
something we’ve been looking at to solve our
issues with compliance with EPA standards.
The EPA has been breathing down our necks
and the AVC is the way to solve this issue.’’

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Mr. BENNET. Mr. President, I will
start with a constituent from Canon
City.
I am writing to express my strong opposition to the administration’s recent plans to
dismantle the National Center for Atmospheric Research, NCAR. NCAR is a cornerstone of American scientific leadership and
public safety. Since 1960, it has provided the
essential infrastructure, including super
computers, research, aircraft, and sophisticated modeling that protects American lives
and our economy every single day. I urge
you to push back against the move for the
following reasons: public safety. NCAR’s research is vital for predicting extreme weather events like hurricanes, tornadoes, and
wildfires. Dismantling this center puts our
emergency response capabilities at risk;
aviation and transportation: NCAR technology is used at a major hub like Denver

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

International Airport to manage snow and
ice, and their wind shear detection systems
are crucial for aviation safety; economic security: from agriculture to energy, the private sector relies on NCAR’s open source
models to manage risk and maintain a competitive advantage; national defense: NCAR
collaborates with the Department of Defense
to develop tools that ensure our military can
operate safely in any environment.
Stripping NCAR of its funding or breaking
up its integrated labs will leave our Nation
behind in the atmospheric threats of the 21st
century. Please support the continued funding and operation of NCAR and its headquarters at the Mesa Laboratory.

From a constituent in Denver:
I am writing as a concerned Coloradan to
urge you to stand up for the National Center
for Atmospheric Research and oppose any
plans to dismantle or significantly weaken
the institution. NCAR is not only a worldclass scientific organization; it is a major
economic asset to Colorado and to the
United States. Its presence strengthens our
State’s economy. It supports high-quality
jobs, attracts private investment, and reinforces America’s global leadership in science,
technology, and national security. NCAR’s
direct economic value to Colorado is substantial. The center employs hundreds of
highly skilled scientists, engineers, IT professionals, and support staff, many of whom
live and raise families and pay taxes here in
Colorado. These are stable, high-paying jobs
that cannot be easily replaced. They won’t
be easily replaced. In addition, NCAR’s operations support local contractors, suppliers,
and small businesses across the Front Range,
creating a multiplier effect that benefits the
broader regional economy. NCAR is also a
powerful driver of innovation and privatesector growth. Its research underpins advances in aviation safety, agriculture, water
management, energy production, wildfire
forecasting, and weather risk modeling—industries that collectively represent billions
of dollars in economic activity. Private companies rely on NCAR’s development tools
and data to improve efficiency, reduce
losses, and plan investments. The weakening
of NCAR would not reduce regulation or bureaucracy; it would reduce the high-quality
information that businesses need to compete. From a national perspective, NCAR
strengthens U.S. security and resilience. Accurate weather and climate forecasting is essential for military readiness, disaster preparedness, infrastructure planning, and supply chain resiliency. These capabilities help
save lives and taxpayer dollars by reducing
the costs of natural disasters and improving
long-term planning. Other nations are aggressively investing in atmosphere, science.
Dismantling NCAR would cede leadership to
global competitors at a time when American
technological dominance is increasingly
challenged. Finally, NCAR represents an excellent return on taxpayer investment. Its
budget is modest relative to the economic
losses it helps to prevent and the innovation
it enables. Cutting or dismantling NCAR
may appear to save money in the short
term—I doubt very much anybody really believes it—but the long-term costs to businesses, farmers, municipalities, insurers, and
emergency responders would be far greater.
Colorado has been a leader in science, innovation, and pragmatic problem-solving, and
NCAR is a cornerstone of that legacy. I respectfully ask for you to stand up for Colorado jobs, American competitiveness, and
fiscally responsible governance by opposing
efforts to dismantle or weaken the National
Center for Atmospheric Research. Thank you
for your service to our State and for considering the economic and strategic importance
to our State.

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

From Boulder:
Thank you for supporting science and specifically for supporting NCAR. I don’t need
to tell you how important NCAR’s work is
for the safety of our Nation. This move
against NCAR serves no valid purpose. It appears merely punitive as are many of the
moves that the Trump administration has
made against our State. I work in research
at a university. We work closely with NOAA
and with NCAR. The last shutdown was
stressful to our researchers and our institutions, but if another shutdown were to happen in order to save institutions like NCAR
from arbitrary posturing and governance, I
know that our research and community
would support that cause. Stand strong, Senator. We support you.

And here is a letter from an NCAR
institutional stakeholder:
We write to express our strong support for
continued—
This is from, I think, the Governors: Jared
Polis, Josh Green, Spencer Cox, Bob Ferguson, Michelle Lujan Grisham, Gavin
Newsom, and Katie Hobbs—Democrats and
Republicans.
We write to express our strong support for
continued Federal funding for the National
Center for Atmospheric Research, NCAR,
and to underscore its importance to States
all across the Nation.
Governors rely on NCAR’s research and
modeling and data infrastructure to help
protect lives, strengthen regional and national economies, and improve preparedness
for increasingly complex environmental
challenges.
NCAR’s work directly informs decision
making at the State and local level, supporting emergency management, infrastructure planning, and long-term resilience.
We agree with your administration’s fiscal
year 2026 National Science Foundation budget request to Congress that NCAR is a critical national research and infrastructure
asset. As the budget request notes, NCAR is
an NSF-sponsored, federally funded research
and development center that integrates advanced observational facilities, widely used
community weather and climate models, and
high-performance
computing.
Together,
these capabilities provide foundational tools
used by Federal Agencies, the military,
State and local governments, universities,
and the private sector. For our States,
NCAR’s work delivers direct and practical
value.

By the way, I have not found a single
person on this floor who doesn’t agree
with what these Governors have to say,
who hasn’t said that NCAR is a vital
resource to their State, that their
work delivers direct and practical
value.
In wildfire-prone regions, NCAR research
improves understanding of fire behavior,
smoke transport, and extreme weather conditions that exacerbate fire risk, supporting
more effective mitigation and response and
recovery efforts. Governors depend on these
insights to inform emergency management
decisions and to protect communities’ infrastructure and public lands. Where else are we
going to get this data and information?
NCAR’s modeling and forecasting capabilities are also essential to agriculture and to
water management across the West. Seasonal and subseasonal forecasts help producers plan for droughts, floods, and shifting
precipitation patterns, while supporting
more efficient use of scarce water resources.
These tools are increasingly important as
our States work to sustain agricultural productivity, rural economies, and food security
amid growing variability.

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.004

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

I can’t find a single person on this
floor who would disagree with what the
Governors have said.
In addition, NCAR’s capabilities support national defense and homeland security priorities. Accurate, timely
weather and Earth system information
is critical for military operations, forest protection, aviation safety, and infrastructure resilience.
NCAR’s high-performance computing and
data integration capacity strengthens situational awareness and operational readiness
across air, land, and maritime domains.

The Governors continued:
Tourism and outdoor recreation, cornerstones of many of our economies, also benefit from improved forecasting and hazard
preparedness. Reliable weather and environmental information helps protect visitors,
supports local businesses, and reduces disruption from extreme events, reinforcing
economic stability in communities that depend on these sectors—

Which is to say, virtually every community in the American West.
We [these Governors] respectfully urge
your administration to continue supporting
NCAR, consistent with your 2026 fiscal year
budget request, and to work with Congress to
ensure stable funding for its core capabilities. Continued investment will allow NCAR
to deliver high-value research and service
that strengthens public safety, economic resilience, and preparedness all across the Nation.
Thank you for your leadership and your
continued partnership with the Nation’s
Governors.

These Governors sign on.
Here is Tony Busalacchi, who is the
president of UCAR, University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, the
operator of NCAR. Busalacchi—I apologize if I butchered that name.
NSF NCAR’s research is crucial for building American prosperity by protecting lives
and properties, supporting the economy, and
strengthening national security. Any plan to
dismantle NSF NCAR would set back our Nation’s ability to predict, prepare for, and respond to severe weather and other natural
disasters.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

I have an open letter here from major
scientific societies—from the American
Meteorological Society, the Alliance
for Data Science and AI. I won’t read
the rest, Mr. President.
The letter says:
The United States of America needs the
National Center for Atmospheric Research.
On behalf of the scientific societies we represent, we write to express our strong support of NCAR and the full breadth of scientific research undertaken by the scientists
at NCAR.
The benefits of NCAR to the United States
and the world are enormous. Since its inception in 1960, NCAR has made groundbreaking
advances in weather, water, and climate
science. Working with partners within the
United States, as well as across the world,
NCAR scientists have provided crucial insights on severe storms, flash floods,
drought, air quality, wildfire, climate, and
weather predictions, to name just a few key
contributions.
These discoveries improve early warnings
and weather forecasts, ensure enhanced
transportation safety by air, sea, and
ground, and reverse the adverse impacts of
hazards. Crucially, they save lives and make
America safer!

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S241

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Recently, the White House announced
plans to dismantle it. Sending various parts
of NCAR to other cities will isolate expertise
and reduce the synergies and enhanced productivity that results when people work together. NCAR is an incredible resource, and
losing it would hurt the economic health of
the Nation and the safety of its people. A
better option would be to work to maintain
and strengthen NCAR, including through enhanced cooperation with Federal science
Agencies, academic institutions, and private
sector researchers.
Science improves lives and drives economic prosperity.

‘‘Science improves lives and drives
economic prosperity,’’ and we used to
care around here whether we were the
leader among nations in that.
Scientific innovation promotes public safety, enables new businesses, and helps us
thrive in a competitive global marketplace.
The United States has long been a world
leader—

I would say the world leader—
in all science, including the science of environmental prediction. The Nation’s strong
support of science over the past century is a
foundation of our success. A strong NCAR
will lead to further forecast improvements
that enhance our national well-being.
We stand ready to work with the administration and leaders in Congress to ensure
that U.S. scientific preparedness, including
with respect to environmental prediction, remains second to none.

And Colorado does as well.
Finally, from Arvada:

I could not have said it better myself.
Shutting down NCAR will be bad for
everybody in the country, and that is a
fact. And the people there obviously
don’t deserve it.
And we also need to set a standard
for what we expect out of the leadership in the White House, which is that
they are going to actually serve everybody in the country, whether they
voted for them or not.
What is happening to Colorado today
could happen to your State tomorrow.
(Mr. MORENO assumed the Chair.)
We also lost, to the President’s first
veto of his second term, the Arkansas
Valley Conduit. That is a pipeline that
I have been working on since the day I
got here. It is the very first piece of
legislation that I wrote. It was an effort to try to keep a promise that had
been made to Colorado in 1960 by Jack
Kennedy, who went out to Pueblo and
said to the people there, to the farmers
and
ranchers—mostly
Republicans
then, in 1960, and still mostly Republicans today. That doesn’t matter, but
I just want to set the scene for what we
are dealing with here, which is a group
of people that have fought and fought

Frm 00015

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

I am writing as a deeply disappointed, concerned, and frankly angry constituent regarding President Trump’s veto of the finishing of the Arkansas Valley Conduit. This
legislation passed unanimously in both the
House and the Senate, an increasingly rare
example of true bipartisan agreement, because it addressed a fundamental responsibility of government: providing clean, safe
drinking water to America.
Communities across Colorado’s eastern
plains, between Pueblo and Lamar, have
waited too long for this project to be completed.
The AVC is not political theater. It is a
public health necessity. Using access to
clean water as a bargaining chip for punishment against a State is unacceptable.
Using access to clean water as a bargaining
chip for punishment against a State is unacceptable.

It is unacceptable.
My constituent from Pueblo writes:
The President is obligated to represent and
serve all Americans, regardless of party,
State, or political disagreements. This action falls short of that standard and undermines trust in our democratic institution.

I could not agree with that more.

Thank you for defending NCAR and holding up the budget unless full funding is included.
As you know, parts of the State are out of
power right now due to high winds and dry,
warm conditions that put us at fire risk. We
need to continue to study climate and
weather to fight climate change but also to
predict and respond to weather emergencies.
Shutting down NCAR will be bad for everyone in the country.
Thank you, and please continue to fight
for our State and the environment.

PO 00000

and fought, generation after generation
after generation, to supply their farming families, their ranching families
with clean water that the United
States, the richest country in the
world, promised them many, many
years ago.
And I have a constituent from Pueblo
who wrote in. The letter says:

I urge you to do the right thing for the
people of Colorado by supporting and voting
to override this veto. Clean drinking water
should never be held hostage to partisan
grievances or personal vendettas. Congress
spoke clearly and unanimously once. Now it
must stand by that decision.
Please let me know what actions you will
take to ensure this vital project moves forward and that the needs of Coloradoans are
placed above political calculation.

Here is a letter in support of the conduit from the Otero County Commission:
Your public statements of opposition to
President Trump’s veto to finish the Arkansas Valley Conduit Act are greatly appreciated by those of us who have long supported this project to ensure that residents
in rural Southeastern Colorado have access
to a safe drinking water supply. The challenges we face with naturally occurring contaminants in groundwater are precisely why
the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act exists.

It is imperative that we work together to overturn this decision. We
stand ready to assist you in any effort
to override the veto or pursue an alternative path to enact this strongly supported legislation.
It is unanimously supported legislation. The conduit can’t be viewed as a
mere amenity or a frivolous investment. It is the most effective way to
deliver safe drinking water to 50,000
people without creating harmful side
effects that are associated with other
treatment processes like reverse osmosis.
This is a public health issue, and shared investments by Federal, State, and local governments are critical to addressing it.

Indeed, H.R. 131 highlights the significant non-Federal investment—35

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.034

S15JAPT1

S242

percent of the total cost—to say nothing of the blood, sweat, and tears that
generations of South Coloradans in
Southeastern Colorado have been willing to exert in this cause in their partnership with Federal Agencies to get
this project built.
This is a classic case of Americans
doing the work for the next generation
of Americans and the generation after
that—the county commissioners in
Otero County who came and lived and
died long before the ones that are here
writing in about this right now without
ever seeing their dream for clean water
for their families or their communities
realized in the richest country in the
world. We are this close to having it
done, and it was canceled out of spite.
In addition to pointing out the local
share that the communities—and by
the way, these are tiny farming communities. Every dollar they spend on a
project like this is a hard dollar for
them to spend, but they know why it is
so important.
This bill—the bill that we passed
unanimously, which the President vetoed—this bill adjusts the interest rate
and extends the repayment period
while also providing an option for economic hardship consideration, which is
vital given the challenging economic
conditions of our region.
The longstanding bipartisan support—

The commissioners continued—
for the Arkansas Valley Conduit speaks volumes about its clear purpose: a safe—safe—
clean drinking water supply. Together, we
must fight this attempt to stop the project
and diminish its critical importance. We respectfully ask you to use all your tools
available to overturn the decision and ensure
the enactment of H.R. 131. Thank you for
your leadership and commitment to the
health and wellbeing of our Southeastern
Colorado community.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

I have got one last letter that I am
going to read from the Pueblo County
commissioners:
Thank you for your public statements opposing President Trump’s veto to finish the
Arkansas Valley Conduit Act. Your leadership on this issue is deeply appreciated by
the communities of Southeastern Colorado
who have worked for decades to secure a safe
and reliable drinking water supply. As an
elected body representing residents of Pueblo County, we see firsthand the challenges
posed by naturally occurring groundwater
contaminants. These conditions are precisely why the Federal Safe Drinking Water
Act exists and why Federal partnership is essential. Access to clean drinking water is not
optional; it is a fundamental public health
responsibility.
It is critical that we work together to
overturn this veto or pursue an alternative
path to enactment. We stand ready to assist
in any effort necessary to ensure this project
moves forward.
The Arkansas Valley Conduit should not
be characterized as discretionary or a nonessential investment. It is the most effective
and sustainable way to deliver drinking
water to approximately 50,000 people without
the long-term complications and unintended
consequences associated with other treatment methods.
H.R. 131 appropriately recognizes the significant commitment already made at the
local and at the State level with other non-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

Federal partners covering approximately 35
percent of the total cost. The bill’s modest
adjustments to the interest rate and repayment period, along with provisions for economic hardship, are especially important
given the economic realities facing rural
Southeast Colorado.

I can see that my colleague from Colorado has arrived at the floor, which
means that I am going to have to wind
up in a minute. Before I finish, I just
had a few more closing remarks, and
then I will turn it over to my friend.
Political decisions in America are
not supposed to be made this way. I
know they are sometimes in other
countries. I know there are many countries around the world where there is
corruption, and the way decisions are
made is, might makes right, and whoever happens to get elected to a certain
term—that person gets to reward their
friends and punish their enemies.
I can guarantee you that every one of
those places has a less successful economy than the United States of America. Our economy is based on the rule
of law, not might makes right. Our
economy is based on the idea that the
citizens we represent and their futures
are far more important than the political scorekeeping that any President or
any chief executive officer should
maintain.
This is not, I have to say, what the
American Government is supposed to
look like or what the American Government has ever looked like. Making
these kinds of partisan decisions, like
the one that is underlined, the cancellation of the Arkansas Valley Conduit or NCAR or the other hundreds of
millions of dollars that are being taken
away from poor families in Colorado
who are just trying to raise their children, who are now not going to have
access to food or access to schooling—
which, by the way, just for political
reasons, this strikes at the heart of the
constitutional system that was envisioned by our Founders. That is not an
exaggeration. The men who framed our
founding document were raised in and
were some of the greatest exponents of
the scientific revolution and the fundamental shift in human thought and
reason that we now call the enlightenment.
That tradition prioritized—and by
the way, they weren’t just politicians;
many of them were scientists themselves. That tradition prioritized freedom of thought and considered debate.
It held that truth was best drawn out
from the contrast of opposing views
and beliefs or disagreements.
The Founders understood that this
philosophy could only reach its full potential within the framework of a constitutional republic. It had never existed before anywhere. They drew up
the Bill of Rights, with its freedom of
speech and its freedom of press, in
order to protect that ability to face
each other in the public square with
our disagreements, and they ingrained
their belief in the overwhelming power
of reason to discern truth from falsehood and science from superstition in
the original text of our Constitution.

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

In article I, section 8, they charged
Congress with the responsibility to ‘‘fix
the Standards of Weights and Measures’’ and provide for policies that
‘‘promote the Progress of Science and
useful Arts.’’
The Founders understood how fundamental these responsibilities were to
the country they hoped to create.
These directives are in the very same
section as the power to lay and collect
taxes, to borrow money, and to declare
war.
NCAR is a modern embodiment of the
Founders’ intent—the careful and objective collection of data to inform
public policy and political debate free
from restriction or censure or political
punishment. And that is what is at
stake today. That is why this should
matter to everybody on this floor.
NCAR was founded in 1960, and it has
operated over 13 Presidential administrations and 32 Congresses, Democratic
and Republican alike. NCAR’s work
benefits Americans, as we have heard,
from every State, from disaster forecasts, to aviation fog warnings, to
drought predictions that guide crop
planning and water management, to
weather intelligence for military operations, to early detection for solar
storms that threaten our electric grid
and communications systems.
When it comes to NCAR, the President’s effort at political retribution
threatens the health and safety of communities all across the country—all
across this country.
The entire implication of what the
Founders were writing about in this
context was that nobody has a monopoly of wisdom—least of all, a President.
The Founders’ greatest fear was to
have a demagogue in that office unconstrained by the rule of law. And they
knew how fragile all of this experiment
was. They knew how easily, under the
wrong direction, it could collapse.
Now we know this is not some temporary bump in the road; it is a reflection of what the Founders understood
is a fundamental aspect of human nature: that there would always be somebody who would reach out to grab the
kind of unconstrained power that this
President has reached for.
In moments like this, what the
Founders expected was that it would be
up to all of us—the rest of us—to prevent exactly what they were worried
about. There was no self-reinforcing
mechanism. Nobody was riding to our
rescue, because, as I mentioned earlier,
what can happen to our State can happen to any other State. The Founders
understood that the American people
would know that and that they would
rally to support the rule of law, they
would rally to support their democracy.
What is happening today under a Republican President could happen with
the wrong kind of Democratic President.
Our children and future generations
have a reasonable expectation that
their government should be designed to

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.036

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

work for them—all of them; all of
them—regardless of their political
leaning. We have a responsibility as
legislators, as Americans, and an obligation to the Constitution, to our respective States no matter what color
they are on the political map.
I urge my colleagues to reject these
partisan games and to stand up for scientific integrity and the rule of law. It
is what the people of Colorado and all
Americans expect, and it is what they
deserve.
As I come to a close, I am going to
read what I have to read for the amendment. I just want to say how proud I
am to be here today on the floor with
my
colleague
Senator
JOHN
HICKENLOOPER, whom I have known for
more years than I would care to actually admit to you, Mr. President.
But one of the things that I know
about JOHN is that he embodies the
hope, the aspiration that our Founders
had for citizen legislators. He is somebody who came to politics with a business background but, I would say in the
context of the discussion we are having
today, with the background of a geologist, somebody who came to the West
to begin with to be able to apply his
scientific imagination to the challenges that we were facing at the time
and was able to then use that in business but then also in politics and who
has brought that intellect and scientific commitment to the Commerce
Committee, where he sits.
I think all of Colorado has been incredibly well served and the country
has been incredibly well served in this
debate by that scientific background. If
I dare say it—I am not saying that he
is exactly who Ben Franklin was envisioning, but I will say that JOHN
HICKENLOOPER and Ben Franklin would
have gotten along extremely well had
they had the chance to serve with each
other.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

AMENDMENT NO. 4153

With that, I ask unanimous consent
to call up and make pending amendment No. 4153 to H.R. 6938 to maintain
operations and capabilities at the National Center for Atmospheric Research.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there
objection?
The Senator from Maine.
Ms. COLLINS. Reserving the right to
object, let me first say that I appreciate the advocacy from the Senators
from Colorado for the National Center
for Atmospheric Research, an NSFfunded research and development center in Boulder.
The bill before us includes robust
funding for the National Science Foundation. That has been a top priority of
mine and of many other members of
the Appropriations Committee.
Consistent with longstanding practice, the bill does not have a carve-out
for NCAR, nor any of the other NSF research facilities around the globe, and
it does not direct grant-making to certain activities. This longstanding
precedent is designed to preserve NSF’s

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S243

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

autonomy in funding decisions and empowers the big foundation to prioritize
scientific needs.
Let me emphasize that nothing—
nothing—in this bill precludes continued support for operation of the center.
This is a carefully negotiated package that passed the House of Representatives with an overwhelming
vote last week. Any amendment that
would send the package back to the
House would make its fate uncertain.
We would risk a continuing resolution
or, even worse, another disastrous government shutdown at the essential
Agencies funded in this package.
Therefore, I must object.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The objection is heard.
The Senator from Colorado.
Mr. HICKENLOOPER. Mr. President,
I am going to talk for a moment about
my path towards science and what it
meant.
A lot of people know my mother was
widowed twice before she turned 40. My
father died when I was 8. I was the
youngest kid. I had really thick glasses
and acne, and I was let’s just say
marginalized when I was in third and
fourth grade, the butt of many jokes. I
was bullied on a regular basis.
But it is funny, as I went through
school, I did have this natural curiosity. I mean, I loved sports, but it
didn’t keep me from doing schoolwork
around discovery. And there is a whole
peripheral culture in most schools—the
high schools and the middle schools I
went to—where the kids that are the
nerds—I guess I would call myself a
nerd back then—kind of hung out together, and they were also the people
who were into the arts or into music,
into tech.
It is really only in the last 25 years
that that peripheral part of most colleges and universities became the foundation of—or I should say the fulcrum
of our economic growth, and that is the
beginning of the age of technology
back in the 1990s.
We are here today because before the
holidays, the Trump administration
announced that they were going to dismantle the National Center for Atmospheric Research based in Boulder, as
my colleague Senator BENNET so elegantly described. I am going to go
through some of that, reiterate some of
what he said, just because I think it is
that important that we hear it more
than once.
In our office—my office, Senator
BENNET’s office—we are determined to
do everything we can to stand up to
this administration and their actions
that harm Coloradans and I think in
many ways harm the country.
Our demand is simple: Put language
into the appropriations bills that guarantees full funding for NCAR.
I understand the Senator from
Maine’s objection to—in history and
certainly in recent history, there has
been no precedent for this, but in recent history, there has been no precedent for a President to go back and tell

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

the National Science Foundation: You
have to rescind this money from that
specific office of research.
NCAR isn’t just a research center, as
Senator BENNET described, it is a national resource. Obviously, this administration has a different view.
When Russell Vought took to social
media to announce his plan, he called
NCAR ‘‘one of the largest sources of
climate alarmism in the country.’’
Now, I am not sure that Mr. Vought
knows exactly what NCAR does. If he
did, I think he would understand the
irony in that tweet. NCAR quite literally powers our country’s alarm system around weather. It is our watchdog
for extreme storms, fires, hurricanes,
tornadoes, the things that cause floods.
Every single American, whether they
are aware of it or not, relies on NCAR
data. Most of them—this administration is included—aren’t really aware of
it. So here are a few more reasons why
all of us should want NCAR to stick
around:
If you are an American who likes to
know whether a tornado is headed your
way; if you are one of the people who
appreciate an early text alert before
you get an oncoming winter storm—let
me say we have had far too few of those
this year; if you would prefer to be on
high ground instead of stuck in your
car during a flash flood; if you like to
look at maps to show you where and
when extreme weather is going to hit,
then you need NCAR. If you like any of
those things, you are directly benefiting from the National Center for Atmospheric Research.
Here is where the administration
gets it really wrong. If we are going to
call anything alarming, it is our
weather patterns—wildfires, tornadoes,
hurricanes, floods, severe weather in
all forms, winter storms. They are all
becoming more intense and less predictable.
I, along with many scientists, refer
to it as climate change. Back when I
was in graduate school, we called it the
greenhouse effect. But to call it a hoax
or just extreme weather doesn’t change
what is happening right outside your
front door.
We have had less snowfall in Colorado this winter than in any year in recorded history. Now, if you are going
to get rid of NCAR, you are going to
take away that opportunity to use history and the facts from recorded history. It is NCAR’s job to use science to
make extreme weather at least somewhat predictable and to make sure that
we can save American lives and property.
The National Center for Atmospheric
Research built the backbone of American weather forecasting models that
are now used all around the world.
Their weather prediction system is
used by NOAA, the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration. It is
used by the National Weather Service,
the Department of Defense, emergency
managers in pretty much every State,
and all the universities worldwide to

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.037

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S244

predict hurricanes, blizzards, floods,
and wildfire behavior.
When we track hurricanes today, our
3- to 5-day forecast is as accurate as a
1-day forecast was back in the 1990s.
That is from research, because NCAR
research helped improve global radar
systems.
Take Hurricane Sandy in 2012. High
resolution models helped forecasters
predict the hurricane’s unusual path a
whole week before landfall. That extra
time meant emergency crews could get
a head start, could evacuate entire
communities and prepare for that
storm’s landfall. It wouldn’t have been
possible even a decade before.
Back home in Colorado, NCAR’s fire
weather research and modeling tools
are critical for wildfire comparatives.
NCAR’s research helped us understand
how extreme winds and local weather
provided the fuel for the 2021 Marshall
fire—the single most destructive fire in
Colorado history. Almost 1,100 homes
were destroyed. We vowed that would
never happen again, but we can’t make
good on that promise without NCAR.
Its research is actively improving wildfire prediction not just in Colorado but
across the country.
NCAR is our safety net, and dismantling it to combat so-called climate
alarmism is the policy equivalent of
sticking your fingers in your ears and
yelling ‘‘la, la, la’’ to drown out the
tornado that is rearranging your living
room. Without NCAR, our country isn’t
safer; we are just more unprepared.
NCAR also conducts the research on
space weather. This allows us to know
what threats there are for our satellites, especially our GPS satellites,
which are crucial for the health of our
infrastructure, not to mention our
weather forecasting.
It is not just weather; it is also our
national security. Without NCAR, our
military defense systems could take a
huge hit. NCAR has been central to
President Trump’s military adventure.
On January 3, when the U.S. military
launched 150 aircraft across the Western Hemisphere to capture Venezuelan
President Nicolas Maduro, they knew
in advance that visibility would be
clear.
Members of Delta Force had been
training for weeks under the exact
weather conditions they would be operating in. Conditions had to be perfect
because there was a zero margin for
error. How did they know that the conditions would be clear on January 3?
The National Center for Atmospheric
Research. NCAR’s scientists developed
the advanced weather prediction system the Pentagon relies on, known as
the Global Climatology Analysis Tool
or GCAT.
To put it simply, however you feel
about the President’s mission, a small
failure—even the smallest failure
would have been putting American
lives at risk. NCAR’s technology helps
make our military the strongest in the
world. It is a part of that strength.
The irony here is that this administration is too focused on retribution—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

in this case, to our State of Colorado
and our Governor—to actually understand the consequences of really what
is going to be the consequence of what
they are doing.
U.S. military success and our country’s ability to keep Americans safe
from natural disaster hinge on NCAR.
This administration might as well declare war on smoke detectors in our
homes or carbon monoxide alarms because those critical detection systems
function in much the same way that
NCAR’s research does.
This administration’s war on our premier weather research center isn’t a
stand-alone attack, and very sadly, it
is part of a broader campaign to, well,
spite our State. The President and his
administration have set their sights on
Colorado to settle what they perceive
as a political score. He wants Colorado
to release one of his most fervent supporters, Tina Peters, a former clerk
and recorder of Mesa County. Ms.
Peters is currently in prison after she
was convicted on State charges of tampering with Colorado’s election equipment in 2020.
This wasn’t just a case of election
denialism or spreading conspiracy
theories; Ms. Peters is in prison because she tampered with the election
equipment she took an oath to protect.
She was tried and prosecuted by a Republican district attorney and convicted by her peers, a majority Republican jury, in Mesa County.
Now the President is pressuring our
Governor to release her and in the
process, hurting Coloradans to do it.
We have one strong message in that
Colorado is not going to give in to a
bully or bow to a King. We believe in
the rule of law, and we are going to
fight to protect the traditional notion
of American democracy.
Even worse, most of Coloradans who
these attacks harm have no clue who
Tina Peters actually is. Many of the
people most severely subject to the
consequence of these decisions are Republicans.
And NCAR is just one of the recent
targets.
As part of his campaign against Colorado, President Trump denied emergency disaster relief to help families
rebuild after devastating wildfires and
floods. He canceled millions of dollars
for clean energy. He slashed hundreds
of millions of dollars in childcare assistance for families and denied 50,000
rural Coloradans clean drinking water.
Let me say it again. The President of
the United States denied emergency
funding for American citizens to help
them rebuild their lives after wildfires
and flooding that, for many of them,
destroyed the lives they knew this past
summer.
This is not a game. These are people’s lives. These are our constituents’
lives.
We can start with the President’s
second attack on FEMA funding, in
August, when the Elk and Lee fires
tore across the Western Slope of Colo-

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

rado, burning more than 152,000 acres of
land. Farmers and ranchers lost thousands of acres they were depending on
for grazing and for farming. The fire
also damaged electrical infrastructure
that businesses and families depend on,
not just to do their business but to live
at home. They depend on it for energy.
Just weeks later, floods ripped
through more communities in western
Colorado,
including
La
Plata,
Archuleta, and Mineral County. Families lost homes. Businesses lost everything. The floods even destroyed drinking water and wastewater infrastructure, risking people’s safety.
Residents have been left to pick up
the broken pieces of their lives and try
to rebuild. Colorado estimates the fires
cost $27 million of damage, and flooding cost at least $13 million more.
Unfortunately, Colorado is no stranger to major disasters and the struggle
to rebuild the lives hurt in the aftermath. It is, sadly, a part of our way of
life. We band together, we lift each
other up, and we rebuild back better
than it was before. We rebuild stronger.
I will always remember the horrible
wildfires and floods our State experienced when I was Governor. I remember visiting Lyons after the floods of
2013—the worst floods in the history of
our State—and flying over that area in
a helicopter and seeing people marooned on the roofs of their houses or
their businesses. Some of them were
there for a couple of days waiting to
get help.
I saw and heard how neighbors and
small business owners reached out and
helped each other. They helped get
each other through the worst hard
times of their lives. They cleaned their
stores out, their shops. They rebuilt
their homes. It was a herculean effort,
and our Federal Government stepped
up with emergency FEMA help that
could make it possible. They don’t pay
for everything. They pay for a very
small amount, but it is a crucial piece
of the recovery.
That is why President Trump’s decision to reject Colorado’s disaster request without any objective reason and
to withhold resources that would help
our communities recover—that is why
it is so infuriating, not just to me and
Senator BENNET but to so many people
across our State and across the country. I mean, why in God’s name would
the Federal Government turn its back
on its own citizens who have gone
through, in many cases, the worst hard
time of their lives?
Why should Coloradans not get the
same support to rebuild their lives that
the Trump administration had already
delivered to the people of Alaska or
North Dakota, following the natural
disasters in their communities? Because people in Colorado opt to vote by
mail, like in many red States, and
President Trump hates vote-by-mail? I
am not sure that is true. That is certainly not how America should work.
The President’s third target was our
booming energy economy. This October, the administration canceled $7.5

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.040

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

billion in clean energy grants in blue
States. Colorado’s Noble Energy lost
$550 million in funding that had already passed into law and had already
been appropriated. The rationale? He
said the Democrats had a ‘‘Green New
Scam.’’
I would really like to ask the President: Is making energy more efficient a
scam and were all those grants—the
majority of which went to red States,
States that had a Republican Governor
and a Republican general assembly—
were they part of the scam? What
about lowering energy prices so families can heat their homes this winter
without sacrificing the ability to afford
their kids’ health insurance? Is that a
scam?
What happened to the Republicans’
so-called energy emergency? Canceling
billions of dollars in energy projects
ready to go or very close to ready to
go, or in some cases almost complete,
while disrupting much needed updates
to our energy grid is going to increase
prices. This is going to hurt American
families. It is lunacy. It makes no
sense.
Many millions of people voted for
this President because they were struggling to afford their lives and they
heard that promise to lower prices. But
you don’t lower energy prices by punishing communities and canceling energy projects that are almost complete.
That wastes the money that has already been spent.
The fourth step on this revenge list—
this revenge tour against Colorado—is
a direct hit to our kids and to our families. At the beginning of this month,
the administration tried to freeze $10
billion of Federal funding for childcare,
for Colorado and four other States—
again, blue States.
Let me say this again. While prices
are already increasing across the
board, the President of the United
States is cutting childcare services and
other resources for the most vulnerable
families. Childcare. No matter how you
cut it, going after childcare services
for American families and for Colorado
families is just plain cruel. Even worse,
these services are for families that
need it the most. More than 1.4 million
children around the country depend on
those programs. In Colorado, these programs help more than 27,000 children
get childcare so their parents can
work.
The administration has tried to
claim that this is about rooting out
fraud and waste, but there is no record
in Colorado of fraud to justify their actions. We have safeguards in place to
prevent fraud at that scale and to ensure that Federal funds actually go toward the care of children. Parents have
enough to worry about. Now they have
to figure out how to keep their jobs,
deal with rising costs, and care for
their children. The result? Families are
going to lose the support that helps
them keep financial stability.
Thankfully, a Federal judge has temporarily blocked the administration’s

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S245

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

attack on childcare. But that has not
stopped this President in the past, and
we are not going to stop pushing back.
That brings us to the President’s
other target: clean drinking water for
rural Coloradans.
In certain parts of our State, we have
high levels of radioactive minerals,
heavy metals. And in some cases, this
is from waste. In some cases, this is
natural. But it makes the drinking
water unsafe.
With one stroke of a pen, President
Trump used the first veto of his second
term to stand in the way of the Arkansas Valley Conduit, a 130-mile water
project and infrastructure project that
would bring clean drinking water to
50,000 Americans in Southeast Colorado. This is the first time a bill has
gone through both the House and the
Senate on a unanimous basis. It passed
the Senate unanimously. It passed the
House unanimously. But for the first
time—for the first time since President
Johnson—a President vetoed a bill that
was passed by both houses unanimously—for the first time since President Johnson. I am not talking about
Lyndon Johnson. I am going back to
the Civil War, to Andrew Johnson.
That is the last time this happened.
It is a decision that really does defy
logic, but it fits a troubling pattern.
While parts of this administration are
spending time on personal grievances
and political beefs, the basic needs of
American families are being treated as
afterthoughts, and, in many cases, the
prices soar.
The Arkansas Valley Conduit has
been in the works for 60 years—almost
65 years—after President John Kennedy came to Pueblo, CO, in 1962 and
gave a rousing speech and promised
that the Federal Government would see
it through.
For six decades, Colorado leaders
from both parties have fought to keep
that promise. We are now in the final
stages of the project, with the Arkansas Valley Conduit as the remaining
piece. We secured more than $500 million for the project from our historic
bipartisan infrastructure law, and we
broke ground on the conduit—the remaining portions of the conduit—in
2023.
We worked with Republican Representative LAUREN BOEBERT to introduce the Finish the Arkansas Valley
Conduit Act to keep construction on
track and to lower costs. This bipartisan bill passed the Senate unanimously; this bipartisan bill passed the
House unanimously—both, last year.
That means every single Senator and
every single House Member was good
with it.
But the President vetoed it. I am not
sure why anyone would veto a unanimous, bipartisan rural water project,
unless they had a pretty serious beef,
especially when our bill and the project
would actually help the President keep
his campaign promises.
The completion of the Arkansas Valley Conduit would mean water for our

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

rural schools in communities like
Lamar, which are teaching the next
generation. It would mean water for
our local hospitals in towns like La
Junta, which keep Coloradans healthy.
Trump has left these communities
out to dry—communities that have
been waiting for clean drinking water
for over 60 years, communities that
overwhelmingly voted for him. If you
go look at these counties, they are a
large proportion of who voted for President Trump in 2024.
When a President puts a political
grievance against the Governor of a
State, against the working people that
did their very best to elect him,
against the schools and hospitals and
ranchers that supported him, he isn’t
‘‘shaking up’’ Washington. He is undermining the very people he swore to
serve, and it is working people in rural
communities who are paying the price.
If members of either party wanted to
actually deliver for their constituents,
then the best path forward would have
been clear. Congress could have stood
up to this intimidation, honored the
promise that 60 years ago came from
Washington, and overridden this veto.
But, last week, the House refused to
do so. It was Washington at its worst.
Now, rural Colorado is going to pay
the price. Southeast Colorado was the
target this month, but it could be your
community tomorrow. I wish the President could spend some time in Southeast Colorado. If you go back and look
at the book, the worst hard times—
talking about the Great Depression and
the dust storms—the far northwest
part of Oklahoma and the far southeast
part of Colorado were the hardest hit.
And that durability and willingness to
withstand the worst hardships and
keep on keeping on is what really sets
Southeast Colorado apart.
They were still the target this
month, but it could be any community
across the country tomorrow.
President Trump’s cuts aren’t limited to Colorado or blue States. He
seemingly made it a goal to hinder
America’s leadership in science and innovation. He has fired, literally, thousands of scientists from our leading
government Agencies, like the National Renewable Energy Lab in Golden, or NREL, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology in
Boulder.
And in the face of natural disasters,
he has even shuttered NOAA facilities.
That is the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. He shuttered their facilities and fired scientists there, weakening not just Colorado but the entire Nation’s ability to
respond to wildfires or to track the
West’s worsening drought.
The Trump administration also
slashed funding for the National Institutes of Health, which is having a devastating impact on medical research
projects in every State of this country.
They left veterans battling PTSD who
were beginning to find relief in clinical
trials. They stripped resources from

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.043

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S246

critical research to improve the lives
of people with Down syndrome. They
cut support groups for LGBTQ persons
struggling with mental health issues.
We can’t be surprised that the President doesn’t place a high priority in
science and research. He has never
shown a great respect or support for it.
Back when I graduated, in 1979, with
my master’s in earth and environmental sciences—we called it geology
back in those days—I published peer review papers. And from that process and
that experience, I have a reverence for
the scientific method. It is not always
right. The science doesn’t always get it
right. I am not saying there haven’t
been glaring mistakes in the history of
science. But science always points us
in the right direction, and it helps us
determine when and where those mistakes are and how to rectify them.
MARK KELLY told me when I first got
here—even though he was an engineer,
I told him he was a scientist as well,
and he said: No, no. You are the only
one in here who has actually done experiments and then published peer-reviewed papers.
As I said, science can sometimes surprise us. It is always evolving. It is always trying to figure out what is next,
what the next frontier is. It is why the
field relies on constant evaluation and
research to make new discoveries or
deepen our understanding of some of
the most complex problems facing the
world. I also know that leading with
science helps us get the most accurate
information we can—not always perfect but the most accurate information
we can get. So it really is frightening
when the administration has shown a
bias toward elevating people who peddle disinformation, and they sow doubt
into every level of settled science.
Cuts to science funding are going to
cause long-term and profound damage
to our standing in the world in terms
of innovation. How can we expect to
beat China in the fight—in the race to
succeed at AI or to find a cure for cancer or to remain the world’s strongest
economy if we are not investing in
science?
Science has been the foundation of
every aspect of our economy. If our scientists are fleeing to other countries—
and we are seeing this now at an increasing rate—if our scientists are fleeing to other countries that recognize
the economic and national security
value of scientific research, what is
next?
Not only are our scientists leaving to
work in other countries, but our students are choosing different careers because they don’t see a safe, reliable future in science. With the administration’s cuts to research funding, some of
those folks who are finishing their PhD
research are now stopped. They won’t
get that degree that in some cases they
have spent 3 or 4 or 5 years working on.
We can’t train the next generation of
scientists, engineers, and innovators
without having that upward flow.
President Trump’s Secretary of the
Department of Health and Human

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:31 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

Services, Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., is an
example of someone who in many cases
seems willing to overlook facts and
overlook settled science. One of his
most anti-scientific claims—that autism is caused by childhood vaccines—
is a claim that has been spread within
communities for decades, but it is all
based on one single paper that was published way back in 1988. That paper has
been retracted for years. There have
been hundreds of studies investigating
the link between autism and the measles vaccine ever since, and they have
found no—let me reiterate. They have
found zero connection between vaccines and the cause of autism.
It is settled science. Vaccines are not
only extremely safe but extremely effective. Every year, they save millions
of lives around the globe, effectively
eliminating some of the worst diseases,
like polio, and we are already making
considerable progress toward a vaccine
for some of the other really debilitating diseases, like HIV and AIDS.
In the last 100 years, our country’s
life expectancy has increased by 30
years, and 25 of those 30 years have
been attributed to public health intervention, including clean drinking
water and widespread vaccine adoption.
So 25 of those 30 years of our improved
life expectancy came from those investments in science.
We should recognize and accept that
vaccines have had a huge impact on all
of our abilities to lead healthy lives
and to get out of childhood being
spared from diseases that in previous
generations would have killed us.
Some of the damage from the
disinformation about vaccines is almost impossible to undo. Why do some
accept the results of one debunked
paper rather than the conclusions of
the hundreds of studies that have been
conducted since in careful, measured
processes? I mean, they have even tried
to link Tylenol to autism with, again,
no conclusive proof.
People who peddle vaccine skepticism are preying upon a parent’s very
rational fears. These skeptics are trying to advance their own conspiracy
theories. Parents are trying their hardest to keep their kids safe and healthy,
and I think it is irresponsible for people to plague them with misinformation and what is not real science when
the science has been settled for decades. The measles vaccine is safe, and
it doesn’t cause autism.
We can’t let ourselves backslide in
the number of children getting vaccinated, but that is what is happening.
President Trump and R.F.K., Jr., are
moving full speed ahead in putting the
health of our children and communities
at risk by implementing health
changes based on conspiracy theories
and not science.
Measles cases are now higher than
they were in 1991, with there being over
2,000 confirmed cases nationwide. We
have literally slid backward in the
progress of eradicating measles. The
U.S. eliminated the disease in 2000, but

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

due to vaccine skepticism and vaccine
rates going down, we have had a resurgence.
Mr. Kennedy seems unfazed that our
kids are getting sick. He fired the top,
nonpartisan public health officials at
the CDC because they wouldn’t adhere
to his agenda. I asked two of them, in
a Senate hearing back in September,
what keeps them up at night when Mr.
Kennedy is at the helm of America’s
public health. They both said the same
thing: the next pandemic.
In President Trump’s first term,
which was at the height of the COVID–
19 pandemic, Operation Warp Speed
helped bring vaccines to the public in
record time. It was a remarkable success, and President Trump deserves
credit for that. The National Institutes
of Health estimates that Operation
Warp Speed saved 140,000 lives by
speeding up the development of the
vaccines by 5 months.
It is not if the next pandemic comes
but when. We will need a robust Federal response and a thorough preparedness plan, one guided by actual science.
Otherwise, we will endanger lives and
the health of Americans.
Reproductive health care—they are
getting at that too. Back when I was
Governor, we made free and low-cost
birth control accessible to every Coloradan—low-cost, reversible contraception. We reduced unwanted pregnancies
by nearly 60 percent. Those were pregnancies that were unwanted, but you
were also looking in many cases at
avoiding what would have been abortions.
Now this administration is doing everything it can to eliminate the last
remaining
protections.
They
are
threatening access to mifepristone—a
medication that has been proven to be
safe and effective for decades, especially when someone has had a miscarriage as it allows them to deal with
that safely at home.
Colorado understands the importance
of reproductive freedom. Women deserve the right to make their own reproductive health care decisions without having politicians or the government telling them what to do with
their bodies.
All of this comes at a time when
some MAGA Republicans passed their
One Big Beautiful Bill last summer.
Some of us call it the ‘‘Big Ugly Betrayal Act.’’ The bill cut more than $1
trillion from Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act—more than $1 trillion.
The results are going to be clear, and
they are already becoming clear. Over
time, 15 million Americans are likely
going to lose their health coverage.
Again, about 240,000 of them are living
in Colorado. Hundreds and hundreds of
hospitals and nursing homes around
the country are at risk of closing.
Many of them are in Colorado.
Since both sides—well, certainly Republicans—have refused to work together to extend the ACA enhanced
premium tax credits, 20 million more
Americans have been hit with some of

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.044

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

the largest price hikes in recent memory for their health insurance. We have
heard from Colorado families across
the
State
that
their
monthly
healthcare premiums have doubled, tripled, and in some cases quadrupled. In
many cases, that is higher than their
mortgages now. This is unsustainable
and is crushing many Americans and
many Coloradoans. It means that
working families are being forced to
choose between putting food on the
table or their healthcare or, even
worse, dropping their insurance altogether.
Without a doubt, this is a crisis. It
seems that the other side has realized
that this will be devastating to their
constituents. Hopefully, we can find
some compromise to resolve this.
Last week, the House of Representatives passed a clean 3-year extension of
the ACA enhanced premium tax credits
in a bipartisan vote. Yet, yesterday, it
got blocked here in the Senate.
Soaring healthcare costs are squeezing working families in ways we
couldn’t have imagined a few years
ago. We should be making it easier for
Americans to get healthcare that is affordable, accessible, and universal and
not harder.
It is worth remembering why they
made all of these cuts to healthcare in
the first place, why they made all of
the cuts to research funding or to
childcare grants, why they fired so
many government employees. It is because they wanted to pass a budget and
find a way to pay for $4.5 trillion in tax
breaks, most of which go to the largest
corporations and to some of the
wealthiest people in this country. To
do this, they cut food stamps and they
cut healthcare in order to pass the
largest transfer of wealth from the
poor to the rich in the history of the
country. I think that speaks volumes
as to the values before us.
We are not going to let some of these
actions go down without a fight.
It has been clear from the beginning
that President Trump’s goal in his second term is shock and awe—to bombard the American people with wall-towall coverage of every aspect of every
decision that they make. They are trying to attack anything that is the status quo. I think he believes that this
constant chaos will drown out all
voices of opposition. Well, we are still
here, we are still fighting, and we are
not quitting.
This past year, we have seen the administration
send
masked
armed
agents—without
identification—into
communities to separate families and
to pull people off the streets and into
unmarked vans. We have seen them
target people strictly based on the
color of their skin or on the accents
they may have when they speak.
In the past week, the footage out of
Minneapolis and out of Portland, OR,
was truly horrifying. An ICE officer
shot a woman, Renee Good from Colorado Springs, apparently in cold blood.
We are going to argue the legal aspects

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S247

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

of this case, but she was shot, to the
best of our knowledge, while she was
trying to have her voice heard that
what was being done to her and to the
communities in this country was
wrong.
Our office has been working tirelessly trying to help families who have
been desperately searching for loved
ones who have been arrested by ICE.
We have shown up repeatedly at the
ICE detention facility in Aurora to
press officials on the concerns about
the conditions of the facility, on the
delays in communication, on the irregular process changes and on the reports
of ICE pressuring detainees—some of
them minors—to voluntarily deport instead of proceeding through the judicial process.
We are also working on legislation
with Senator CORTEZ MASTO to redirect
the excessive increase in Federal funding for ICE that was snuck into the Big
Beautiful Bill to triple ICE’s budget,
and we are working to redirect that
money to actually keep our communities safe.
When President Trump shut down
the government last fall, he went after
the most vulnerable in this country,
but we were resilient in raising awareness of the healthcare crisis and in
fighting back against—we have to call
them—the heartless SNAP cuts, which
is the nutrition support for many of
the neediest people in our communities. Both times, Republicans put forward a continuing resolution to keep
business as usual, but we pushed back
in every way we could.
Back in May, when Republicans were
on an ill-fated mission to sell off public
lands to the highest bidder to supposedly lower the public debt, we
fought back hard and got them to
abandon that plan. Some things just
shouldn’t be for sale, and one of them
is our public lands.
Even as they continue to try to
sneak in different pieces of legislation,
we have tried to stop them every time,
but we know that President Trump and
his MAGA allies aren’t going to stop.
That is why they have nominated
Steve Pearce to lead the Bureau of
Land Management. The BLM manages
many of our Federal lands and is the
caretaker for some of the most breathtaking and sacred landscapes. Mr.
Pearce, on the other hand, has proudly
advocated to sell off these public lands.
I will say once again—I have said it a
bunch of times—Colorado’s public
lands are not for sale, and they never
will be for sale. So I will certainly vote
no on Mr. Pearce, and I will be fighting
his nomination every step of the way.
All of this brings us back to the final
question: How did we get here?
It was the NCAR disaster relief, the
canceling of clean energy projects,
freezing childcare funding, the demolition of the Arkansas Valley Conduit,
and the relentless attacks on science.
The President was elected, as I said
earlier, because Americans thought he
was going to make their lives better.

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

One year later, families are still wondering when that relief is going to
come. The cuts to NCAR, to clean energy and to clean drinking water, the
cuts to childcare and to financial assistance for Colorado families—all this
does nothing to improve anyone’s quality of life. It doesn’t make groceries
cheaper. It doesn’t bring down the cost
of rent or the utilities cost at the end
of the month.
To be frank, we have pretty much
completely lost the narrative, the plot
line of the administration. They seem
to be more focused on building ballrooms and getting involved in wars
without a necessary plan in place.
If you want to talk about how to get
and create a forever war, that would be
to depose a leader of a foreign country
without a plan of what the transition is
going to be.
And they have been vetoing unanimous, bipartisan legislation for rural
water infrastructure projects that actually help working people.
And that brings us back to NCAR.
The work the National Center for Atmospheric Research does is critical.
Senator BENNET talked about that at
great length. I have talked about it. It
informs so much of the weather data
and scientific research that makes our
country safer, both militarily and in
terms of natural disasters. We can’t let
the dismantling of NCAR be just a blip
in the news.
Time and time again, the President
makes critical announcements, but before we can even digest them, he has
moved on to the next reckless action.
This pattern leaves everyday Americans to pick up the pieces. The consequences permeate the fabric of our
society.
Dismantling science and cutting
funding for the National Center for Atmospheric Research harms every single
American and diminishes the opportunities that we will be able to create for
the next generation. It threatens our
safety. It threatens our economy. It
threatens our national security. It
threatens our livelihoods.
We can’t just stand by because of one
more crazy thing that comes out one
way or the other. We need to all be determined to do everything we can to
stand up to these attacks on science,
and I think that starts with standing
up for the National Center for Atmospheric Research.
Senator BENNET and I have a simple
demand: Put language into the appropriations bill that guarantees the full
funding for NCAR through the end of
this fiscal year.
That was money that was appropriated to the National Science Foundation with the full expectation that
that is where they would allocate it,
and they did allocate it there. Once
they have done that, the President
should not be able to come back in and
tell them to—I don’t know if
‘‘deallocate’’ is the right word, but ‘‘rescind’’ the money, if you want to use
legal terminology.

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.046

S15JAPT1

S248

It should be abundantly clear that
the work of the National Center for Atmospheric Research impacts every one
of us. Again, it saves lives. It protects
property. It boosts our economy. It creates the foundation on which our future economy is going to be based.
We have heard countless stories from
our constituents about how important
it is. We have heard from family members of NCAR researchers who don’t
want the work of their loved ones to be
thrown out, families who will struggle
to support someone who got laid off at
NCAR, students whose work relies on
NCAR data who may be in the process
of finishing their Ph.D. We have heard
from scientists who recognize this
international crown jewel of research.
We have heard from them all, and I
brought just a few to read today. One
constituent wrote:
My father has worked at NCAR for 20 years
. . . and I’m seriously concerned about its
continued existence. I voted for President
Trump in the latest election but feel this attack on NCAR is more about a personal attack on Colorado for being a largely blue
State than a legitimate action for the betterment of the American people.
My Dad has worked tirelessly for this place
for decades, putting in long hours and taking
on more responsibilities than he ever bargained for to keep up the work that he loves
being a part of. Please fight for NCAR, fight
with all you’ve got, it means so much to the
people who have spent their life’s work to
keep it going.

Another constituent, this one from
Lafayette, CO, wrote:
NCAR is important for Colorado—and the
nation—and provides not only top notch
science but employs close to 1,000 people in
my community.
My husband has worked for NCAR for over
16 years as a scientist and administrator.
The loss of his job would be devastating to
our family. We would not be able to help support our two college-aged daughters. My husband carries our health insurance. I have
stage 4 breast cancer and having to find new
health insurance—that is affordable—would
be very difficult [and quite possibly impossible] and would [certainly] threaten my current health status.

Another constituent from Glenwood
Springs wrote:
I have worked with NCAR scientists and
educators for all of my carer as a science
teacher here in Colorado. I now live in Glenwood Springs, retired, and I think NCAR is
one of the jewels of our state. I feel the same
way about the former [National Renewable
Energy Laboratory].

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

And then last—I can’t wrap it up
more succinctly than this constituent:
I am writing as a constituent and a scientist to ask you to stop the dismantling of
the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado, as announced by
OMB Director Russ Vought. NCAR is the
beating heart of climate research in the US.
I grew up in Boulder and I am one of the scientists who has worked at NCAR. My current
research depends on NCAR. My future career
opportunities in Colorado will be decimated
if NCAR is dismantled.
NCAR provides essential forecasting support to our nation, such as: Partnerships
with airlines to provide in-flight turbulence
and icing guidance—Collaboration with reinsurance companies to assess risks of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

wildfires, heat waves, and hurricanes—Forecasting capabilities that inform farmers,
truckers, and other critical components of
our economy about severe weather disruptions.
Dismantling NCAR is a wasteful exercise
that could cost lives. Please do everything
you can to keep our community safe and
don’t let NCAR be dissolved.

I would like to urge Congress to
stand up and protect this critical scientific research, to stand up for American innovation, and to protect American families.
AMENDMENT NO. 4153

I ask unanimous consent to call up
and make pending amendment No. 4153
to H.R. 6938 to maintain operations and
capabilities at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
BUDD). Is there objection?
The Senator from Maine.
Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, reserving the right to object, I appreciate the
advocacy from the Senators from Colorado for the National Center for Atmospheric Research in their State and,
in the case of Senator HICKENLOOPER,
his advocacy in support of scientific research in general.
It is important for Members to know
that the bill before us includes robust
funding for the National Science Foundation. This has not only been a top
priority of mine but of many members
of the Appropriations Committee.
Consistent with longstanding practice, the bill does not have a carve-out
for NCAR nor for any of the National
Science Foundation’s research facilities around the globe, and it does not
direct grant-making to certain activities. This longstanding precedent is designed to preserve the National Science
Foundation’s autonomy in funding decision and empowers the Agency to
prioritize scientific needs.
Nothing in this bill precludes continued support for NCAR. This is a carefully negotiated package that passed
the House of Representatives overwhelmingly in a bipartisan way last
week. Any amendment would send the
package back to the House, where its
fate would be uncertain. We would risk
a continuing resolution or, even worse,
another disastrous shutdown at the essential Agencies funded in this package. Therefore, Mr. President, I must
object, and I do object.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Objection is heard.
The Senator from Washington.
Mrs. MURRAY. Mr. President, I want
to thank Chairs COLLINS and COLE,
Ranking Member DELAURO, as well as
our fantastic subcommittee leaders and
all of our staffs for working so hard to
put this package together.
This vote is about returning power to
the American people, protecting the
funding that they count on, and making sure Congress—not Trump and
Vought—decide how taxpayer dollars
get spent.
We have, of course, the package of bipartisan bills, the product of hard, seri-

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ous negotiations that reject devastating Trump cuts that would cut
scientific research, raise energy prices,
and make our communities less safe
and prosperous. These bills protect key
investments in scientific research, our
Tribes, our public lands, and so much
else, and they reassert the power of
Congress to make our Nation’s funding
decisions—Congress, that is us.
So let’s choose to exercise our power
and make sure our States’ voices are
heard by passing these bills now and
getting them signed into law.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Maine.
Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I will
withhold my remarks until after the
vote.
AMENDMENT WITHDRAWN

Mr. President, I withdraw amendment No. 4208.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, the amendment is withdrawn.
VOTE ON H.R. 6938

Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I know
of no further debate at this time on the
bill.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there
further debate?
Hearing none, the clerk will read the
title of the bill for the third time.
The bill was read the third time.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The bill
having been read the third time, the
question is, Shall the bill pass?
Ms. COLLINS. I ask for the yeas and
nays.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a
sufficient second?
There appears to be a sufficient second.
The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk called the roll.
Mr. BARRASSO. The following Senators are necessarily absent: the Senator from Tennessee (Mr. HAGERTY)
and the Senator from Florida (Mrs.
MOODY).
Further, if present and voting: the
Senator from Tennessee (Mr. HAGERTY)
would have voted ‘‘yea.’’
Mr. DURBIN. I announce that the
Senator from Michigan (Mr. PETERS) is
necessarily absent.
The result was announced—yeas 82,
nays 15, as follows:
[Rollcall Vote No. 11 Leg.]
YEAS—82
Alsobrooks
Baldwin
Banks
Barrasso
Blackburn
Blumenthal
Blunt Rochester
Boozman
Britt
Budd
Cantwell
Capito
Cassidy
Collins
Coons
Cornyn
Cortez Masto
Cotton
Cramer
Crapo

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.047

S15JAPT1

Cruz
Curtis
Daines
Duckworth
Durbin
Ernst
Fetterman
Fischer
Gallego
Gillibrand
Graham
Grassley
Hassan
Hawley
Heinrich
Hirono
Hoeven
Husted
Hyde-Smith
Justice

Kaine
Kelly
Kennedy
King
Klobuchar
Lankford
Luján
Marshall
McConnell
McCormick
Merkley
Moran
Moreno
Mullin
Murkowski
Murray
Ossoff
Reed
Ricketts
Risch

January 15, 2026
Rosen
Rounds
Schatz
Schmitt
Schumer
Scott (SC)
Shaheen
Sheehy

Slotkin
Smith
Sullivan
Thune
Tillis
Tuberville
Van Hollen
Warner

Bennet
Booker
Hickenlooper
Johnson
Kim

Lee
Lummis
Markey
Murphy
Padilla

NAYS—15
Paul
Sanders
Schiff
Scott (FL)
Warren

NOT VOTING—3
Hagerty

Moody

Peters

The bill (H.R. 6938) was passed.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
HUSTED). The Senator from Maine.
f

MORNING BUSINESS
Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Senate be
in a period of morning business, with
Senators permitted to speak therein
for up to 10 minutes each.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

REMEMBERING REVEREND
CHESTER LEONARD CAVIL
Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President,
today I pay tribute to a native Iowan
who left this good Earth on November
26, 2025. With his loving wife at his bedside, Rev. Chester Leonard Cavil was
welcomed home at age 77.
Now, Mr. Cavil and I crossed paths
decades ago because of my sister
Bunny Wiegmann. My oldest sister
worked her entire career at F.W. Woolworth’s in Cedar Falls, IA. She was the
bookkeeper for the business.
Back then, women didn’t run the
store, at least not officially. But I
know that Bunny ran the show. As part
of her responsibilities, she trained all
the employees and was assigned to
train the incoming store manager.
That happened to be Mr. Cavil. They
worked together at Woolworth’s for 12
years. Bunny continued her job there
as bookkeeper for a total of 45 years.
During his time as store manager,
Bunny and Mr. Cavil became good
friends. To be sure, their friendship
lasted long after he left Woolworth’s.
Bunny always called him Mr. Cavil, a
sign of respect in the workplace. Most
of their friendship was long distance.
Bunny and her husband Ed traveled to
Chicago to celebrate Mr. Cavil’s wedding to his beloved wife Ruby in 1986.
Thinking back, I would have to say
their friendship was the reason Mr.
Cavil became one of my earliest—and
most visible—supporters.
At the time, I was serving in the
State legislature. In early 1974, I decided to run for the House of Representatives when H.R. Gross announced his retirement.
When I decided to run for Iowa’s
Third Congressional District, which included the Cedar Falls-Waterloo area,
Mr. Cavil wanted to help. Of course,
back then, there wasn’t such thing as

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S249

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE
Warnock
Welch
Whitehouse
Wicker
Wyden
Young

Jkt 069060

advertising on social media. You did it
the old-fashioned way. Mr. Cavil offered to put a larger-than-life sign that
said ‘‘Grassley for Congress’’ anchored
on top of his car. Turned out, that 24/
7 kind of advertising was worth its
weight in gold—and it was free.
Looking back, I would say he went
out on a political limb to help me get
elected. Every day, Mr. Cavil parked
his car with the big blue and white sign
anchored on top in the front of the
shopping center. Remember, this is before online shopping. So, that sign
caught the attention of countless customers in 1974, from the primaries all
the way to election day that November.
But perhaps most noteworthy was
where Mr. Cavil drove his car home
every night and parked: his urban
neighborhood in Waterloo. I am sure
many of his neighbors didn’t have the
slightest idea who CHUCK GRASSLEY
even was. For those who knew my political party, I am surprised the sign
didn’t get ripped off the roof. Either
way, the giant ‘‘Grassley for Congress’’
sign on top of his car certainly raised
my name recognition. And to have his
backing made a difference—nothing
beats retail politics. I will never forget
his steadfast support and loyalty to
Bunny.
After my election to Congress, Mr.
Cavil and his wife kept in touch over
the years. After I was elected to the
Senate, they visited my office in Washington, DC, a couple of times. The
Cavils raised a family and built their
life together in Georgia, where they
launched a couple of businesses and Mr.
Cavil followed his vocational calling.
He volunteered for decades as a chaplain and was ordained a Baptist minister. Reverend Cavil immersed himself
in his ministry, teaching Sunday
school, Bible studies and performing
weddings and funerals for the faithful.
Barbara and I extend our condolences
to his loving wife Ruby, as well as his
children, grandchildren, and entire extended family. I have no doubt Mr.
Cavil and Bunny have enjoyed reminiscing about the good old days at Woolworth’s.
f

RECOGNIZING THE FALL 2025
SENATE PAGE CLASS
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that a list of the
fall 2025 Senate Page class be printed in
the RECORD.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
Nikita Bates, Cecilia Bleyer, Cheyenne
Brindac, Elizabeth Cannon, Hunter Coy, Ian
Goff, Reagan Grau, Lucas Hogan, Everett
Jennings, Addison Norris, Caden Perkins,
Chloe Quinn, Ahliya Roy, Luke Stanton,
Evelyn Szaukellis, Maureen Bai, Jacqueline
Belliveau, Nicholas Cellini, John Ciok, Gabriel Frech, Lilliana Grinberg, Steven Jiang,
Sadie Jordan, Naisha Maheshwari, Jace
Miles, Chris Qian, Emma Russ, George Solomon.

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ARMS SALES NOTIFICATION
Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, section
36(b) of the Arms Export Control Act
requires that Congress receive prior notification of certain proposed arms
sales as defined by that statute. Upon
such notification, the Congress has 30
calendar days during which the sale
may be reviewed. The provision stipulates that, in the Senate, the notification of proposed sales shall be sent to
the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee.
In keeping with the committee’s intention to see that relevant information is still available to the full Senate, I ask unanimous consent to have
printed in the RECORD the notifications
that have been received. If the cover
letter references a classified annex,
then such an annex is available to all
Senators in the office of the Foreign
Relations Committee, room SD–423.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker of the House,
House of Representatives, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. SPEAKER: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
24–121, concerning the Army’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Iraq for defense articles and services
estimated to cost $110 million. We will issue
a news release to notify the public of this
proposed sale upon delivery of this letter to
your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. JAMES E. RISCH,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relations,
U.S. Senate, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
24–121, concerning the Army’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Iraq for defense articles and services
estimated to cost $110 million. We will issue
a news release to notify the public of this
proposed sale upon delivery of this letter to
your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. BRIAN MAST,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs,
House of Representatives, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
24–121, concerning the Army’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Iraq for defense articles and services
estimated to cost $110 million. We will issue

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.005

S15JAPT1

S250

a news release to notify the public of this
proposed sale upon delivery of this letter to
your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 24–121
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act, as amended
(i) Prospective Purchaser: Government of
Iraq.
(ii) Total Estimated Value:
Major Defense Equipment* $0.
Other $110 million.
Total $110 million.
Funding Source: National Funds.
(iii) Description and Quantity or Quantities of Articles or Services under Consideration for Purchase: Foreign Military Sales
(FMS) case IQ–B–APT was below congressional notification threshold at $46 million
($0 in MDE) and included Very Small Aperture Terminals (VSAT); VSAT modems;
VSAT hubs; L–band tactical satellite service
(L–TAC) manpacks; commercial satellite
services;
satellite
ground
terminals,
modems, and hubs; spare parts; field service
representative services; and technical support and training. The Government of Iraq
has requested the case be amended to include
additional VSATs; VSAT items; and related
support. This amendment will cause the case
to exceed the notification threshold, and
thus notification of the entire program is required.
Major Defense Equipment (MDE): None.
Non-Major Defense Equipment: The following non-MDE items will be included: Very
Small Aperture Terminals (VSAT); VSAT
modems; VSAT hubs; L–band tactical satellite service (L–TAC) manpacks; commercial satellite services; satellite ground terminals; modems and hubs; spare parts; field
service representative services; technical
support and training; personnel training;
U.S. Government and contractor engineering, technical, and logistics support services
and personnel services; and other related elements of logistics and program support.
(iv) Military Department: Army (IQ–B–
APT).
(v) Prior Related Cases, if any: IQ–B–AAO.
(vi) Sales Commission, Fee, etc., Paid, Offered, or Agreed to be Paid: None known at
this time.
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology Contained
in the Defense Article or Defense Services
Proposed to be Sold: None.
(viii) Date Report Delivered to Congress:
January 14, 2026.
*As defined in Section 47(6) of the Arms Export Control Act.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

POLICY JUSTIFICATION

Iraq—Very Small Aperture Terminals
The Government of Iraq has requested to
buy additional Very Small Aperture Terminals (VSAT); VSAT modems; VSAT hubs; L–
band tactical satellite service manpacks;
spare parts; personnel training; U.S. Government and contractor engineering, technical,
and logistics support services and personnel
services; and other related elements of logistics and program support that will be added
to a previously implemented case whose
value was under the congressional notification threshold. The original Foreign Military
Sales (FMS) case, valued at $46 million ($0 in
Major Defense Equipment), included VSATs;
VSAT
modems;
VSAT
hubs;
L–TAC
manpacks; commercial satellite services;
satellite ground terminals, modems, and
hubs; spare parts; field service representative services; and technical support and
training. The estimated total cost is $110
million.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

This proposed sale will support the foreign
policy and national security of the United
States by helping to improve the security of
a strategic partner.
The proposed sale will improve Iraq’s capability to meet current and future threats by
improving its satellite communication capability across the Ministry of Defense’s communication infrastructure. This investment
in the Government of Iraq’s command and
control capabilities is crucial to protecting
its borders, energy infrastructure, and residents. Iraq will have no difficulty absorbing
these articles and services into its armed
forces.
The proposed sale of this equipment and
support will not alter the basic military balance in the region.
The principal contractor will be Network
Innovations, located in Frederick, MD. At
this time, the U.S. Government is not aware
of any offset agreement proposed in connection with this potential sale. Any offset
agreement will be defined in negotiations between the purchaser and the contractor.
Implementation of this proposed sale will
require the assignment of two additional
U.S. Government and five U.S. contractor
representatives to Iraq for a duration of five
years to support quarterly program management reviews, provide engineering consulting and technical assessments for equipment upgrades and evolutions to the VSAT
hubs and modems, and to conduct in-country
training.
There will be no adverse impact on U.S. defense readiness as a result of this proposed
sale.
f

ARMS SALES NOTIFICATION
Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, section
36(b) of the Arms Export Control Act
requires that Congress receive prior notification of certain proposed arms
sales as defined by that statute. Upon
such notification, the Congress has 30
calendar days during which the sale
may be reviewed. The provision stipulates that, in the Senate, the notification of proposed sales shall be sent to
the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee.
In keeping with the committee’s intention to see that relevant information is still available to the full Senate, I ask unanimous consent to have
printed in the RECORD the notifications
that have been received. If the cover
letter references a classified annex,
then such an annex is available to all
Senators in the office of the Foreign
Relations Committee, room SD–423.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. SPEAKER: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
25–65, concerning the Army’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Kuwait for defense services estimated to cost $800 million. We will issue a
news release to notify the public of this proposed sale upon delivery of this letter to
your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Enclosures.
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. JAMES E. RISCH,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relations,
U.S. Senate, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
25–65, concerning the Army’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Kuwait for defense services estimated to cost $800 million. We will issue a
news release to notify the public of this proposed sale upon delivery of this letter to
your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. BRIAN MAST,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs,
House of Representatives, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
25–65, concerning the Army’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to the Government of Kuwait for defense services estimated to cost $800 million. We will issue a
news release to notify the public of this proposed sale upon delivery of this letter to
your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 25–65
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act, as amended
(i) Prospective Purchaser: Government of
Kuwait.
(ii) Total Estimated Value:
Major Defense Equipment (MDE) * $0.
Other $800 million.
Total $800 million.
Funding Source: National Funds.
(iii) Description and Quantity or Quantities of Articles or Services under Consideration for Purchase:
Major Defense Equipment (MDE): None.
Non-Major Defense Equipment: The following non-MDE items will be included:
spare and repair parts; storage and aging;
surveillance firing; stockpile reliability;
shared and country-unique PATRIOT PAC–3
Missile Support Center support; operator and
maintenance support; test program set development process support; publications and
technical documentation; personnel training
and training equipment; U.S. Government
and contractor engineering, technical, and
logistics support services; studies and surveys; transportation; and other related elements of logistics and program support.
(iv) Military Department: Army (KU–B–
UYU).
(v) Prior Related Cases, if any: KU–B–UXH,
KU–B–UJO, KU–B–UMG.
(vi) Sales Commission, Fee, etc., Paid, Offered, or Agreed to be Paid: None known at
this time.
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology Contained
in the Defense Article or Defense Services
Proposed to be Sold: None.
(viii) Date Report Delivered to Congress:
January 14, 2026.
* As defined in Section 47(6) of the Arms
Export Control Act.

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.009

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026
POLICY JUSTIFICATION

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Kuwait—PATRIOT Program Sustainment
and Follow-On Technical Support
The Government of Kuwait has requested
to buy equipment and services related to
sustainment and follow-on technical support
for its PATRIOT program. The following
non-Major Defense Equipment items will be
included: spare and repair parts; storage and
aging; surveillance firing; stockpile reliability; shared and country-unique PATRIOT
PAC–3 Missile Support Center support; operator and maintenance support; test program
set development process support; publications and technical documentation; personnel training and training equipment; U.S.
Government and contractor engineering,
technical, and logistics support services;
studies and surveys; transportation; and
other related elements of logistics and program support. The estimated total cost is
$800 million.
This proposed sale will support the foreign
policy goals and national security objectives
of the United States by improving the security of a major non-NATO ally that is a force
for political stability and economic progress
in the Middle East.
The proposed sale will improve Kuwait’s
capability to meet current and future
threats by assisting it in maintaining higher
levels of operational readiness while meeting
its modernization and professionalization
goals. Kuwait will have no difficulty absorbing these articles and services into its armed
forces.
The proposed sale of this equipment and
support will not alter the basic military balance in the region.
The principal contractors will be RTX Corporation, located in Waltham, MA, and
Huntsville, AL; Lockheed Martin, located in
Bethesda, MA, and Huntsville, AL; LEIDOS,
Inc., located in Reston, VA, and Huntsville,
AL; and KBR, located in Houston, TX, and
Huntsville, AL. At this time, the U.S. Government is not aware of any offset agreement proposed in connection with this potential sale. Any offset agreement will be defined in negotiations between the purchaser
and the contractor.
Implementation of this proposed sale will
require the assignment of six U.S. Government and four contractor representatives to
provide technical support and equipment familiarization.
There will be no adverse impact on U.S. defense readiness as a result of this proposed
sale.
f

ARMS SALES NOTIFICATION
Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, section
36(b) of the Arms Export Control Act
requires that Congress receive prior notification of certain proposed arms
sales as defined by that statute. Upon
such notification, the Congress has 30
calendar days during which the sale
may be reviewed. The provision stipulates that, in the Senate, the notification of proposed sales shall be sent to
the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee.
In keeping with the committee’s intention to see that relevant information is still available to the full Senate, I ask unanimous consent to have
printed in the RECORD the notifications
that have been received. If the cover
letter references a classified annex,
then such an annex is available to all
Senators in the office of the Foreign
Relations Committee, room SD–423.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S251

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. SPEAKER: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
25–37, concerning the Army’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to Peru for defense articles and services estimated to cost
$l.5 billion. We will issue a news release to
notify the public of this proposed sale upon
delivery of this letter to your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. JAMES E. RISCH,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relations,
U.S. Senate, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
25–37, concerning the Army’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to Peru for defense articles and services estimated to cost
$1.5 billion. We will issue a news release to
notify the public of this proposed sale upon
delivery of this letter to your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Washington, DC.
Hon. BRIAN MAST,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs,
House of Representatives, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
25–37, concerning the Army’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to Peru for defense articles and services estimated to cost
$1.5 billion. We will issue a news release to
notify the public of this proposed sale upon
delivery of this letter to your office.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL F. MILLER,
Director.
Enclosures.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 25–37
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act, as amended
(i) Prospective Purchaser: Government of
Peru.
(ii) Total Estimated Value:
Major Defense Equipment * $0.
Other $1.5 billion.
Total $1.5 billion.
Funding Source: National Funds.
(iii) Description and Quantity or Quantities of Articles or Services under Consideration for Purchase: The Government of Peru
has requested to buy equipment and services
to support the procurement of maritime and
onshore facilities at the Callao Naval Base.
Major Defense Equipment (MDE):
None.
Non-Major Defense Equipment:
The following non-MDE items will be included:
lifecycle
design;
construction;

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

project management; engineering studies;
engineering services; technical support; facility and infrastructure assessments; surveys; planning; programming; design; acquisition; contract administration; construction
management; U.S. Government and contractor engineering, technical, and logistics
support services; and other related elements
of logistics and program support.
(iv) Military Department: Army (PE–B–
HAE).
(v) Prior Related Cases, if any: PE–B–HAD.
(vi) Sales Commission, Fee, etc., Paid, Offered, or Agreed to be Paid: None known at
this time.
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology Contained
in the Defense Article or Defense Services
Proposed to be Sold: None.
(viii) Date Report Delivered to Congress:
January 15, 2026.
* As defined in Section 47(6) of the Arms
Export Control Act.
POLICY JUSTIFICATION

Peru—Design and Construction at Callao
Naval Base
The Government of Peru has requested to
buy equipment and services to support the
procurement of maritime and onshore facilities at the Callao Naval Base. The following
non-Major Defense Equipment items will be
included: lifecycle design; construction;
project management; engineering studies;
engineering services; technical support; facility and infrastructure assessments; surveys; planning; programming; design; acquisition; contract administration; construction
management; U.S. Government and contractor engineering, technical, and logistics
support services; and other related elements
of logistics and program support. The estimated total cost is $1.5 billion.
This proposed sale will contribute to the
foreign policy objectives of the United
States by helping to improve the security of
an important partner which is a force for political stability, peace, and economic
progress in South America.
The proposed sale will improve Peru’s port
infrastructure to accommodate current and
future naval and logistical operations and requirements. This sale will also provide a
safer, more efficient platform for naval operations by reducing civilian-military interactions at the existing facility. Peru will
have no difficulty absorbing these articles
and services into its armed forces.
The proposed sale of this construction and
support will not alter the regional military
balance in the region.
The principal contractor or contractors
will be determined later from a list of approved vendors, likely through a competitive
process. At this time, the U.S. Government
is not aware of any offset agreement proposed in connection with this potential sale.
Any offset agreement will be defined in negotiations between the purchaser and the contractor or contractors.
Implementation of this proposed sale will
require the assignment of up to twenty U.S.
Government or U.S. contractor representatives to Peru for a duration of up to ten
years to provide construction management
and oversight.
There will be no adverse impact on U.S. defense readiness as a result of this proposed
sale.
f

U.S. WITHDRAWAL FROM UNITED
NATIONS ORGANIZATIONS AND
PROGRAMS
Mr. WELCH. Mr. President, last week
we learned that President Trump has
decided to withdraw the United States
from 66 United Nations organizations,

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.008

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S252

offices, and treaties that have had bipartisan support in Congress for decades. As far as I am aware, neither the
White House nor the State Department
consulted Congress about this extremist and, frankly, self-defeating decision.
We all want to see the United Nations become more efficient and eliminate unnecessary duplication and
waste. This may, indeed, be a time to
reassess our participation in some of
these organizations, something we
should do every 5 to 10 years. The world
is constantly changing, and our priorities and funding decisions need to
adapt. But for an administration to
take such a drastic, unilateral step is
unprecedented, short-sighted, and certain to weaken U.S. global leadership
and U.S. national security.
Among the organizations and programs the President plans to withdraw
from include the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
United Nations Population Fund, the
UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the UN Register of Conventional Arms, the International Tropical Timber Organization, the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature, and the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change.
I seriously doubt that President
Trump is familiar with the work that
any of these organizations do or why
the United States during Republican
and Democratic administrations has
been a leading member and supporter.
While I will not recount each of their
mandates and activities, I encourage
my colleagues to do so. It would become readily apparent that their work
is squarely in sync with U.S. national
interests.
Of course, if one believes, as the
President and some of his closest advisers believe, that climate change is a
hoax and that any program or organizations with the words ‘‘climate’’ or
‘‘nature’’ in its title should be eliminated, then it is not surprising that
they would want to withdraw from the
IUCN, the IPCC, and the UNFCCC,
which play key and complementary
roles in monitoring and reporting on
the health and environmental impacts
of carbon emissions and the destruction of the Earth’s biodiversity.
If you believe, as perhaps some in the
administration
believe,
that
preventing sexual violence in conflict is
not something that requires international cooperation, then there would
be no need for the Office of the Special
Representative. But Members of Congress and their staff who have met with
the extraordinarily knowledgeable and
dedicated occupants of that position
over the years would strongly disagree.
If you believe that the alarming proliferation of conventional weapons, including small arms like machine guns
and shoulder-fired missiles that are
susceptible to ending up in the hands of
terrorists and narcotics traffickers
halfway around the world is not a prob-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

lem, then it is understandable why
some would favor withdrawing from
the UN Register of Conventional Arms,
which provides transparency on arms
transfers and helps to deter the traffic
in illicit weapons. But it is as illogical
as it is dangerous.
And if you believe that it is wrong to
support an organization that provides
lifesaving, voluntary family planning
information and services in countries
where impoverished women and girls
lack access to modern contraceptives,
then it is hypocritical but not surprising that some, for purely political
and ideological reasons, would want to
withdraw from the UN Population
Fund, even though it is prohibited by
its own bylaws from supporting abortion.
The key point I want to make is that
applying an ideological litmus test to
these organizations and withdrawing
from them without any consultation or
debate will further isolate the United
States. Our adversaries will fill the
vacuum. There are many problems that
cannot be solved by the United States
or any other country alone: global
warming, the destruction of tropical
forests, acidification of the oceans,
rape as a weapon of war, illicit arms
sales, and unsustainable population
growth in countries that cannot feed
their own people today. These daunting
challenges require regional and global
cooperation and the active involvement of these UN organizations that
provide the necessary expertise, data,
strategies, and guidance. Their effectiveness is a function of the quality
and active participation of their members, and without the United States,
their ability to carry out their mandates will suffer.
Congress understands this. In their
bipartisan fiscal year 2026 conference
agreement for National Security, the
Department of State, and Related Programs that was published earlier this
week, House and Senate appropriators
recommend continued funding for most
UN organizations and programs, as in
past years.
According to their bylaws, no UN
member state, including the United
States, can withdraw from some, if not
many, of these organizations and treaties by simply declaring an intent to
withdraw. There is an interim period of
months before a withdrawal takes effect. Withdrawing from treaties may
require an act of Congress. It would be
a serious mistake for the White House
to go down that road, absent a thorough assessment by the relevant executive Agencies and congressional committees of jurisdiction of the pros and
cons of doing so. Otherwise, it will be
just a matter of time before China or
some other country occupies the dominant positions in not only these organizations but the UN Secretariat itself.
By then, Donald Trump will be gone,
but it will be too late to reverse course,
and future generations of Americans
will pay the price.

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

TRIBUTE TO PETER FEIGIN
Ms. BALDWIN. Mr. President, I rise
today to honor Peter Feigin, president
of the Milwaukee Bucks and Fiserv
Forum, for his 12 years of leadership of
Milwaukee’s professional basketball
organization during a pivotal time of
growth and success.
Since 1968, the Milwaukee Bucks, a
team loved by former Senator and my
mentor Herb Kohl have represented the
State of Wisconsin in the National Basketball Association, NBA. While Milwaukee’s market for a professional basketball team may be considered small,
its strong fan base has been anything
but. At the team’s conception in 1968,
more than 40,000 fans participated in a
contest to help name the team’s mascot. The team would be known as the
‘‘Bucks,’’ a nod to one of Wisconsin’s
State animals, the white-tailed deer.
This Bucks mascot would become the
proud identity of a loyal fan base.
In the team’s more than 50-year history, they have won 19 division titles,
three conference titles, and two national championships. An organization
with this level of success requires a
leader with integrity, expertise, and a
love for the game of basketball. Peter
Feigin has brought those skills and so
many more to the Milwaukee Bucks
throughout his time with the organization.
Mr. Feigin earned a bachelor’s degree
from Franklin & Marshall College,
where he would also later earn an honorary doctorate. In his early career,
Mr. Feigin worked in sales and marketing for Six Flags Theme Parks, and
in 1998, Mr. Feigin joined the New York
Knicks organization where he served in
a variety of positions before eventually
taking on the role of vice president of
marketing.
From there, Mr. Feigin moved into a
variety of corporate business and entertainment positions. He served as the
chief marketing and revenue officer of
Deluxe Entertainment Services Group,
a global entertainment company. As
president and chief operating officer of
Marquis Jet Partners, Inc., Mr. Feigin
navigated the company through their
merger with NetJets. In 2014, with
more than two decades of proven leadership across the sports, business, and
entertainment sectors, Mr. Feigin
joined the Milwaukee Bucks as president.
Mr. Feigin has been integral to the
success and development of the Milwaukee Bucks organization and the
Milwaukee community over the past 12
years. He has elevated the organization
by reimagining the possibilities of the
team’s business development and
achieving substantial success across
organizational departments.
At the start of Mr. Feigin’s tenure
with the Milwaukee Bucks, the team
faced an impasse, either needing to
build a larger arena or fear the team
leaving Milwaukee. The Bucks home at
that time, the BMO Harris Bradley
Center, was one of the oldest NBA arenas in the league and no longer met the

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.028

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

NBA’s standards. Mr. Feigin was integral in the planning and development
of both a new arena and the expansion
of the surrounding urban district. In
2018, the Fiserv Forum, a 17,341-seat
arena, opened and welcomed home
Bucks basketball.
Alongside the Fiserv Forum, the
Deer District is a 30-acre urban community that features restaurants, bars,
lodging, and attractions. Through Mr.
Feigin’s determination and leadership,
the Deer District has flourished as a vibrant part of Milwaukee’s economy,
community, and identity. He has remained committed to ensuring that the
progress made in the Deer District continues to better the city of Milwaukee
and the State of Wisconsin.
Mr. Feigin has built a culture of success across the Milwaukee Bucks organization, both on the court and across
the business. The Milwaukee Bucks
were named one of Milwaukee’s best
places to work 5 years in a row. And
success in the front office was reflected
on the court. During Mr. Feigin’s tenure, the Bucks won six division titles,
an NBA Cup tournament, a conference
title, and the 2021 NBA national championship.
With the launch of the Milwaukee
Bucks Foundation in 2016, Mr. Feigin
created an additional bridge to the city
and surrounding communities. He has
served on the boards of the Milwaukee
Public Schools Foundation, City Year
Milwaukee, the Milwaukee Public Museum and the Boys & Girls Clubs of
Greater Milwaukee. Mr. Feigin served
as chairman of the American Heart and
Stroke Association’s 2017 annual campaign. He was a member of the board of
CEO’s Against Cancer’s Wisconsin
chapter. Mr. Feigin’s passion for service and people is evident and his work
has and will continue to have a positive impact on Wisconsinites for years
to come.
There is no doubt that Mr. Feigin
ushered in a new era of success for the
Milwaukee Bucks. As Mr. Feigin transitions from the organization, I am
proud to honor his contributions to the
Milwaukee Bucks, Fiserv Forum, the
city of Milwaukee, and the State of
Wisconsin.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

TRIBUTE TO RAYMOND NEIRINCKX
Mr. REED. Mr. President, I rise
today to recognize the retirement of
Raymond Neirinckx after an incredible
43-year career, including the past 26
years as coordinator of the Rhode Island Housing Resource Commission.
I first met and began working with
Ray when I was serving in the Rhode
Island State Senate, and I was immediately struck by his compassion and
intelligence. Indeed, for nearly five
decades, Ray used his considerable talents not for personal gain, but to help
others in great need.
Throughout his housing advocacy career, he counseled over 1,000 Rhode Islanders facing mortgage foreclosure.
He helped these families navigate com-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S253

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

plex financial documents and often
communicated with lenders on their
behalf. Ray’s painstaking work combing through legal documents and financial regulations helped many, many
Rhode Islanders keep their homes despite dire circumstances. He would
often go above and beyond what was required under his role, helping Rhode Islanders who could not avoid foreclosure
get back on their feet. When I connected struggling Rhode Islanders with
Ray, I knew they were in the best
hands possible.
Just as my constituents have relied
on Ray’s advice, I have often depended
on Ray’s expertise here in Congress. As
I have drafted, considered, and voted
on complex housing finance legislation,
I have always turned to Ray for an
analysis of how these proposals would
operate in the real world and to understand what their real impact would be
on Rhode Islanders. His insights were
invaluable.
While I will miss Ray at the Rhode
Island Housing Resource Commission, I
know that he is still just a phone call
away. And luckily for Rhode Island, retirement is not the end of Ray’s public
service story. He is leading the first
community development course within
the Rhode Island Department of Corrections, work that will help people
trying to turn their lives around.
Ray, thank you for decades of extraordinary work, for dedicating your
career to caring for and supporting
your fellow Rhode Islanders, and for
being a trusted partner. I wish you
luck as you begin this new chapter.
f

TOWN OF SEBAGO 200TH
ANNIVERSARY
Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, in 1826,
a small town on the western shore of
Sebago Lake was incorporated and
took the name that has roots in the
Abenaki phrase sobagoo, or ‘‘it is the
sea.’’ Today, it is an honor to join the
people of Sebago, ME, in celebrating
the 200th anniversary of a community
that is a great place to live, work, and
raise families.
Initially, Sebago was known as
Flintstown, as a result of the Massachusetts General Court granting settlement in the area to the survivors of
Captain John Flint’s brigade of American Revolution soldiers. Shortly
thereafter, the town was named Baldwin and saw an influx of lumberjacks
and woodsmen drawn by the abundant
forests. Despite difficult growing conditions, residents were successful in
farming, and in establishing factories
to produce lumber, boots, shoes, and
barrel staves.
As the town grew, so did trade and
tourism. The Cumberland and Oxford
Canal opened in 1832, tying together
the Sebago Lake and Portland economies. Later, in the 1870s, the Portland
and Ogdensburg Railroad expanded the
town’s hospitality industry and encouraged steamboats to bring visitors
to Sebago. What were once seasonal

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

homes and inns evolved into yearround abodes that contribute to
Sebago’s image as a well-known resort
area in southwestern Maine.
Sebago is home to many examples of
charming New England architecture on
the National Register of Places. One of
the most fascinating is the Dyke
Mountain Annex. It was built between
1906 and 1908 and originally was part of
the Dyke Mountain Hotel. While the
rest of the resort would later be destroyed by fire, the annex functioned
as a summer hostel and continues to be
used as such by the present owners.
Another example of Sebago’s smalltown beauty is Fitch’s General Store
and House. Built in 1870, it combined
Italianate and Greek Revival architecture. In 1920, it opened as a general
store, offering goods from groceries to
hardware to gardening supplies. Although the building has been restored
as a private residence, its legacy remains a pivotal part of the town’s history.
The rich history of Sebago resides
not only in beautiful architecture, but
also in honoring the tireless service of
their veterans. Words chiseled in stone
at the Sebago Veterans Memorial read,
‘‘Sebago Honors Her Men and Women
Who Served in the Wars of Their Country.’’ From the valiant service of Captain Flint and his troops in securing
American’s independence to the patriots of today, Sebago honors her people’s history.
The celebration of Sebago’s 200th anniversary is not merely about the passage of time. It is about human accomplishment in the face of adversity. We
celebrate the people of Sebago who
stand together, work together, and
have created community together for
200 years. Thank you to those who
came before. Sebago, ME, could not
continue to thrive without your sacrifice. Thank you to those there today.
Your effort and dedication ensure Sebago has a bright future.
f

ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS
REMEMBERING STEVE SHEETZ
∑ Mr. MCCORMICK. Mr. President, I
rise today to honor the life and legacy
of Mr. Steve Sheetz, a proud Pennsylvanian, visionary leader, and devoted family man, who passed away on
January 4, 2026. Mr. Sheetz leaves behind an enduring legacy of entrepreneurship, community service, and unwavering commitment to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Sheetz was a central figure in the
growth and success of Sheetz, the family-founded business that began as a
single dairy store in Altoona and grew
into a nationally recognized brand employing thousands of people across
multiple States.
Beyond his business accomplishments, Mr. Sheetz was deeply committed to giving back. He believed
strongly in supporting local communities, investing in employees, and ensuring that success was shared with

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.033

S15JAPT1

S254

others. His philanthropy and civic engagement made a meaningful difference in the lives of countless Pennsylvanians and strengthened communities throughout the region.
On behalf of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, I extend my deepest condolences to the Sheetz family, friends,
and all those mourning his loss. May
we honor Mr. Steve Sheetz’s memory
by continuing to uphold the values he
embodied and the legacy he leaves behind.∑

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

RECOGNIZING CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE EVANGELIST
∑ Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, I rise
today to honor the Cathedral of St.
John the Evangelist in Boise, ID, as it
celebrates its 150th anniversary. This
historic landmark has played a vital
role in the spiritual and cultural fabric
of our community since its founding in
1876, symbolizing growth, resilience,
and our unwavering faith in God. It
stands as a testament to the enduring
spirit of the Catholic Church in Idaho
and continues to serve as a gathering
place for generations of worshippers.
From its humble beginnings as St.
John’s parish in 1876, the cathedral has
gone through significant milestones.
Originally established in a modest
wooden structure, the parish quickly
outgrew its facility. In the early 1900s,
Bishop Alphonse J. Glorieux purchased
the current site to construct a more
permanent cathedral. The cornerstone
was laid in 1906, and construction progressed slowly but steadily despite the
challenges posed by World War I. After
15 years of persistent efforts, the cathedral was finally dedicated on Easter
Sunday in 1921.
Architecturally, the Cathedral of St.
John the Evangelist is an exemplary
representation of the Romanesque revival style, crafted from locally
sourced Boise sandstone. Its cruciform
layout spans 170 feet in length and 65
feet in width, featuring a barrel-vaulted ceiling, intricate stained-glass windows, and ornate marble finishes. The
magnificent rose window above the
choir loft depicting the patroness of
musicians, St. Cecilia, draws the eye of
all visitors. Over the decades, significant renovations have preserved the
cathedral’s legacy while adapting to
the community’s needs, including a
centennial project in 2021 that revitalized the sanctuary and returned the
tabernacle to its center.
The cathedral serves not only as a
place of worship but also as a cultural
landmark, anchoring the local Catholic
community and attracting visitors
with its stunning design and historical
significance. It has witnessed countless
weddings, baptisms, and celebrations
and is a cherished gathering place for
parishioners. Its proximity to the
Idaho State Capitol further underscores its role as a spiritual and civic
beacon in the heart of Boise.
As we commemorate 150 years of the
cathedral’s history, we honor the vi-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

sionary leaders, dedicated parishioners,
and the wider community that have
contributed to its enduring legacy. The
Cathedral of St. John the Evangelist
stands as a monument of faith, our Father, and the resilience of Idaho’s
Catholic community. May it continue
to inspire future generations as a place
of worship and a pillar of Catholic tradition in our ever-changing world.∑
f

MESSAGES FROM THE PRESIDENT
Messages from the President of the
United States were communicated to
the Senate by Ms. Holstead, one of his
secretaries.
f

EXECUTIVE MESSAGES REFERRED
As in executive session the Presiding
Officer laid before the Senate messages
from the President of the United
States submitting sundry nominations
which were referred to the Committee
on Armed Services.
(The messages received today are
printed at the end of the Senate proceedings.)
f

MESSAGES FROM THE HOUSE

The message further announced that
pursuant to 22 U.S.C. 1928a, clause 10 of
rule 1, and the order of the House of
January 3, 2025, the Speaker appoints
the following Members on the part of
the House of Representatives to the
United States Group of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly: Ms. SÁNCHEZ of
California, Mr. LARSEN of Washington,
Mr. NORCROSS of New Jersey, and Ms.
KAMLAGER-DOVE of California.
The message also announced that
pursuant to 20 U.S.C. 2103(b), and the
order of the House of January 3, 2025,
the Speaker appoints the following individual to the Board of Trustees of the
American Folklife Center in the Library of Congress on the part of the
House of Representatives for a term of
6 years: Mr. Robert Anacletus Underwood of Tamueng, Guam.
f

MEASURES REFERRED
The following bill was read the first
and the second times by unanimous
consent, and referred as indicated:
H.R. 4593. An act to amend the Energy Policy and Conservation Act to revise the definition of showerhead; to the Committee on
Energy and Natural Resources.
f

ENROLLED BILL SIGNED

At 10:57 a.m., a message from the
House of Representatives, delivered by
Mrs. Alli, one of its reading clerks, announced that the Speaker has signed
the following enrolled bill:
S. 269. An act to improve coordination between Federal and State agencies and the Do
Not Pay working system.

The enrolled bill was subsequently
signed by the President pro tempore
(Mr. GRASSLEY).
At 3:21 p.m., a message from the
House of Representatives, delivered by
Mrs. Alli, one of its reading clerks, announced that the House has passed the
following bills, in which it requests the
concurrence of the Senate:
H.R. 4593. An act to amend the Energy Policy and Conservation Act to revise the definition of showerhead.
H.R. 7006. An act making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.

The message further announced that
pursuant to 22 U.S.C. 6913, and the
order of the House of January 3, 2025,
the Speaker appoints the following
Member on the part of the House of
Representatives to the Congressional
Executive Commission on the People’s
Republic of China: Mr. WALKINSHAW of
Virginia.
The message also announced that
pursuant to 22 U.S.C. 276d, clause 10 of
rule 1, and the order of the House of
January 3, 2025, the Speaker appoints
the following Members on the part of
the House of Representatives to the
Canada-United States Interparliamentary Group: Mr. LARSEN of Washington,
Mr. MORELLE of New York, Ms. OMAR of
Minnesota, Mr. THANEDAR of Michigan,
and Mr. KENNEDY of New York.

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

MEASURES READ THE FIRST TIME
The following bill was read the first
time:
S. 3674. A bill to expand and clarify the
grounds for civil denaturalization proceedings for individuals who have defrauded
a governmental program, joined a terrorist
organization, or committed certain criminal
offenses.
f

PRIVILEGED NOMINATION
REFERRED TO COMMITTEE
On request by Senator TIM KAINE,
under the authority of S. Res. 116, 112th
Congress, the following nomination
was referred to Committee on Foreign
Relation: Russell Vought, of Virginia,
to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Inter-American Foundation
for a term expiring September 20, 2030.
f

EXECUTIVE AND OTHER
COMMUNICATIONS
The following communications were
laid before the Senate, together with
accompanying papers, reports, and documents, and were referred as indicated:
EC–2486. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 36(c) of the Arms Export Control Act,
the certification of a proposed license
amendment for the export of defense articles, including technical data, and defense
services to Japan in the amount of $50,000,000
or more (Transmittal No. DDTC 25–090); to
the Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–2487. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 36(c) of the Arms Export Control Act,
the certification of a proposed license
amendment for the export of defense articles, including technical data, and defense

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.025

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

services to Germany in the amount of
$100,000,000 or more (Transmittal No. DDTC
25–080); to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–2488. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
section 36(c) and 36(d) of the Arms Export
Control Act, the certification of a proposed
license amendment for the manufacture of
significant military equipment abroad and
the export of defense articles, including
technical data, and defense services to Germany and the Republic of Korea in the
amount of $100,000,000 or more (Transmittal
No. DDTC 25–079); to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–2489. A communication from the Senior
Bureau Official, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘International Traffic in Arms Regulations: Exemption for Defense Trade and Cooperation
Among Australia, the United Kingdom, and
the United States’’ (RIN1400–AF84) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
EC–2490. A communication from the Deputy Assistant General Counsel, Department
of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to
law, a report relative to a vacancy, designation of an acting officer, and discontinuation
of service in an acting role for a position
covered by the Federal Vacancies Reform
Act of 1998 for the position of Inspector General, Department of the Treasury, Office of
the Inspector General (Tax Administration),
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committees on Finance; and Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs.
EC–2491. A communication from the Deputy Assistant General Counsel. Department
of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to
law, four (4) reports relative to nominations,
vacancies, designations of service in acting
roles, discontinuations of service in acting
roles and actions on nominations for positions covered by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 14, 2026;
to the Committee on Finance.
EC–2492. A communication from the United
States Trade Representative, transmitting,
pursuant to law, a six-month periodic report
on the national emergency that was declared
in Executive Order 14257 with respect to regulating imports with a reciprocal tariff to
rectify trade practices that contribute to
large and persistent annual United States
goods trade deficits; to the Committee on Finance.
EC–2493. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel, Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Allocation
of Assets in Single-Employer Plans; Valuation of Benefits and Assets; Expected Retirement Age; Missing Participants Mortality Assumption’’ (29 CFR Part 4044) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
EC–2494. A communication from the Acting
Director, Office of Workers’ Compensation
Programs, Department of Labor, transmitting, pursuant to law, Secretary of Labor’s
response to the Office of the Ombudsman’s
2024 Annual Report; to the Committee on
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
EC–2495. A communication from the Deputy Assistant General Counsel. Department
of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to
law, nine (9) reports relative to nominations,
vacancies, designations of service in acting
roles, discontinuations of service in acting
roles and actions on nominations for posi-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S255

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

tions covered by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 14, 2026;
to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and
Urban Affairs.
EC–2496. A communication from the Secretary of the Treasury, transmitting, pursuant to law, a six-month periodic report on
the national emergency that was declared in
Executive Order 14064 with respect to the
widespread humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and the potential for a deepening economic collapse in Afghanistan; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2497. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Energy Dominance
Financing Amendments’’ (RIN1901–AB72) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2498. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Application for
Presidential Permit Authorizing the Construction, Connection, Operation, and Maintenance of Facilities for Transmission of
Electric Energy at International Boundaries’’ (RIN1901–AB68) received in the Office
of the President of the Senate on January 14,
2026; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2499. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Clean Energy for
New Federal Buildings and Major Renovations of Federal Buildings; Stay’’ (RIN1904–
AB96) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2500. A communication from the Director, Office of Regulatory Oversight and Management, Department of Veterans Affairs,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Apportionments’’ (RIN2900–
AP67) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
EC–2501. A communication from the Director, Office of Regulatory Oversight and Management, Department of Veterans Affairs,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Reproductive Health Services’’ (RIN2900–AS31) received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 14,
2026; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
EC–2502. A communication from the Director, Office of Regulatory Oversight and Management, Department of Veterans Affairs,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of
a rule entitled ‘‘Servicemembers’ Group Life
Insurance Traumatic Injury Protection Program Amendments’’ (RIN2900–AS12) received
in the Office of the President of the Senate
on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on
Veterans’ Affairs.
EC–2503. A communication from the Chief
Regulatory Officer, Citizenship and Immigration Services, Department of Homeland
Security, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Adjustment to Premium Processing Fees’’ ((CIS No. 2830–25) (8
CFR Part 106)) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 14, 2026;
to the Committee on the Judiciary.
EC–2504. A communication from the Secretary of the Board of Governors, United
States Postal Service, transmitting, pursuant to law, the Board’s annual report relative to its compliance with Section 3686(c)

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

of the Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act of 2006; to the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2505. A communication from the General Counsel, Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Curing
Missed Loan Payments’’ (RIN322–AA01) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 7, 2026; to the Committee
on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2506. A communication from the Chief
of Staff, Office of Government Ethics, transmitting, pursuant to law, the Office’s Agency
Financial Report for fiscal year 2025; to the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2507. A communication from the Associate General Counsel for General Law, Office of the General Counsel. Department of
Homeland Security, transmitting, pursuant
to law, three (3) reports relative to nominations, vacancies, designations of service in
acting roles, discontinuations of service in
acting roles and actions on nominations for
positions covered by the Federal Vacancies
Reform Act of 1998, received in the Office of
the President of the Senate on January 7,
2026; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2508. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Energy Conservation Program: Final Withdrawal of Determination of Miscellaneous Gas Products as a
Covered Consumer Product’’ (RIN1904–AF70)
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2509. A communication from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of
Health and Human Services, transmitting,
pursuant to law, a report entitled ‘‘Report on
Unobligated Balances for Appropriations Relating to Quality Measurement’’; to the
Committee on Finance.
EC–2510. A communication from the Secretary of Labor, transmitting, pursuant to
law, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation’s Office of Inspector General’s Semiannual Report to Congress and the Pension
Benefit Guaranty Corporation Management’s
Response for the period from April 1, 2025
through September 30, 2025; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2511. A communication from the Commissioner, Federal Maritime Commission,
transmitting, pursuant to law, the Commission’s Performance and Accountability Report for fiscal year 2025; to the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
EC–2512. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Implementing Voluntary Agreements Under the Defense Production Act’’ (RIN1901–AB73) received in the
Office of the President of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs.
EC–2513. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Nondiscrimination
on the Basis of Sex in Sports Programs Arising Out of Federal Financial Assistance’’
(RIN1903–AA25) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on January 14, 2026;
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.019

S15JAPT1

S256

EC–2514. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Energy Conservation Program: Energy Conservation Standards and Test Procedures for Certain Consumer Products and Commercial Equipment
Corrections’’ (Docket No. EERE–2023–BT–
CE–0001) received in the Office of the President of Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2515. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Energy Conservation Program: Test Procedure for Central
Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps’’ (RIN1904–
AF49) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2516. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Repeal of the Definition of Showerhead’’ (RIN1904–AF75) received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on January 14, 2026; to the Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2517. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Procedures for Acquisition of Petroleum for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve’’ (RIN1901–AB66) received in
the Office of the President of the Senate on
January 14, 2026; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
EC–2518. A communication from the Assistant General Counsel for Legislation, Regulation, and Energy Efficiency, Department of
Energy, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Amending the Administrative Procedures With Respect to the
Import and Export of Natural Gas’’ (RIN1901–
AB67) received in the Office of the President
of the Senate on January 14, 2026; to the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

EXECUTIVE REPORTS OF
COMMITTEE
The following executive reports of
nominations were submitted:
By Mr. GRASSLEY for the Committee on
the Judiciary.
Daniel E. Burrows, of Colorado, to be an
Assistant Attorney General.
Megan Blair Benton, of Missouri, to be
United States District Judge for the Western
District of Missouri.
David Clay Fowlkes, of Arkansas, to be
United States District Judge for the Western
District of Arkansas.
Nicholas Jon Ganjei, of Texas, to be United
States District Judge for the Southern District of Texas.
Brian Charles Lea, of Tennessee, to be
United States District Judge for the Western
District of Tennessee.
Justin R. Olson, of Indiana, to be United
States District Judge for the Southern District of Indiana.
Aaron Christian Peterson, of Alaska, to be
United States District Judge for the District
of Alaska.
Andrew Benson, of Maine, to be United
States Attorney for the District of Maine for
the term of four years.
William Boyle, of North Carolina, to be
United States Attorney for the Eastern Dis-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

trict of North Carolina for the term of four
years.
Kevin Holmes, of Arkansas, to be United
States Attorney for the Western District of
Arkansas for the term of four years.
Brian David Miller, of Pennsylvania, to be
United States Attorney for the Middle District of Pennsylvania for the term of four
years.
Richard Price, of Missouri, to be United
States Attorney for the Western District of
Missouri for the term of four years.
Darin Smith, of Wyoming, to be United
States Attorney for the District of Wyoming
for the term of four years.

(Nominations without an asterisk
were reported with the recommendation that they be confirmed.)
f

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND
JOINT RESOLUTIONS
The following bills and joint resolutions were introduced, read the first
and second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated:
By Mr. MORAN:
S. 3647. A bill to require the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs to establish a program to
address bowel and bladder care needs for veterans with spinal cord injuries and disorders,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. LEE:
S. 3648. A bill to amend title II of the Social Security Act to allow disabled individuals with incurable terminal illnesses listed
on the Compassionate Allowance list to receive disability insurance benefits without a
waiting period, to prohibit concurrent receipt of disability insurance benefits and unemployment insurance, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mrs. MOODY (for herself and Mrs.
GILLIBRAND):
S. 3649. A bill to amend chapter 131 of title
5 to prohibit Members of Congress and their
spouses and dependents from owning or trading stocks, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mrs. MOODY (for herself, Mr.
RISCH, Mr. LANKFORD, Mr. DAINES,
Mrs. FISCHER, Mr. CASSIDY, Mr. KENNEDY,
Mr.
CRAMER,
and
Mr.
RICKETTS):
S. 3650. A bill to amend title 18, United
States Code, to prohibit taking minors
across State lines in circumvention of laws
requiring the involvement of parents in abortion decisions; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. BUDD (for himself and Mrs.
SHAHEEN):
S. 3651. A bill to amend title 18, United
States Code, to prohibit doxing of special operations personnel, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. COTTON:
S. 3652. A bill to enhance criminal penalties for welfare fraud, to provide adequate
immigration consequences for fraud convictions, to establish a welfare fraud recovery
task force, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mrs. BLACKBURN (for herself, Mr.
Mr.
TILLIS,
and
Mr.
SHEEHY,
TUBERVILLE):
S. 3653. A bill to require the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs to carry out efforts to inform veterans of their rights with regards to
the receipt of health care, benefits, and services furnished under provisions of law administered by the Secretary, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

By Mr. BLUMENTHAL (for himself,
Mr. SHEEHY, Ms. ERNST, and Ms.
HIRONO):
S. 3654. A bill to improve housing and environmental health and safety protections for
members of the Armed Forces and their families residing in military family housing, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Armed Services.
By Mr. MERKLEY (for himself, Mr.
SULLIVAN, Mr. CURTIS, and Mr.
KAINE):
S. 3655. A bill to require the President to
remove the extension of certain privileges,
exemptions, and immunities to the Hong
Kong Economic and Trade Offices if Hong
Kong no longer enjoys a high degree of autonomy from the People’s Republic of China,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
By Mrs. FISCHER (for herself and Mr.
RICKETTS):
S. 3656. A bill to designate the portion of
Interstate Route 680 in Omaha, Nebraska, as
the ‘‘Hal Daub Freeway’’; to the Committee
on Environment and Public Works.
By Ms. CORTEZ MASTO (for herself
and Mrs. BLACKBURN):
S. 3657. A bill to modify the procedures
used by the United States Postal Service for
the closure or consolidation of any post office or any processing and distribution center, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mr. BLUMENTHAL (for himself,
Mr. MURPHY, and Ms. WARREN):
S. 3658. A bill to support healthy fisheries
in dynamic ocean conditions, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
By Mrs. SHAHEEN (for herself, Mr.
YOUNG, Mr. ROUNDS, and Ms. CORTEZ
MASTO):
S. 3659. A bill to establish a Strategic Resilience Reserve of the United States, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources.
By Mr. FETTERMAN (for himself, Mr.
BOOKER, and Ms. BALDWIN):
S. 3660. A bill to amend the Truth in Lending Act to reduce excessive credit card late
fees, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER (for herself and Mr. MCCORMICK):
S. 3661. A bill to increase access to higher
education and center-based Head Start programs by providing public transit grants; to
the Committee on Banking, Housing, and
Urban Affairs.
By Mr. MCCORMICK (for himself and
Mr. KIM):
S. 3662. A bill to amend the Securities Act
of 1933 to raise the offering amount threshold
for when issuers using the crowdfunding exemption are required to file financial statements reviewed by a public accountant who
is independent of the issuer, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs.
By Mr. COONS (for himself and Mr.
LEE):
S. 3663. A bill to amend title 18, United
States Code, to modify delayed notice requirements, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on the Judiciary.
By Ms. DUCKWORTH (for herself and
Mr. BOOKER):
S. 3664. A bill to require the Bureau of Prisons to submit to Congress an annual summary report of disaster damage, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Ms. DUCKWORTH (for herself and
Mr. HOEVEN):

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.021

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

S. 3665. A bill to prosecute, as a Federal
crime, the assault or intimidation of a passenger train crew member in a manner consistent with the prosecution of assault or intimidation of an aircraft crew member; to
the Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
By Mrs. GILLIBRAND (for herself and
Mr. SCHUMER):
S. 3666. A bill to reauthorize the West Valley demonstration project; to the Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mr. ROUNDS (for himself, Mrs.
Mr.
KENNEDY,
Mr.
BLACKBURN,
Mr.
TUBERVILLE,
Mr.
WICKER,
CRAMER, Mr. HAGERTY, Mr. CRAPO,
Mr. BANKS, Mr. HOEVEN, and Mr.
DAINES):
S. 3667. A bill to implement equal protection under the 14th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States for the right
to life of each born and preborn human person; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MURPHY:
S. 3668. A bill to direct the United States
Postal Service to designate a single, unique
ZIP Code for Scotland, Connecticut; to the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mr. SCHIFF (for himself, Ms.
ALSOBROOKS, Mr. BOOKER, and Mr.
PADILLA):
S. 3669. A bill to amend the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act to establish
a pilot program to award grants to school
food authorities to provide 100 percent plantbased food and milk options, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition, and Forestry.
By Mr. PAUL (for himself, Mr. CASSIDY, and Ms. LUMMIS):
S. 3670. A bill to prohibit the use of funds
to provide benefits to refugees, asylees, and
illegal immigrants; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. DAINES (for himself and Mr.
ROUNDS):
S. 3671. A bill to amend the Investment
Company Act of 1940 with respect to the authority of closed-end companies to invest in
private funds, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs.
By Mr. KIM (for himself, Mr. WICKER,
Mr. PADILLA, and Mr. CORNYN):
S. 3672. A bill to amend title 51, United
States Code, to authorize the Administrator
of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to conduct a public-private talent program, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation.
By Mr. MERKLEY (for himself and Mr.
ROUNDS):
S. 3673. A bill to amend title 23, United
States Code, to improve and reauthorize the
pollinator-friendly practices on roadside
highways and rights-of-way program, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
By Mr. SCHMITT:
S. 3674. A bill to expand and clarify the
grounds for civil denaturalization proceedings for individuals who have defrauded
a governmental program, joined a terrorist
organization, or committed certain criminal
offenses; read the first time.
By Mr. CORNYN (for himself, Mr. GRAHAM, Mr. HAGERTY, Mr. LANKFORD,
Ms. LUMMIS, Mr. MULLIN, and Mr.
DAINES):
S. 3675. A bill to amend title 18, United
States Code, to protect U.S . Immigration
and Customs Enforcement agents, as well as
other Federal law enforcement officers, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on the
Judiciary.
By Ms. ROSEN (for herself, Mr. YOUNG,
Mr. PADILLA, and Mr. CURTIS):

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S257

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

S. 3676. A bill to require a sports diplomacy
strategy to strategically leverage the major
sporting events being hosted in the United
States during the next decade to enhance
United States soft power, diplomatic relationships, and global leadership, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Foreign
Relations.
By Mr. DURBIN:
S. 3677. A bill to improve transparency and
the availability of information regarding dietary supplements by amending the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to require
manufacturers of dietary supplements to list
dietary supplements with the Food and Drug
Administration; to the Committee on
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
By Mr. WICKER (for himself and Ms.
KLOBUCHAR):
S. 3678. A bill to modify the Intercountry
Adoption Act of 2000 to provide a limited accreditation option for performing certain
adoption services; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
By Mr. BUDD (for himself, Mrs. BLACKBURN, Mrs. MOODY, Mr. COTTON, Mr.
BANKS, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. LANKFORD,
and Mr. CRUZ):
S. 3679. A bill to amend the Immigration
and Nationality Act to restrict visa issuance
to individuals who have directed, authorized,
significantly supported, participated in, or
carried out violations of religious freedom;
to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MARKEY (for himself, Mr.
MERKLEY, Mr. WELCH, Ms. WARREN,
Mr. SCHIFF, Mr. WYDEN, and Mr.
BOOKER):
S. 3680. A bill to require agencies that use,
fund, or oversee algorithms to have an office
of civil rights focused on bias, discrimination, and other harms of algorithms, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mr. SCOTT of Florida (for himself
and Mr. JUSTICE):
S. 3681. A bill to provide for continuing appropriations for certain employees and contractors of U.S. Customs and Border Protection and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement in the event of a Government
shutdown; to the Committee on Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mr. VAN HOLLEN (for himself, Mr.
DURBIN, Mr. BLUMENTHAL, Mr. BOOKER, Ms. DUCKWORTH, Ms. SMITH, Mr.
WELCH, and Ms. ALSOBROOKS):
S. 3682. A bill to promote the creation of
data center load queues and data center-specific rate classes to mitigate the impact of
data centers on other electricity consumers,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mr. KELLY (for himself and Mr.
GALLEGO):
S. 3683. A bill to establish clear standards,
training requirements, and reporting relating to immigration enforcement personnel;
to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Ms. MURKOWSKI (for herself and
Mr. WYDEN):
S. 3684. A bill to amend the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 to reauthorize water power research, development,
demonstration, and commercial application
activities, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
By Mr. BENNET (for himself, Mr.
WELCH, Mr. KAINE, Mr. VAN HOLLEN,
Mr. REED, Mr. HICKENLOOPER, and Mr.
SCHIFF):
S. 3685. A bill to prohibit appropriations of
funds for the payment of reimbursements for
capital expenditures in the oil and gas sector, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

By Ms. KLOBUCHAR (for herself, Mr.
PAUL, and Mr. MERKLEY):
S. 3686. A bill to amend the Agriculture,
Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agency Appropriations
Act, 2026, to delay the implementation of
amendments made by that Act to the hemp
production provisions of the Agricultural
Marketing Act of 1946; to the Committee on
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.
By Ms. DUCKWORTH (for herself, Mr.
Mr.
BLUMENTHAL,
Mr.
DURBIN,
SCHIFF, Mrs. GILLIBRAND, and Mr.
WELCH):
S. 3687. A bill to amend title 5, United
States Code, to prohibit the appointment of
political appointees as Inspectors General,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
By Mr. SULLIVAN:
S. 3688. A bill to amend title XVIII of the
Social Security Act to increase the floor for
the practice expense and work geographic indices for certain areas; to the Committee on
Finance.
f

SUBMISSION OF CONCURRENT AND
SENATE RESOLUTIONS
The following concurrent resolutions
and Senate resolutions were read, and
referred (or acted upon), as indicated:
By Mr. MERKLEY:
S. Res. 583. A resolution recognizing 2026 as
‘‘The Year of The Power of Nurses’’ in Celebration of the 130th Anniversary of the
American Nurses Association; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions.
By Mr. WARNOCK (for himself and Mr.
SCOTT of South Carolina):
S. Res. 584. A resolution honoring the life
and legacy of Reverend Richard Smallwood,
a world-class composer, pianist, and arranger; considered and agreed to.
By Mr. BENNET (for himself, Mr.
HICKENLOOPER, Mr. THUNE, Mr. SCHUMER, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, Ms. BALDWIN,
Mr. BANKS, Mr. BARRASSO, Mrs.
BLACKBURN, Mr. BLUMENTHAL, Ms.
BLUNT ROCHESTER, Mr. BOOKER, Mr.
BOOZMAN, Mrs. BRITT, Mr. BUDD, Ms.
CANTWELL, Mrs. CAPITO, Mr. CASSIDY,
Ms. COLLINS, Mr. COONS, Mr. CORNYN,
Ms. CORTEZ MASTO, Mr. COTTON, Mr.
CRAMER, Mr. CRAPO, Mr. CRUZ, Mr.
CURTIS, Mr. DAINES, Ms. DUCKWORTH,
Ms.
ERNST,
Mr.
Mr.
DURBIN,
Mrs.
FISCHER,
Mr.
FETTERMAN,
GALLEGO, Mrs. GILLIBRAND, Mr. GRAHAM, Mr. GRASSLEY, Mr. HAGERTY,
Ms. HASSAN, Mr. HAWLEY, Mr. HEINRICH, Ms. HIRONO, Mr. HOEVEN, Mr.
HUSTED, Mrs. HYDE-SMITH, Mr. JOHNSON, Mr. JUSTICE, Mr. KAINE, Mr.
KELLY, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. KIM, Mr.
KING, Ms. KLOBUCHAR, Mr. LANKFORD,
Mr. LEE, Mr. LUJÁN, Ms. LUMMIS, Mr.
MARKEY, Mr. MARSHALL, Mr. MCCONNELL, Mr. MCCORMICK, Mr. MERKLEY,
Mr.
MORAN,
Mr.
Mrs.
MOODY,
MORENO, Mr. MULLIN, Ms. MURKOWSKI, Mr. MURPHY, Mrs. MURRAY,
Mr. OSSOFF, Mr. PADILLA, Mr. PAUL,
Mr. PETERS, Mr. REED, Mr. RICKETTS,
Mr. RISCH, Ms. ROSEN, Mr. ROUNDS,
Mr. SANDERS, Mr. SCHATZ, Mr.
SCHIFF, Mr. SCHMITT, Mr. SCOTT of
Florida, Mr. SCOTT of South Carolina,
Mrs. SHAHEEN, Mr. SHEEHY, Ms.
SLOTKIN, Ms. SMITH, Mr. SULLIVAN,
Mr. TILLIS, Mr. TUBERVILLE, Mr. VAN
HOLLEN, Mr. WARNER, Mr. WARNOCK,
Ms. WARREN, Mr. WELCH, Mr. WHITEHOUSE, Mr. WICKER, Mr. WYDEN, and
Mr. YOUNG):

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.024

S15JAPT1

S258

S. Res. 585. A resolution honoring the life,
achievements, and legacy of Ben Nighthorse
Campbell; considered and agreed to.
By Mr. GALLEGO (for himself and Ms.
MURKOWSKI):
S. Con. Res. 26. A concurrent resolution affirming the partnership between the United
States and Denmark and Greenland; to the
Committee on Foreign Relations.
f

ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS
S. 128

At the request of Mr. LEE, the name
of the Senator from South Dakota (Mr.
ROUNDS) was added as a cosponsor of S.
128, a bill to amend the National Voter
Registration Act of 1993 to require
proof of United States citizenship to
register an individual to vote in elections for Federal office, and for other
purposes.
S. 455

At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL,
the name of the Senator from New
Hampshire (Mrs. SHAHEEN) was added
as a cosponsor of S. 455, a bill to amend
section 287 of the Immigration and Nationality Act to limit immigration enforcement actions at sensitive locations, to clarify the powers of immigration officers at sensitive locations, and
for other purposes.
S. 749

At the request of Ms. MURKOWSKI, the
names of the Senator from Wisconsin
(Ms. BALDWIN) and the Senator from
Colorado (Mr. HICKENLOOPER) were
added as cosponsors of S. 749, a bill to
amend title 38, United States Code, to
extend increased dependency and indemnity compensation paid to surviving spouses of veterans who die from
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, regardless of how long the veterans had such
disease prior to death, and for other
purposes.
S. 921

At the request of Mr. BANKS, the
names of the Senator from Florida
(Mrs. MOODY) and the Senator from
Alabama (Mr. TUBERVILLE) were added
as cosponsors of S. 921, a bill to direct
the Secretary of Health and Human
Services to issue guidance on whether
hospital
emergency
departments
should implement fentanyl testing as a
routine procedure for patients experiencing an overdose, and for other purposes.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S. 1562

At the request of Mr. BENNET, the
names of the Senator from Delaware
(Mr. COONS), the Senator from New
Mexico (Mr. LUJÁN), the Senator from
New York (Mrs. GILLIBRAND), the Senator from Montana (Mr. DAINES), the
Senator from West Virginia (Mrs. CAPITO) and the Senator from Mississippi
(Mrs. HYDE-SMITH) were added as cosponsors of S. 1562, a bill to reauthorize
the Prematurity Research Expansion
and Education for Mothers who deliver
Infants Early Act.
S. 1572

At the request of Mrs. BLACKBURN,
the name of the Senator from Tennessee (Mr. HAGERTY) was added as a

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

cosponsor of S. 1572, a bill to amend
title 18, United States Code, to improve
the Federal carjacking statute.
S. 1763

At the request of Mr. YOUNG, the
name of the Senator from Delaware
(Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER) was added as a
cosponsor of S. 1763, a bill to amend the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to make
permanent the 7-year recovery period
for motorsports entertainment complexes.
S. 2132

At the request of Mr. CORNYN, the
name of the Senator from Delaware
(Mr. COONS) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2132, a bill to amend title 18,
United States Code, to prevent and
mitigate the potential for conflicts of
interest following government service,
and for other purposes.
S. 2355

At the request of Mr. MARSHALL, the
name of the Senator from Michigan
(Mr. PETERS) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2355, a bill to amend the Public
Health Service Act to provide for hospital and insurer price transparency.
S. 2461

At the request of Mr. DAINES, the
names of the Senator from Nebraska
(Mrs. FISCHER) and the Senator from
Rhode Island (Mr. REED) were added as
cosponsors of S. 2461, a bill to amend
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and
the Small Business Act to expand the
availability of employee stock ownership plans in S corporations, and for
other purposes.
S. 2612

At the request of Mr. JUSTICE, the
name of the Senator from Maryland
(Ms. ALSOBROOKS) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2612, a bill to amend title
XVIII of the Social Security Act to include physical therapists and occupational therapists as health professionals for purposes of the annual
wellness visit under the Medicare program, and for other purposes.
S. 2761

At the request of Mr. TILLIS, the
names of the Senator from Indiana
(Mr. BANKS) and the Senator from California (Mr. PADILLA) were added as cosponsors of S. 2761, a bill to amend title
XVIII of the Social Security Act to
provide long-term stability for Medicare beneficiary access to clinical diagnostic laboratory tests by improving
the accuracy of, and feasibility of data
collection for, the private payor-based
fee schedule payment rates applied
under the Medicare program for such
tests, and for other purposes.
S. 2840

At the request of Mr. HAGERTY, the
name of the Senator from Illinois (Ms.
DUCKWORTH) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 2840, a bill to amend the Investment Company Act of 1940 to postpone
the date of payment or satisfaction
upon redemption of certain securities
in the case of the financial exploitation
of specified adults, and for other purposes.

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

S. 3179

At the request of Mrs. MOODY, the
names of the Senator from Alabama
(Mr. TUBERVILLE) and the Senator from
Kansas (Mr. MARSHALL) were added as
cosponsors of S. 3179, a bill to amend
title 18, United States Code, to establish a criminal penalty for obstructing
immigration enforcement activities.
S. 3185

At the request of Mr. WARNOCK, the
name of the Senator from Georgia (Mr.
OSSOFF) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3185, a bill to amend title 10, United
States Code, to require the Secretary
of Defense to provide information on
relocation assistance programs when a
member of the Armed Forces receives
orders for a change of permanent station, and for other purposes.
S. 3187

At the request of Mr. WHITEHOUSE,
the name of the Senator from California (Mr. SCHIFF) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3187, a bill to provide a
civil remedy for an individual whose
rights have been violated by a person
acting under Federal authority, and for
other purposes.
S. 3302

At the request of Mr. MULLIN, the
names of the Senator from New Mexico
(Mr. HEINRICH), the Senator from Indiana (Mr. BANKS) and the Senator from
Pennsylvania (Mr. MCCORMICK) were
added as cosponsors of S. 3302, a bill to
amend the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act with respect to molecularly targeted pediatric cancer investigations, and for other purposes.
S. 3583

At the request of Mr. HUSTED, the
name of the Senator from Iowa (Ms.
ERNST) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3583, a bill to establish a pilot program
in which States may use consolidated
funds,
through
Upward
Mobility
Grants, for antipoverty programs, and
for other purposes.
S. 3616

At the request of Ms. CORTEZ MASTO,
the name of the Senator from Nebraska
(Mr. RICKETTS) was added as a cosponsor of S. 3616, a bill to provide the National Credit Union Administration
Board flexibility to increase Federal
credit union loan maturities, and for
other purposes.
S. 3627

At the request of Mrs. MOODY, the
names of the Senator from Oklahoma
(Mr. MULLIN), the Senator from Texas
(Mr. CRUZ) and the Senator from West
Virginia (Mr. JUSTICE) were added as
cosponsors of S. 3627, a bill to require
institutions of higher education to disseminate information on the rights of,
and accommodations and resources for,
pregnant students, and for other purposes.
S. 3644

At the request of Mr. CORNYN, the
name of the Senator from Florida (Mrs.
MOODY) was added as a cosponsor of S.
3644, a bill to amend the Child Care and
Development Block Grant Act of 1990

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.026

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

to debar child care providers who commit fraud from receiving certain financial assistance, and for other purposes.
AMENDMENT NO. 4153

At the request of Mr. HICKENLOOPER,
the name of the Senator from Illinois
(Mr. DURBIN) was added as a cosponsor
of amendment No. 4153 intended to be
proposed to H.R. 6938, a bill making
consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and
for other purposes.
AMENDMENT NO. 4188

At the request of Mr. SCHIFF, the
name of the Senator from Virginia (Mr.
KAINE) was added as a cosponsor of
amendment No. 4188 intended to be proposed to H.R. 6938, a bill making consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes.
f

STATEMENTS ON INTRODUCED
BILLS AND JOINT RESOLUTIONS
By Mr. DURBIN:
S. 3677. A bill to improve transparency and the availability of information regarding dietary supplements
by amending the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act to require manufacturers of dietary supplements to list dietary supplements with the Food and
Drug Administration; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor,
and Pensions.
S. 3677
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Dietary Supplement Listing Act of 2026’’.
SEC. 2. REGULATION OF DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Chapter IV of the Federal

Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 341
et seq.) is amended by adding after section
403C of such Act (21 U.S.C. 343–3) the following:

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

‘‘SEC. 403D. DIETARY SUPPLEMENT LISTING REQUIREMENT.
‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—Beginning on the date

specified in subsection (b)(4), each dietary
supplement marketed in the United States
shall be listed with the Secretary in accordance with this section. Each such listing
shall include, with respect to the dietary
supplement, the information specified in
subsection (b)(1).
‘‘(b) REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—The manufacturer, packer, or distributor of a dietary supplement
whose name (pursuant to section 403(e)(1))
appears on the label of a dietary supplement
marketed in the United States (referred to in
this section as the ‘responsible person’), or if
the responsible person is a foreign entity,
the United States agent of such person, shall
submit to the Secretary in accordance with
this section the following information for a
dietary supplement that is marketed in the
United States:
‘‘(A) Any name of the dietary supplement
and the statement of identity, including
brand name and specified flavors, if applicable.
‘‘(B) The name and address of the responsible person and the name and email address
of the owner, operator, or agent in charge of
the responsible person.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S259

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

‘‘(C) The name, domestic address, and
email address for the United States agent, if
the responsible person is a foreign entity.
‘‘(D) The business name and place of business the responsible person provided on the
label pursuant to section 403(e)(1).
‘‘(E) An electronic copy of the label for the
dietary supplement.
‘‘(F) A list of all ingredients in each such
dietary supplement required under sections
101.4 and 101.36, title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulations), to
appear on the label of a dietary supplement,
including—
‘‘(i) where applicable, ingredients in a proprietary blend as described in section
101.36(c) of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulations);
‘‘(ii) the amount per serving of each listed
dietary ingredient;
‘‘(iii) if required by section 101.36 of title
21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulations), the percent of the daily
value of each listed dietary ingredient; and
‘‘(iv) the amount per serving of dietary ingredients within a proprietary blend (which
shall remain confidential and not subject to
public disclosure).
‘‘(G) The number of servings per container
for each container size.
‘‘(H) The directions for use.
‘‘(I) Warnings, notice, and safe handling
statements, as required by section 101.17 of
title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any
successor regulations).
‘‘(J) Allergen statements for major food allergens (pursuant to sections 403(w) and
403(x)).
‘‘(K) The form of the dietary supplement
(such as tablets, capsules, powders, liquids,
softgels, and gummies).
‘‘(L) Any claim that appears on the label
or package insert that—
‘‘(i) characterizes the relationship of any
ingredient to a disease or a health-related
condition and is described in section
403(r)(1)(B); or
‘‘(ii) is subject to notification under section 403(r)(6), provided that no additional
listing or change to listing information is required under this paragraph for any minor
variation or modification to a claim for
which notification under section 403(r)(6) is
not required.
‘‘(M) The dietary supplement product listing number for the dietary supplement provided by the Secretary in accordance with
subsection (c).
‘‘(2) FORMAT; NOTIFICATION OF RECEIPT.—
‘‘(A) FORMAT.—The Secretary may require
that a listing submitted under paragraph (1)
be submitted in an electronic format.
‘‘(B) NOTIFICATION OF RECEIPT.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—Upon receipt of a listing
under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall
promptly notify the responsible person of—
‘‘(I) the receipt of a complete listing; or
‘‘(II) the receipt of a listing that is not
complete, together with a statement describing the reasons why the listing is not complete.
‘‘(ii) COMPLETE RECEIPTS DESCRIBED.—A
listing under paragraph (1) is deemed complete once all fields of required information
have been completed by the responsible person who represents that the product will be
marketed in the United States as a dietary
supplement.
‘‘(3) LISTING CONTENT.—A single listing submission for a dietary supplement under paragraph (1) may include multiple dietary supplements with identical formulations and
forms, or formulations of the same form,
that differ only with respect to color,
excipients, or flavorings, whether offered in
a single package size or in multiple package
sizes.
‘‘(4) TIMING.—

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—
‘‘(i) DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS ON THE MARKET.—In the case of a dietary supplement
that is being offered in interstate commerce
on or before January 1, 2027, a listing for
each such dietary supplement introduced or
delivered for introduction into interstate
commerce shall be submitted by the responsible person to the Secretary under this subsection not later than 18 months after the
date of enactment of the Dietary Supplement Listing Act of 2026.
‘‘(ii) NEW DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS.—In the
case of a dietary supplement that is not
being offered in interstate commerce on or
before January 1, 2027, a listing for each such
dietary supplement introduced or delivered
for introduction into interstate commerce
that has not been included in any listing previously submitted by the responsible person
to the Secretary under this subsection shall
be submitted to the Secretary at the time of
introduction into interstate commerce.
‘‘(B)
DISCONTINUED
DIETARY
SUPPLEMENTS.—The responsible person shall notify
the Secretary not later than 1 year after the
date the responsible person discontinues the
introduction into interstate commerce of a
dietary supplement required to be listed with
the Secretary under paragraph (1).
‘‘(C) CHANGES TO EXISTING LISTINGS.—The
responsible person shall submit to the Secretary any change or modification to listing
information submitted under paragraph (1)
included on the label of a dietary supplement
not later than 30 days after the dietary supplement with the change or modification is
first introduced into interstate commerce.
‘‘(5) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.—The responsible person shall provide, upon request from
the Secretary, not later than 10 calendar
days after such request—
‘‘(A) the full business name and physical
and mailing address of all locations at which
the responsible person manufactures, packages, labels, or holds the dietary supplement;
and
‘‘(B) the full business name and physical
and mailing address from which the responsible person receives a dietary ingredient or
combination of dietary ingredients that the
responsible person uses in the manufacture
of the dietary supplement or, if applicable,
from which the responsible person receives
the dietary supplement.
‘‘(c) PRODUCT LISTING NUMBER AND DIETARY
SUPPLEMENT ELECTRONIC DATABASE.—
‘‘(1) DIETARY SUPPLEMENT PRODUCT LISTING
NUMBER.—The Secretary shall provide each
dietary supplement listed in accordance with
subsection (b)(1) a dietary supplement product listing number, which may apply to multiple dietary supplements with identical formulations, or formulations that differ only
with respect to color, excipients, or
flavorings, including dietary supplements offered in a single package size or in multiple
package sizes. The Secretary shall provide a
process for a responsible person to reserve dietary supplement listing numbers in advance
of listing under subsection (b)(1).
‘‘(2) ELECTRONIC DATABASE.—Not later than
2 years after the date of enactment of the Dietary Supplement Listing Act of 2026, the
Secretary shall establish and maintain an
electronic database that is publicly available
and contains information submitted under
subsection (b)(1) (except for the information
submitted under subparagraph (B), (C), and
(F)(iv) of such subsection). The Secretary
shall make such information maintained in
the electronic database publicly searchable,
including by dietary supplement product
listing number, and by any field of information or combination of fields of information
provided under subsection (b)(1) (except for

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.039

S15JAPT1

S260

the information submitted under subparagraph (B), (C), and (F)(iv) of such subsection).
‘‘(3) CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.—In response to a request under section 552 of title
5, United States Code, information described
in subparagraph (B), (C), and (F)(iv) of subsection (b)(1) that is derived from a listing
under this section, and information described in subparagraph (b)(5), shall be withheld under section 552(b)(3) of title 5, United
States Code.
‘‘(d) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this section shall be construed—
‘‘(1) to limit the authority of the Secretary
to inspect or copy records or to require the
establishment and maintenance of records
under any other provision of this Act;
‘‘(2) to authorize the disclosure of information that is prohibited from disclosure under
section 301(j) of this Act or section 1905 of
title 18, United States Code, or that is subject to withholding under section 552(b)(4) of
title 5, United States Code;
‘‘(3) to authorize or permit the release in
the public database, or to make subject to
disclosure under section 552 of title 5, United
States Code, information that discloses the
identity or location of a specific registered
person or facility not identified on the label,
or the quantity of any individual ingredients
in a proprietary blend; or
‘‘(4) to grant the Secretary authority to require the approval of a dietary supplement
prior to marketing.
‘‘(e) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
There is authorized to be appropriated
$7,872,984 for fiscal year 2026, and $6,615,000
for each of fiscal years 2027 through 2030, for
purposes of conducting the activities under
this section and hiring personnel required to
carry out this section.’’.
(b) MISBRANDING.—Section 403 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C.
343) is amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(z) If it is a dietary supplement for which
a responsible person or the United States
agent of such a person is required under section 403D to file a listing, file a change to an
existing listing, or provide additional information to the Secretary, and such person or
agent has failed to comply with any such requirements under section 403D with respect
to such dietary supplement.’’.
(c) NEW PROHIBITED ACT.—Section 301 of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. 331) is amended by adding at the
end the following:
‘‘(jjj) The introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate commerce of a dietary supplement that has been prepared,
packed, or held using the assistance of, or at
the direction of, a person debarred under section 306.’’.
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SUBMITTED RESOLUTIONS
SENATE RESOLUTION 583—RECOGNIZING 2026 AS ‘‘THE YEAR OF
THE POWER OF NURSES’’ IN
CELEBRATION OF THE 130TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE AMERICAN
NURSES ASSOCIATION
Mr. MERKLEY submitted the following resolution; which was referred
to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions:
S. RES. 583
Whereas nurses represent the largest segment of the healthcare workforce in the
United States, serving as the backbone of
our healthcare system and as trusted profes-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

sionals who protect, educate, heal, and advocate for patients and communities across
every setting of care;
Whereas the American Nurses Association,
founded in 1896, has stood as the unified
voice for the nation’s nurses for 130 years,
advancing the profession through advocacy,
education, and standards that safeguard the
health, safety, and well-being of the country;
Whereas, for more than a century, nurses
have been on the frontlines of every major
health challenge, demonstrating extraordinary skill, courage, and resilience whether
responding to pandemics, delivering primary
care, conducting groundbreaking research,
leading public health efforts, educating the
next generation, or shaping health policy;
Whereas The Power of Nurses represents
the enduring strength, leadership, and expertise of nurses, reflecting their role as caretakers, clinicians, innovators, educators,
mentors, and changemakers who expand access to care and improve patient outcomes
for all;
Whereas the year 2026 marks a momentous
milestone, the 130th Anniversary of the
American Nurses Association, providing an
opportunity to honor the nursing profession’s rich legacy, recognize the countless
ways nurses advance health and healing, and
reaffirm their essential role in sustaining
the well-being of our country; and
Whereas it is fitting that we dedicate the
year 2026 to celebrating and recognizing The
Power of Nurses, honoring their compassion,
expertise, and unwavering commitment to
improving lives and shaping a healthier future for us all: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) recognizes 2026 as ‘‘The Year of The
Power of Nurses’’ in recognition of the 130th
Anniversary of the American Nurses Association; and
(2) honors the extraordinary contributions
of nurses to the health, safety, and prosperity of the United States of America.
f

SENATE
RESOLUTION
584—HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF
REVEREND
RICHARD
SMALLWOOD, A WORLD-CLASS
COMPOSER, PIANIST, AND ARRANGER
Mr. WARNOCK (for himself and Mr.
SCOTT of South Carolina) submitted
the following resolution; which was
considered and agreed to:
S. RES. 584
Whereas Reverend Richard Smallwood was
born on November 30, 1948, in Atlanta, Georgia;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood was musically gifted from a young age, began playing
the piano by ear at age 5, formally trained at
age 7, and formed his first choir at age 11;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood graduated
from Howard University cum laude with degrees in classical vocal performance and
piano and co-founded the Celestials, the university’s first gospel choir;
Whereas,
after
college,
Reverend
Smallwood taught music at the University of
Maryland, at the Washington School of
Music, and for the District of Columbia Public School System;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood released his
first album in 1974, entitled, ‘‘Look Up and
Live,’’ and his second album in 1976, entitled,
‘‘Give Us Peace’’;
Whereas, in 1977, the Richard Smallwood
Singers were formed and brought a contemporary sound to gospel music;
Whereas, in 1982, the Richard Smallwood
Singers’ self-titled album was on Billboard

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

magazine’s chart for top gospel albums for 87
weeks;
Whereas, in 1984, the album ‘‘Psalms’’ by
the Richard Smallwood Singers topped the
gospel albums chart and earned the group
their first Grammy nomination for Best Soul
Gospel Performance by a Duo or Group;
Whereas, in 1996, the album ‘‘Adoration:
Live in Atlanta’’ was released and featured
‘‘Total Praise,’’ which became one of Reverend Smallwood’s signature compositions
and defined his career;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood is also
known for his song ‘‘I Love the Lord,’’ which
was sung by Whitney Houston and debuted in
the 1996 movie ‘‘The Preacher’s Wife’’;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood is also
known for the songs ‘‘Center of My Joy,’’
‘‘My Everything,’’ and ‘‘I Will Sing Praises’’;
Whereas many of Reverend Smallwood’s
songs were recorded and performed by other
artists, notably Stevie Wonder, Whitney
Houston, Destiny’s Child, Yolanda Adams,
Karen Clark Sheard, Edwin Hawkins, Chaka
Kahn, Kelly Price, Ledisi, Gerald Levert,
Reuben Studdard, and Aretha Franklin;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood was nominated for 8 Grammy Awards and received 3
Dove Awards from the Gospel Music Association;
Whereas, on separate occasions, Reverend
Smallwood performed for former President
Richard Nixon, former President Ronald
Reagan, and former President William Clinton;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood was ordained as a minister at the District of Columbia’s historic Metropolitan Baptist
Church in 2004, the same year he completed
his Master of Divinity degree at Howard University;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood served as an
artist-in-residence at Metropolitan Baptist
Church, following his ordination and
throughout his ministry;
Whereas, in 2006, Reverend Smallwood was
inducted into the Gospel Music Hall of Fame;
Whereas, in November 2019, Reverend
Smallwood released a book entitled, ‘‘Total
Praise: The Autobiography of Richard
Smallwood’’;
Whereas, in 2024, the National Symphony
Orchestra held a 2-day celebration of his 75th
birthday at the Kennedy Center;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood’s musical
virtuoso continues to inspire listeners and is
rooted deeply in faith-based worship that
blends classical gospel music with themes of
hope, healing, and resilience, teaching believers to find strength in God during times
of suffering;
Whereas Reverend Smallwood’s iconic song
entitled, ‘‘Total Praise’’ has become a universal hymn of surrender and divine support,
reflecting the rich layers of the Black spiritual experience and steadfast belief that
will continue to inspire listeners for generations to come; and
Whereas Reverend Smallwood left a lasting
legacy in the music industry, rooted in faith
and triumph: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) mourns the passing of the legendary
gospel extraordinaire Reverend Richard
Smallwood;
(2) honors the life and legacy of Reverend
Richard Smallwood and his contributions to
the United States of America; and
(3) respectfully requests that the Secretary
of the Senate transmit an enrolled copy of
this resolution to—
(A) the family of Reverend Richard
Smallwood;
(B) Howard University; and
(C) the Metropolitan Baptist Church of the
District of Columbia.

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.027

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

SENATE
RESOLUTION
585—HONORING
THE
LIFE,
ACHIEVEMENTS, AND LEGACY OF BEN
NIGHTHORSE CAMPBELL
Mr. BENNET (for himself, Mr.
HICKENLOOPER, Mr. THUNE, Mr. SCHUMER, Ms. ALSOBROOKS, Ms. BALDWIN,
Mr. BANKS, Mr. BARRASSO, Mrs. BLACKBURN, Mr. BLUMENTHAL, Ms. BLUNT
ROCHESTER, Mr. BOOKER, Mr. BOOZMAN,
Mrs. BRITT, Mr. BUDD, Ms. CANTWELL,
Mrs. CAPITO, Mr. CASSIDY, Ms. COLLINS,
Mr. COONS, Mr. CORNYN, Ms. CORTEZ
MASTO, Mr. COTTON, Mr. CRAMER, Mr.
CRAPO, Mr. CRUZ, Mr. CURTIS, Mr.
DAINES, Ms. DUCKWORTH, Mr. DURBIN,
Ms. ERNST, Mr. FETTERMAN, Mrs.
FISCHER, Mr. GALLEGO, Mrs. GILLIBRAND, Mr. GRAHAM, Mr. GRASSLEY,
Mr.
HAGERTY,
Ms.
HASSAN,
Mr.
HAWLEY, Mr. HEINRICH, Ms. HIRONO, Mr.
HOEVEN, Mr. HUSTED, Mrs. HYDE-SMITH,
Mr. JOHNSON, Mr. JUSTICE, Mr. KAINE,
Mr. KELLY, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. KIM, Mr.
KING, Ms. KLOBUCHAR, Mr. LANKFORD,
Mr. LEE, Mr. LUJÁN, Ms. LUMMIS, Mr.
MARKEY, Mr. MARSHALL, Mr. MCCONNELL, Mr. MCCORMICK, Mr. MERKLEY,
Mrs. MOODY, Mr. MORAN, Mr. MORENO,
Mr. MULLIN, Ms. MURKOWSKI, Mr. MURPHY, Mrs. MURRAY, Mr. OSSOFF, Mr.
PADILLA, Mr. PAUL, Mr. PETERS, Mr.
REED, Mr. RICKETTS, Mr. RISCH, Ms.
ROSEN, Mr. ROUNDS, Mr. SANDERS, Mr.
SCHATZ, Mr. SCHIFF, Mr. SCHMITT, Mr.
SCOTT of Florida, Mr. SCOTT of South
Carolina, Mrs. SHAHEEN, Mr. SHEEHY,
Ms. SLOTKIN, Ms. SMITH, Mr. SULLIVAN,
Mr. TILLIS, Mr. TUBERVILLE, Mr. VAN
HOLLEN, Mr. WARNER, Mr. WARNOCK,
Ms. WARREN, Mr. WELCH, Mr. WHITEHOUSE, Mr. WICKER, Mr. WYDEN, and
Mr. YOUNG) submitted the following
resolution; which was considered and
agreed to:
S. RES. 585
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell was
born on April 13, 1933, in Auburn, California;
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell joined
the United States Air Force in 1951 and was
stationed in Korea during the Korean War,
serving as an air policeman;
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell left the
United States Air Force in 1953 with the
rank of Airman Second Class and was awarded the Korean Service Medal and the Air
Medal;
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell went on
to graduate from university and excel in
judo, winning 3 national titles in the United
States, competing in the 1963 Pan-American
Games, and representing the United States
on a global stage during the 1964 Summer
Olympics, where he was the first Native
American to ever compete on the United
States Olympic judo team;
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell and his
wife, Linda, moved to her home State of Colorado and went on to buy a ranch near
Ignacio on the Southern Ute Indian Reservation;
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell learned
how to fashion jewelry from his father, going
on to create internationally award-winning
jewelry and founding Nighthorse Jewelry, a
successful family business that spans 3 generations of craftsmanship;
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell was
elected to the Colorado State Legislature,
where he served for 4 years and was voted
one of the 10 best legislators by his colleagues;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S261

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell was
then elected to the House of Representatives
in 1986, becoming one of the few enrolled
members of a federally recognized Tribe to
serve in the United States Congress;
Whereas, during his tenure in the House of
Representatives, Ben Nighthorse Campbell
authored landmark legislation to establish
the National Museum of the American Indian, honoring the legacy of American indigenous communities;
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell also authored legislation elevating Black Canyon of
the Gunnison to a national park, creating
the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic
Site, and passed the Animas-La Plata water
projects for the Southern Ute Indian and Ute
Mountain Ute Tribes;
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell was
then elected to the Senate in 1993, serving as
the chair of the Committee on Indian Affairs
of the Senate between 1997 and 2005;
Whereas, during the 105th Congress, Ben
Nighthorse Campbell passed more legislation
than any other Member of the Senate;
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell was the
first and only American Indian to chair the
Committee on Indian Affairs of the Senate
and was a member of the Council of 44 Chiefs
of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe; and
Whereas Ben Nighthorse Campbell was a
trailblazer who championed bipartisan action and dedicated his entire life in service
of his community, the people of Colorado,
and the United States: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) has heard with profound sorrow and
deep regret the announcement of the death
of Ben Nighthorse Campbell, former Senator
from Colorado;
(2) honors the life, achievements, and legacy of Ben Nighthorse Campbell for—
(A) his service to his country in the United
States Air Force; and
(B) his exceptional tenure as a Member of
both the Senate and the House of Representatives;
(3) respectfully requests the Secretary of
the Senate to—
(A) communicate this resolution to the
House of Representatives; and
(B) transmit an enrolled copy of this resolution to the family of Ben Nighthorse
Campbell; and
(4) stands in recess as a further mark of respect to the memory of the late Ben
Nighthorse Campbell when the Senate recesses today.
f

SENATE
CONCURRENT
RESOLUTION 26—AFFIRMING THE PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES AND DENMARK AND
GREENLAND
Mr. GALLEGO (for himself and Ms.
MURKOWSKI) submitted the following
concurrent resolution; which was referred to the Committee on Foreign
Relations:
S. CON. RES. 26
Whereas the United States, the Kingdom of
Denmark, and Greenland maintain a close
partnership based on shared democratic values, collective security, and mutual respect
for sovereignty and territorial integrity;
Whereas the United States maintains a
long-standing defense presence in Greenland
in cooperation with the Kingdom of Denmark and the Government of Greenland, contributing to collective security in the Arctic
and the North Atlantic region;
Whereas Denmark and Greenland are important partners under the North Atlantic
Treaty, which was ratified by Congress in
1949;

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Whereas Article 1 of the North Atlantic
Treaty requires NATO members to settle any
international dispute in which they are involved by peaceful means and to refrain from
the threat or use of force;
Whereas recent public statements by senior executive branch officials have suggested
that the United States may seek to acquire
Greenland, including through the potential
use of miliary force;
Whereas such statements have prompted
public concern and objections from the Governments of the Kingdom of Denmark,
Greenland, and other NATO allies who have
reaffirmed that Greenland is not for sale and
that its future must be determined by its
people;
Whereas leaders in Denmark and Greenland have emphasized that threats, pressures, or coercive rhetoric have no place between allies and undermine trust essential to
collective security; and
Whereas the Constitution of the United
States vests in Congress the exclusive authority to declare war, authorize the use of
military force, and regulate the expenditure
of funds for national defense: Now, therefore,
be it
Resolved by the Senate (the House of Representatives concurring), That it is the sense
of Congress that—
(1) the United States Government affirms
its respect for the sovereignty of the Kingdom of Denmark, including Greenland, consistent with longstanding treaty commitments, including the North Atlantic Treaty;
(2) any change in the status of Greenland,
or any use of United States military force involving Greenland, must comply with treaty
obligations and is subject to authorization
by Congress;
(3) the United States should continue to
strengthen diplomatic, economic, and security cooperation with Denmark and Greenland through partnership, consent, and alliance-based engagement; and
(4) the Arctic remains the most secure
when the United States leads through cooperation with allies rather than coercion.
f

AMENDMENTS SUBMITTED AND
PROPOSED
SA 4233. Mr. BARRASSO (for Mr. KELLY)
proposed an amendment to the resolution S.
Res. 519, recognizing the achievements and
contributions of the AH–64 Apache attack
helicopter to the national defense of the
United States and its allies and honoring the
dedication, service, and sacrifice of the
United States Army aviators, maintainers,
and support personnel who operate and sustain the Apache.
f

TEXT OF AMENDMENTS
SA 4233. Mr. BARRASSO (for Mr.
KELLY) proposed an amendment to the
resolution S. Res. 519, recognizing the
achievements and contributions of the
AH–64 Apache attack helicopter to the
national defense of the United States
and its allies and honoring the dedication, service, and sacrifice of the
United States Army aviators, maintainers, and support personnel who operate and sustain the Apache; as follows:
In paragraph (4) of the sixth whereas
clause, strike ‘‘2011’’ and insert ‘‘2010’’.
In paragraph (4) of the sixth whereas
clause, strike ‘‘and’’ at the end.
Between paragraph (5) of the sixth whereas
clause and the seventh whereas clause, insert
the following:

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.041

S15JAPT1

S262

(6) Operation Just Cause;
(7) Operation Freedom’s Sentinel (2015–
2021); and
(8) Operation Atlantic Resolve;
In the eighth whereas clause, strike ‘‘18’’
and insert ‘‘16’’.
f

AUTHORITY FOR COMMITTEES TO
MEET
Mrs. WICKER. Mr. President, I have
four requests for committees to meet
during today’s session of the Senate.
They have the approval of the Majority
and Minority Leaders.
Pursuant to rule XXVI, paragraph
5(a), of the Standing Rules of the Senate, the following committees are authorized to meet during today’s session
of the Senate:
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Committee on Armed Services is
authorized to meet during the session
of the Senate on Thursday, January 15,
2026, at 9:30 A.M., to consider nominations.
COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND
TRANSPORTATION

The
Committee
on
Commerce,
Science, and Transportation is authorized to meet during the session of the
Senate on Thursday, January 15, 2026,
at 10 A.M., to hold a subcommittee
hearing.
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR,
AND PENSIONS

The Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pension is authorized to meet during the session of the
Senate on Thursday, January 15, 2026,
at 10 A.M., to conduct business for consideration.
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

The Committee on the is authorized
to meet during the session of the Senate on Thursday, January 15, 2026, at 9
A.M., to conduct a hearing.
f

PRIVILEGES OF THE FLOOR

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Mr. PADILLA. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous
consent
that
Barbara
Monrroy be granted floor privileges for
the remainder of the Congress.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent to grant floor privileges to my interns for their shadow
days on the following dates: Wes
Baskette on January 28, Justine Wendt
on February 4, Shireen Kaul on February 11, Inez Nieves on February 25,
Maria Ambrozewicz on March 4,
Finnegan Hecox on March 11, Grace
Davenport on March 18, Kiley Huffman
on March 25, Xenia Ellis on April 15,
Anushka Pandey on April 22, Violet
Sheehan on April 29, Zach Marchetti on
May 14, Jack Schallich on May 20, and
Joseph Novack on June 3; as well as
my fellows Mary Trechok and Robin
Watson Moser for the rest of the year.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

COMMERCE,
JUSTICE,
SCIENCE;
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT; AND INTERIOR AND ENVIRONMENT APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, just
now, the Senate passed three more of
the fiscal year 2026 appropriations bills
by a strong bipartisan vote. These bills
support State and local law enforcement, invest in vital scientific research, promote economic development, help protect our national security, and assist our coastal communities.
This fiscally responsible package includes the Commerce-Justice-Science
bill, the Energy and Water Development appropriations, and the Interior
and Environment funding bill. This
package is the result of a great deal of
input from Members on both sides of
the aisle, and it represents months of
bipartisan and bicameral negotiations.
Last week, this three-bill package
passed the House by an overwhelming
vote of 397 to 28, and the Senate just
followed suit with a very strong bipartisan vote.
I want to thank and commend our
subcommittee chairs and ranking
members as well as their staffs, who labored over the holidays to finalize this
package.
Specifically, I want to thank Senators MURKOWSKI and MERKLEY of the
Interior
Subcommittee,
Senators
MORAN and VAN HOLLEN of the CJS
Subcommittee, and Senators KENNEDY
and MURRAY of the Energy and Water
Subcommittee. Senator MURRAY is also
vice chair of the full committee, and I
want to thank her for her partnership
in getting these bills done. I want to
thank the staff of the full committee.
They have worked night and day—literally every night and every day—and I
am so grateful for their dedication and
hard work.
This legislation would actually reduce discretionary spending while better focusing funding on the key priorities that matter and affect the American people. Perhaps most importantly,
it shows that we as a Congress can
come together in a bipartisan way to
carry out our article I responsibilities
and deliver true results for the people
we are honored to represent.
Enacting this legislation brings the
total number of full-year fiscal year
2026 appropriations that will be signed
into law to six. The first three bills—
the Agriculture, Military Construction
and Veterans Affairs, and Legislative
Branch—were enacted in November.
Now we have to continue to complete
the job and make progress on the remainder of the appropriations bills.
Yesterday, after extensive negotiations between the Senate and the
House, the House passed the National
Security, State Department, and Related Programs bill as well as the Financial Services and General Government appropriations bills—again, by a
strong bipartisan vote of 341 to 79.
I look forward to the Senate’s considering these bills as well as the remain-

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

ing four appropriations bills before the
end of the month.
Our goal is to get all of these bills
signed into law—no continuing resolutions that lock in previous priorities
that don’t reflect today’s realities, no
more disastrous government shutdowns
that are totally unnecessary and so
harmful.
Again, I want to thank my colleagues
for supporting the final passage of this
important package so that we can send
it to the President for his signature.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Wyoming.
f

PREGNANT STUDENTS’ RIGHTS
ACT—Motion to Proceed
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I
move to proceed to Calendar No. 300, S.
3627.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
Motion to proceed to Calendar No. 300, S.
3627, a bill to require institutions of higher
education to disseminate information on the
rights of, and accommodations and resources
for, pregnant students, and for other purposes.
CLOTURE MOTION

Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I
send a cloture motion to the desk for
the motion to proceed.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The cloture motion having been presented
under rule XXII, the Chair directs the
clerk to read the motion.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
CLOTURE MOTION
We, the undersigned Senators, in accordance with the provisions of rule XXII of the
Standing Rules of the Senate, do hereby
move to bring to a close debate on the motion to proceed to Calendar No. 300, S. 3627,
a bill to require institutions of higher education to disseminate information on the
rights of, and accommodations and resources
for, pregnant students, and for other purposes.
John Thune, Ashley B. Moody, John Barrasso, Mike Crapo, James Lankford,
Jon Husted, James E. Risch, Pete
Ricketts,
Roger
Marshall,
John
Hoeven, Cindy Hyde-Smith, Bernie
Moreno, Shelley Moore Capito, Jim
Justice, Rick Scott of Florida, John
Boozman, Steve Daines.
f

MEASURE READ THE FIRST
TIME—S. 3674
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I understand there is a bill at the desk, and
I ask for its first reading.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will read the bill by title for the
first time.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
A bill (S. 3674) to expand and clarify the
grounds for civil denaturalization proceedings for individuals who have defrauded
a governmental program, joined a terrorist
organization, or committed certain criminal
offenses.

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.043

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I now
ask for a second reading, and in order
to place the bill on the calendar under
the provisions of rule XIV, I object to
my own request.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Objection is heard.
The bill will be read for the second
time on the next legislative day.
f

RETURN OF PAPERS REQUEST—
H.R. 1834
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the papers
with respect to H.R. 1834 be returned to
the House of Representatives at their
request.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

HONORING THE LIFE, ACHIEVEMENTS, AND LEGACY OF BEN
NIGHTHORSE CAMPBELL
Mr. BARRASSO. I ask unanimous
consent that the Senate proceed to the
consideration of S. Res. 585, which is at
the desk.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the resolution by
title.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
A resolution (S. Res. 585) honoring the life,
achievements, and legacy of Ben Nighthorse
Campbell.

There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the resolution.
Mr. BARRASSO. I ask unanimous
consent that the resolution be agreed
to, the preamble be agreed to, and that
the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid upon the table with
no intervening action or debate.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The resolution (S. Res. 585) was
agreed to.
The preamble was agreed to.
(The resolution, with its preamble, is
printed in today’s RECORD under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
f

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF
REVEREND
RICHARD
SMALLWOOD, A WORLD-CLASS
COMPOSER, PIANIST, AND ARRANGER
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Senate
proceed to the consideration of S. Res.
584, which is at the desk.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the resolution by
title.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
A resolution (S. Res. 584) honoring the life
and legacy of Reverend Richard Smallwood,
a world-class composer, pianist, and arranger.

There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the resolution.
Mr. BARRASSO. I ask unanimous
consent that the resolution be agreed

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S263

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

to, the preamble be agreed to, and that
the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid upon the table with
no intervening action or debate.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The resolution (S. Res. 584) was
agreed to.
The preamble was agreed to.
(The resolution, with its preamble, is
printed in today’s RECORD under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
f

RECOGNIZING THE ACHIEVEMENTS
AND CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE
AH–64 APACHE ATTACK HELICOPTER TO THE NATIONAL DEFENSE OF THE UNITED STATES
AND ITS ALLIES
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Committee on Armed Services be discharged from further consideration of
S. Res. 519 and the Senate proceed to
its immediate consideration.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the resolution by
title.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
read as follows:
A resolution (S. Res. 519) recognizing the
achievements and contributions of the AH–64
Apache attack helicopter to the national defense of the United States and its allies and
honoring the dedication, service, and sacrifice of the United States Army aviators,
maintainers, and support personnel who operate and sustain the Apache.

There being no objection, the committee was discharged and the Senate
proceeded to consider the resolution.
Mr. BARRASSO. I ask unanimous
consent that the resolution be agreed
to; that the Kelly amendment to the
preamble be considered and agreed to;
that the preamble, as amended, be
agreed to; and that the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid
upon the table with no intervening action or debate.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The resolution (S. Res. 519) was
agreed to.
The amendment (No. 4233) to the preamble was agreed to, as follows:
(Purpose: To improve the preamble)
In paragraph (4) of the sixth whereas
clause, strike ‘‘2011’’ and insert ‘‘2010’’.
In paragraph (4) of the sixth whereas
clause, strike ‘‘and’’ at the end.
Between paragraph (5) of the sixth whereas
clause and the seventh whereas clause, insert
the following:
(6) Operation Just Cause;
(7) Operation Freedom’s Sentinel (2015–
2021); and
(8) Operation Atlantic Resolve;
In the eighth whereas clause, strike ‘‘18’’
and insert ‘‘16’’.

The resolution with its preamble, as
amended, reads as follows:
S. RES. 519
Whereas, on September 30, 1975, the Apache
attack helicopter prototype YAH–64 took its
first flight, marking a defining milestone in
the history of aviation and defense innovation;
Whereas the AH–64 Apache was designed as
a twin-engine, tandem-seat, heavy attack

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

helicopter capable of providing close air support, deep strike, and reconnaissance missions under adverse conditions;
Whereas, since its first flight, the AH–64
Apache has become the most advanced, combat-proven attack helicopter in the world,
amassing more than 5,200,000 total flight
hours, including over 1,300,000 combat hours,
in defense of the United States and its allies;
Whereas the AH–64 Apache has undergone
continuous modernization, from the AH–64A
through the AH–64E, incorporating digital
avionics, advanced sensors, and networked
weapons systems to enhance survivability,
lethality, and interoperability;
Whereas production and sustainment of
the AH–64 Apache have been carried out at
facilities across the United States, with final
assembly in Arizona and a supplier base
across 46 States, reflecting decades of leadership of the United States in aerospace design, engineering, and advanced manufacturing;
Whereas the AH–64 Apache has played a decisive role in major combat operations, including—
(1) Operation Desert Storm (1991), where it
conducted the opening strikes of the Gulf
War;
(2) Operation Allied Force (1999), during
the conflict in Kosovo;
(3) Operation Enduring Freedom (2001–
2014), providing close air support and reconnaissance in Afghanistan;
(4) Operation Iraqi Freedom (2003–2010),
supporting ground operations and counterinsurgency missions;
(5) Operation Inherent Resolve (beginning
in 2014 and ongoing as of the date of the introduction of this resolution), conducting
precision strike operations against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria;
(6) Operation Just Cause;
(7) Operation Freedom’s Sentinel (2015–
2021); and
(8) Operation Atlantic Resolve;
Whereas the AH–64 Apache attack helicopters operate from key United States
Army installations around the world, including the United States Army Aviation Center
of Excellence at Fort Rucker, Alabama, and
4 Army National Guard battalions;
Whereas the AH–64 Apache also serves with
16 allied and partner nations, strengthening
global security and coalition interoperability and continuing to prove the indispensable role of the AH–64 Apache on the modern battlefield, including in counter-unmanned system efforts;
Whereas the AH–64 Apache continues to
demonstrate versatility, resilience, and decisive battlefield capability in combat operations around the world; and
Whereas, on the 50th anniversary of the
first flight of the AH–64 Apache, it is fitting
to recognize the extraordinary innovation,
dedication, and service that have defined the
aircraft and the individuals who have designed, built, and maintained it: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) recognizes the achievements and contributions of the AH–64 Apache attack helicopter to the national defense of the United
States and its allies;
(2) honors the dedication, service, and sacrifice of the United States Army aviators,
maintainers, and support personnel who operate and sustain the AH–64 Apache;
(3) acknowledges the enduring role of the
AH–64 Apache in ensuring that the United
States maintains unmatched close air support and precision strike capability; and
(4) respectfully directs the Secretary of the
Senate to transmit an enrolled copy of this
resolution to the United States Army Aviation Center of Excellence at Fort Rucker,
Alabama.

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.052

S15JAPT1

S264

ORDERS FOR FRIDAY, JANUARY
16, 2026, THROUGH MONDAY, JANUARY 26, 2026
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that when the Senate completes its business today, it recess to then reconvene for pro forma
session only, with no business being
conducted, on the following dates and
times: Friday, January 16, at 8:30 a.m.;
Tuesday, January 20, at 10 a.m.; Thursday, January 22, at 11 a.m.; further,
that when the Senate recesses on
Thursday, January 22, it stand in recess until 3 p.m. on Monday, January
26; that following the prayer and
pledge, the Journal of proceedings be
approved to date, the time for the two
leaders be reserved for their use later
in the day, and the Senate be in a period of morning business, with Senators permitted to speak therein for up
to 10 minutes each; finally, that notwithstanding rule XXII, the cloture
motion filed today ripen at 5:30 p.m.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f

ORDER FOR RECESS
Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, if
there is no further business to come before the Senate, I ask that it stand in
recess under the previous order under
the provisions of S. Res. 585 following
the remarks of my colleagues.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. BARRASSO. I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from New Jersey.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

f

SENATE PAGES
Mr. BOOKER. Mr. President, there is
something extraordinary that happens
when we are here in the Senate. Every
cycle, we see numerous young people
who come here to—one might call them
indentured servants. They are the
pages.
I have come to have a lot of respect
for KATIE BRITT, but my work with her
every year in getting to know the
pages—we have a little lunch—it is
something I really treasure.
Senator BRITT could not be here now.
The schedule—we were supposed to do
this earlier in the afternoon. But I
want the pages to know that I think
she is pretty broken-hearted that she
can’t be on the floor right now.
She and I together worked to judge
the poetry competition. She was very
disappointed that she could not be here
to read the successful poems. But even
more so, I think what she really wanted to do was to express her gratitude to
this extraordinary group of young people who are assembled on the Senate
floor before us.
So what I want to do is in two parts,
with the latitude of the Chair, I am
going to talk about the poetry competition and then share some parting
words with the pages.
First, they are already annoying
me—as they often do—because I cannot

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

06:31 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

see you guys, all. So the pages who are
sitting down and cannot eyeball me,
please join the other pages who are
standing so we can have a better look.
I want to look into your eyes just in
case my harsh words make any of you
cry.
That is much better. That is much
better.
Mr. President, we had a poetry competition. I want you to know this poetry competition was different than all
the other poetry competitions we have
had with pages. First of all, they were
recalcitrant. Very few of them even
participated, to begin.
So we did something we never, ever
did before. We extended the deadline,
and then I bullied and badgered—I
admit this on the Senate floor. I
bullied and badgered some high school
students into complying with the poetry competition, and we got a large
number of poems, a large number of
participation from the pages.
I am proud, proud of your page participation that has lasted until today.
Now, what I did not expect is for
their poems to be so good. I was actually literally shocked. I look at you all,
and I just don’t expect greatness. But
your poems were exceptional. I literally texted Senator BRITT in agony.
I was like, how do we decide on which
poems to choose, because in past page
classes—I hope they are listening out
there in the world. They are just so top
class. So it was very difficult.
Katie and I went back and forth. We
did a lot of consternation, and we came
up with the winners.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that all the page poems be—I have
never done this before—but all the page
poems that were written this time—all
of you that wrote poems should be
printed in the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD
with their names because I did not see
names. They were all anonymous to
me. I don’t know which pages they
were. I don’t know if they were Republican or Democrat. I don’t know if they
were the pages that told me bad jokes
or the pages that told me really bad
jokes because there were really just
two categories in this class.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
BY LILLIANA GRINBERG

On the rostrum’s step I take my place,
Except my pins and shoes, in navy monochrome.
From the chamber I move with an awestruck
face
Through marble halls, the nation’s home.
I carry notes through the aisles,
Or on the rostrum I stay put.
I learn that power walks in measured miles
And history hums softly underfoot
Long hours teach me how to stand so still,
To remain unphased as voices rise and clash.
In the chaos I feel a chill;
This will be over in but a flash.
Here is where I have served, and where I see
The making of the world that is, and the
world that ought to be.
BY LILLIANA GRINBERG

‘‘Polarization at an all-time high,’’

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

The newspapers report, day after day.
My time here has shown me it’s not a lie;
I have seen it in every no and yea.
This is no longer the way things will go,
For our generation will pave the way.
We are through waiting until tomorrow,
This is our duty; we’ll do it today.
The Pages of fall twenty-twenty-five
Discuss, argue, debate and disagree,
Our voices echoing with every strive
To from one another’s perspective see.
My fellow Pages across the aisle:
Let our divide be only by miles.
BY LILLIANA GRINBERG

It’s a new day, here in the Capitol:
Prayer and pledge and now hear the gavel.
Under these gilded ceilings, then and now
interweave;
It’s where we see what is, and what ought to
be.
Joking through the tired and laughing
through the stress;
Praying that each scramble will turn into
success;
Voting and speeches and printing amendments,
Debates and objections and unanimous consensus.
We leave this world made of marble and to
Webster Hall we return;
Where our bodies may rest, but our minds
will still churn.
We all have no clue what tomorrow will
bring;
Best and brightest, to this place we will
cling.
We will cling to the chamber, and the flag on
its staff.
We will cling to this group, every lesson and
laugh.
THE SHOES OF THE SENATE
BY STEPHEN JIANG

Gliding across the tiled floors are a hundred
pairs
Of shoes like loafers and running kicks, we
discern
From our vantage, but hidden when C–SPAN
airs
Behold the resolute heels of Senator Blackburn!
They’ve traveled here from Alabama’s waterfalls
Tracking dust from Jersey streets onto the
blue rugs
Long ago, Webster’s boots echoed across
these halls
Stepping over many tobacco spittoon jugs.
Do I belong here? Could I fill these sacred
shoes?
Those grand wooden doors swung open for
you and me
Step in, fear not the faces you’ve seen on the
news
When in doubt, we stay grounded on our own
two feet
We’ll push ahead, one foot in front of another
Across the aisle. . .there’s a lot to discover.
O SENATE
BY JACE MILES

Shall I compare thee to a session day?
Divided it is and together they come,
A place vibrant and unique in every way.
Jacks of all trades but mastered by one.
They call it antediluvian,
Some say it is great.
I will admit it is not arcadian,
Because everyone goes to bed pretty late.
To the parliamentarians, clerks, and Senator’s prowess,
To the Pages and doorkeepers whose faces
beam.
In the Senate no one engages in Churlishness,

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.055

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

Because then they would break Rule XIX.
The Senate has been living for centuries,
Alive by following our framers’ themes.
BY HUNTER COY

Sun rises on the Capitol dome
Suddenly I don’t feel so far from home
I drove 16 hours to be here
Becoming a Senate page meant leaving everything I held dear.
30 strangers came together
Little in common nothing to tether
Finding comfort in each other
My roommate soon became my brother.
Each day our bonds were tested
Crossing party lines that couldn’t be bested
Making memories on the Senate floor
Forming bonds that last evermore.
Becoming a Senate page was never a safe bet
Looking at these strangers, I’m so glad we
met.
THE PAGE’S PLEDGE (AND OTHER SENATE
CONFESSIONS)
BY MAUREEN BAI

I pledge allegiance to the flag,
And to the republic—it’s important, not a
drag
For which it stands, through late-night
votes,
And endless runs to S–123, boy I sure do
mope.
Senator Booker, oh so cool,
You speak and legislate like you’re getting
A’s in school.
Senator Britt, you carried 66 out of 67 counties, clearly many favored you to be
strong
While we pages sprint through halls, trying
not to get in trouble with no bond
Late nights are long, senators congregate
like they’re in frats
While the Parliamentarian and Journal
Clerk chat.
And before you I stand, in my shoes,
Dodging my cloakrooms’ ‘‘urgent’’ news.
I may not be Goldilocks, but through your
heated debates
I keep your water and lectern coming—always just right.
BY EMMA ROSS

I came from quiet roads and open air,
Where every sunset felt like it knew me.
But here, the marble glitters cold and bare,
And I feel lost in all this history.
These crowded halls move faster than my
breath,
Each rushing step reminding me I’m new;
Some days my confidence feels close to
death,
And I miss skies my hometown once let
through
I smile, I learn, I try to stand up tall,
But still my heart aches for familiar ground.
A porchlight glow, a voice I knew to call,
A place where I was seen, not just around.
Yet though I ache, I stay, because I know
Great dreams are born from seeds we bravely
sow

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

BY EMMA ROSS

I dreamed of shaping laws before I came,
A distant vision held in hopeful hands;
But here, where marble echoes history name,
My quiet wish grows fierce with each command.
These halls hum with decisions yet to be,
With voices crafting futures line by line;
And as I watch, a fire awakens me,
A calling clearer now than any sign.
To serve, to lead, to stand where choices
rise,
To guide the course that others will pursue.
The page life opens my eager eyes,
Revealing paths I once but faintly knew.
What once was dream now feels like destiny,
This place, this work, shapes who I’m meant
to be.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S265

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

BY EMMA ROSS

Each dawn I cross beneath the domed white
light,
Its columns towering like a nations pride;
And every step still fills me with delight,
As if I walk where history resides,
I watch the chambers stir before debate.
Hear quiet murmurs blossom into law;
The smallest motions shape a whole state’s
fate,
And I, a page, stand humbled by the awe.
The shuffle of the papers, pens, and plans,
The whispered deals that ripple through the
floor.
I glimpse the power held in human hands,
The careful craft of those who came before.
In every vote, in every echoed call,
I learn how fragile dreams can guide us all.
BY LILLIANA GRINBERG

Patterns cover the Senate floor:
The carpets, the ceilings, the frames of each
door.
They witnessed the history contained by
these walls,
They’ve heard words that echoed through
these hallowed halls.
Patterns of parties and polarization,
Patterns of freedom and of liberation.
Phrygian caps and spirals abound:
Patterns that decorate freedom’s playground.
From this institution they’ve led revolutions,
They’ve made resolutions to fight persecution;
But on these same grounds, they’ve warred
and they’ve hated,
In this same chamber, they’ve marred what
was sacred.
Now it has been two-hundred fifty years,
Since the nation was created from their
blood, sweat, and tears.
With every maiden speech and each inauguration,
I feel my hope grow for the new generation.
Yes, this place is built on tradition,
It feeds on its servants’ relentless ambition.
But the marble is malleable, unlike the gold
throne;
And progress is the practice to which we are
prone.
Though the history of every divide here still
stands,
Such fissures are resolved with each shake of
hands.
Slowly but surely, little by little,
They strengthen the bonds that were once
thought so brittle.
If I could peel back the wallpaper here,
Would I hear Clay debate, would Webster appear?
Maybe I could find some anchor or tether;
Something to hold us through this stormy
weather.
Could I find a key, or a code of some kind,
To break down our limits, to untie each
bind?
Maybe I’d recover some halcyon age,
Where the land of the free is the home of the
brave.
THE SONG THEY LEFT US
BY ADDISON NORRIS

I hear their boots
I feel their sound—
Shots ring out
and haunt the ground
I hear their boots,
Their rhythm cries,
I see the fear
Inside their eyes
I hear their boots,
A melancholy song.
I feel the cold
And shake along
The wind remembers
The whistle of lead

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

The sharp, wet gasp
Of the newly dead
The earth still keeps
Their trembling weight—
Young shoulders bowed
Under old men’s fate
Gunfire—
A savage conductor’s hand—
Wrote the score
No one could stand
Yet they still marched,
However long,
Stitched skin to soil
To finish the song
And I hear it now—
The song on which America stands—
Carried by voices
Of terrified men
Defending a land
They hoped would hold
The peace they’d never
Get to know
Their boots beat out
A brutal hymn,
A prayer half-screamed
From dust and limb
Each step a bargain
Each breath a plea
Each heartbeat breaking
So ours could be free
And so here we stand
In the freedom they won—
A gift paid in blood
Not easily sung
They marched in their boots,
Their head, they held strong
And we live,
And we breathe,
In the echo of that song
BY ADDISON NORRIS

In the beginning,
God created the heavens and the earth.
He looked upon His work and said,
It is good.
But is it really good
when we’re facing wars,
when families are waiting
for unopened doors?
Is it really good
when it doesn’t go my way,
when I’ve lost my job,
had a horrible day?
Is it good
when I can’t see the light,
when there’s no clear way out—
is it good, is it right
Is He good?
Is God really there
when there’s no food on the table?
Does God truly care?
Yes—He is good,
though the night feels long,
though prayers fall heavy
and the silence feels strong.
Because goodness was never
the absence of pain;
it was God stepping into it,
bearing the weight, wearing the stain.
Good looked like a manger,
not a throne dressed in gold.
Good looked like mercy
when the world had grown cold.
Good had dirt on His hands,
tears in His eyes,
a cross on His shoulders,
Love choosing sacrifice.
He is good not because
life bends to our will,
but because He stays close
when everything is still.
When the job is gone,
when the cupboard is bare,
when all we have left
is a whispered prayer—
He is there.
Good is the Shepherd
who walks through the valley,

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.030

S15JAPT1

S266

not shouting directions
but walking it with me.
Good is the promise
that night doesn’t win,
that Sunday still comes
after Friday’s grim.
So yes, He is good—
not loud, not rushed, not proved in a day—
but faithful, and near,
and already making a way.
MOMENTS OF SILENCE
BY LUCAS HOGAN

A gunman enters the school planning to
cause violence
Students try to pretend they aren’t there;
they pack up their things
They hold their breath; the school is in a
moment of silence
As hard as they tried, new angels still gained
untimely wings
At the funerals, they send thoughts and
prayers to victims of the violence
Shell-shocked survivors embrace one another and try to move on
The next day at school, the victims are honored with a moment of silence
It’s impossible for anyone to keep going—
their friends are gone
Politicians give stentorian remarks on stage
denouncing the violence
Afterwards, they hand off the microphone
and scurry off to the next speech
There are no votes on any policies; nothing
but moments of silence
Children still march into the place where
survival is a reach
There’s been enough inaction. There’s been
enough waiting. There’s been enough
sorrow.
Only moments of silence leaves more children who yearn for tomorrow
BY CECILIA BLEYER

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

Throughout the vast halls of the Senate,
Cycles of pages never relent
Here where history is created
and notable acts are legislated
Twenty-eight of us in navy suits
See Senators in heels and boots
We observe what many may never see
Behind the scenes of liberty
Even though this class’ end is near,
We are grateful for our fall term here
Throughout votes, runs and UC requests,
Chaplain Doctor Black makes sure we’re
blessed

Mr. BOOKER. Mr. President, you will
enter all the page poems because they
are so good. So for the rest of time, it
will be noted in the CONGRESSIONAL
RECORD, in the RECORD of this august
body. These poems will be in the
RECORD with my comments that they
are great poetry, even though you tell
very bad jokes. That is now in the
RECORD forever.
But we had to choose. There must be
winners. I am very happy that we—
KATIE and I—through much grueling
work, chose some winners. So there are
three categories I am going to give
you.
There is one honorable mention.
There is another one that I chose myself, taking the privilege of being here
and present on the floor. Please don’t
tell Senator BRITT. And then the two
that garnered in this body the bipartisan support—these are the two ultimate winners that got both KATIE and
me.
So here is the first honorable mention, then the one that really truly
moved me, and then the one the two of
us agreed on.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

First, the honorable mention.
Where is Lilliana Grinberg?
Lilliana, you have been, in so many
ways, so kind. I did not know this was
your poem until moments ago.
Now that I know it is yours, I am not
going to read it. No, I am joking. Here
we go. Let’s see if you impress the good
Senator from Ohio.
It’s a new day, here in the Capitol:
Prayer and pledge and now hear the gavel.
Under these gilded ceilings, then and now
interweave;
It’s where we see what is, and what ought
to be.
Joking through the tired and laughing
through the stress;
Praying that each scramble will turn into
success;
Voting and speeches and printing amendments,
Debates and objections and unanimous
consensus.
We leave this world made of marble and to
Webster Hall we return;
Where our bodies may rest, but our minds
will still churn.
We all have no clue what tomorrow will
bring;
Best and brightest, to this place we will
cling.
We will cling to the chamber, and the flag
and its staff.
We will cling to this group, every lesson
and laugh.

Thank you very much. Snapping in
the Chamber is against the rules, but
you guys are leaving tomorrow anyway. So break some rules.
All right. This next poem I read, and
more than one person who read this
poem agreed with me. We got very
emotional. It was brave and courageous, like some of the other poems I
read. So this is a poem unlike any I
have ever read from the pages. I am
going to read it now. Then I will get to
the two Britt-Booker wins.
But this poem is by Lucas Hogan.
Where is Lucas?
Lucas, all I have to say is wow. I am
going to read it.
The poem is entitled ‘‘Moments of Silence’’
A gunman enters the school planning to
cause violence
Students try to pretend they aren’t there;
they pack up their things
They hold their breath; the school is in a
moment of silence
As hard as they tried, new angels still
gained untimely wings
At the funerals, they send thoughts and
prayers to victims of the violence
Shell-shocked survivors embrace one another and try to move on
The next day at school, the victims are
honored with a moment of silence
It is impossible for anyone to keep going—
their friends are gone
Politicians give stentorian remarks on
stage denouncing the violence
Afterwards, they hand off the microphone
and scurry off to the next speech
There are no votes on any policies; nothing
but moments of silence
Children still march into the place where
survival is a reach
There’s been enough inaction. There’s been
enough waiting. There’s been enough sorrow.
Only moments of silence leaves more children who yearn for tomorrow

PO 00000

Very, very powerful.

Frm 00040

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

Now, the Britt-Booker choices for the
highest senatorial honor given to a
teenager anywhere ever. I guess I am
exaggerating—but what the heck. Who
knows.
Two that I shall read, and first is by
Addison Norris—oh, my gosh.
Addison, you are like a Senator. You
are very long-winded in your poetry
writing. But it is beautiful, nonetheless.
In the beginning,
God created the heavens and the earth.
He looked upon His work and said, It is
good.
But is it really good
when we’re facing wars,
when families are waiting
for unopened doors?
Is it really good
when it doesn’t go my way,
when I’ve lost my job,
had a horrible day?
Is it good
when I can’t see the light
when there’s no clear way out—
is it good, is it right?
Is He good?
Is God really there
when there’s no food on the table?
Does God truly care?
Yes—He is good,
though the night feels long,
though prayers fall heavy
and the silence feels strong.
Because goodness was never
the absence of pain;
it was God stepping into it,
bearing the weight, wearing the stain.
Good looked like a manger,
not a throne dressed in gold.
Good looked like mercy
when the world had grown cold.
Good had dirt on His hands,
tears in His eyes,
a cross on His shoulders,
love choosing sacrifice.
He is good not because
life bends to our will,
but because He stays close
when everything is still.
When the job is gone,
when the cupboard is bare,
when all we have left
is a whispered prayer—
He is there.
Good is the Shepherd
who walks through the valley,
not shouting directions
but walking it with me.
Good is the promise
that night doesn’t win,
that Sunday still comes
after Friday’s grim.
So yes, He is good—
not loud, not rushed, not proved in a day—
but faithful, and near,
and already making a way.

Fantastic.
The last page poem—prodigiously,
purposefully, powerfully plain—I said
less alliteration. I lied. Here is the last
page poem. I do want to say, there was
another poem—I didn’t even ask whose
name it was—that heralded KATIE
BRITT and me. I admired the obsequious nature of that poem. The sycophantic excellence was powerful. I
mean, to drop my name into the poem,
I was weak. I wanted to choose the person who praised me, but I felt like I
wouldn’t get away with it before the
Presiding Officer. He might rule XIX
me or something like that.

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.035

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

So here is the final bipartisan poem
that gets our most highest honor here
in the Senate, and it comes from
Emma Ross.
Emma.
You can snap for Emma before the
poem, but shouldn’t you wait to hear
what she wrote first? Gosh, premature
‘‘snap-ation’’ is a bad thing.
Here we go. From Emma Ross.
I came from quiet roads and open air,
Where every sunset felt like it knew me.
But here, the marble glitters cold and bare,
And I feel lost in all this history.
These crowded halls move faster than my
breath,
Each rushing step reminding me I’m new;
Some days my confidence feels close to
death,
And I miss skies my hometown once let
through
I smile, I learn, I try to stand up tall,
But still my heart aches for familiar
ground.
A porchlight glow, a voice I knew to call
A place where I was seen, not just around
Yet though I ache, I stay, because I know
Great dreams are born from seeds we
bravely sow.

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

I am impressed with this class. I have
to say, as much as I tried to diss you
and disrespect you, you guys showed
such specialness, I will never forget
this page class.
So I am going to do two things. One,
as the Presiding Officer knows that
you lead by example, so, of course, I
wrote you a poem, and I am going to
share it.
Then I will say some final words, and
I will let the Presiding Officer close the
Senate for the recess.
So, first, a poem before my final
words. This is a Booker original, written hastily over the last 24 hours. You
can do things at the last minute and
still make it in life. I think I am a testimony to that. You can procrastinate.
But I actually wrote this after reading
through your poems a second time.
You inspired me, so here is the Senate page poem dedicated to you all.
One hundred Senators—confident, accomplished, successful
Elected leaders projecting excellence in
times so stressful.
They may seem like giants and you may
feel a bit small.
But, dear God, don’t buy it—don’t believe
that at all.
For every Senator you hear roar on this
hallowed floor,
There are shadows, stumbles, wounds—
times they collapsed and wept before.
You witness speeches, polished, practiced,
refined,
What you don’t see are the staffs who write
drafts, fix flaws, and make sure we arrive on
time.
And if we sound wise—sagacious on camera
or TV shows—
The true heft we carry wasn’t born from
our highs,
But was forged through our lows.
So dear Pages, a truth not often shared in
this place,
To the young people who carried our water
and opened our doors with such grace:
Greatness isn’t achieved when you reach
the highest ground.
Greatness is forged when you get knocked
down and despite it all, rise, and rebound.
You may have become curious how someone climbed so far, they must be better than

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

S267

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

Jkt 069060

we are. But if you want to know the real
story, perhaps the best question to ask us is:
Tell me about your scars?
But maybe this is a story you already
know so well . . .
Because these last months of your life here
in the Senate . . .
You all went through hell.
You worked humbling, demanding jobs
full-time,
Then carried a full course load—every
class, so much work assigned.
And what moved me most—what I admire
in you—is that somehow, still, you became
one of the kindest Page classes I have ever
known or knew.
Maybe that’s the lesson you offer us today:
That despite the world’s pressure, its chaos
and fray,
You met stress, struggle, exhaustion, and
so much, too much labor—
Yet you still lived the most sacred refrain
of all:
To love your neighbor.
I say this because you’ve impressed me,
you really have, every single day.
Look, your jokes really sucked, but your
kindness was your way . . .
So I leave you now with this final reminder: God, this world needs to become a
lot kinder.
So, when angry, when joyful, when weary
or mad.
When soaring with hope, or aching and sad.
When lost, when certain, or when unsure of
your way—
When life makes no sense at the end of the
day—
Choose again. Decide again.
Make it your very spine:
Resolve, in all moments, to always be more
kind.
Because in my life the best people I’ve ever
met—without question, what has been and is
their principle?
It is that they center their lives
on cultivating a kindness, that is invincible.

Very true. You guys disappointed me
time and time again. From the day you
arrived, I asked for jokes. I haven’t
asked much. I asked you guys just to
be funny, and you are not. You are
really going to have to work on that in
life. I mean, you have got to have a
sense of humor.
But what you lacked in humor, I was
blown away by just how good people
you are, and this world is yearning for
more good people.
You have seen this place split along
the aisle. You have seen the tribalism
grow in our country. You are going to
return to your phones very soon, which
I think this is probably going to be
looked back upon as one of your better
periods when you weren’t scrolling and
weren’t doing social media. In many
ways, you were liberated from that
toxin, which feeds in our society so
much hate and so much disagreement.
These are corporations actually that
feed us through their algorithms things
that make us more enraged on each
other. If there is any great threat to
America, it is no other country. They
can’t beat us tank for tank or warship
for warship. The greatest threat to our
country isn’t from without, it is from
within. In fact, you will study history,
and if you look at the decline of nations, it has not necessarily been from
external threats. From the Roman Empire to the Soviet Union, they fall be-

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

cause of internal corruption and failing
to live up to their virtues.
If there is any virtue that you all
have been amidst every single day for
America to make us successful, it is
the one over the Presiding Officer’s
head. It is ‘‘E pluribus unum.’’
But I was blown away in this session.
You heard the speech. One of my colleagues researched where that speech
came from. I never thought of the origins of ‘‘E pluribus unum.’’ I have been
saying that phrase from a dead language. And he found the origins of it
from a great philosopher that is actually the end of a sentence. The sentence talks about that value that you
all showed me through your kindness.
Whether it was in the train or passing
in the hallway, you all seem to always
have a smile, a generous word. Even on
the days you were haggard and weary,
‘‘E pluribus unum’’—the beginning of
that sentence is, if we are to be a great
people, we must love one another, we
must love our neighbors and become
one out of many. That is the secret.
So if there is any parting word I can
give you on behalf of Katie and myself,
who have forged a friendship in this
place—I have come to love and respect
her deeper because I see her struggle in
the most important way. The greatest
struggles in our lives are not necessarily the next career ladder we are
going to grab; the greatest struggle in
life is often just to manifest every day,
to show up every day and evidence the
most important virtues in our lives.
And I think of no greater virtue than
to love one another.
So I will end by telling you a short
story about my scars, about times I
have failed, because the truth of the
matter is, the best lessons I have been
gifted have been through the most difficult times. You guys just went
through difficult times, and I hope you
look back and say that there was something about the hardship and the challenge that forged something with you
that you will take with you for the rest
of your life, that you look back at this
page experience and value and remember two things: One is the friends you
made, and the other is the grit that
you gained to be the best version of
yourself to show up.
Whatever you do, whatever you do, I
hope you do like I have seen you do in
this place, is just litter this world with
small acts of kindness, decency, and
love.
So the embarrassing story, which I
hesitate to tell before the Presiding Officer—it might show up in my campaign this year in ads used against me.
So I hope I can have a public promise
that you won’t use this story against
me, sir. Is that without objection?
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection.
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you very much,
sir.
So three blocks from my home in
Newark, NJ, is this place—you guys are
from all over the country. I don’t know
if you have this place, but three blocks

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.057

S15JAPT1

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

S268

from my home is this place called
McDonald’s.
Now, I have a guy who has driven me
since I was a mayor. He was on my protective detail. He was a detective in
the Newark Police Department. His
name is Kevin Batts. From 2006 until
now, he has been driving me around.
And we have such a great friendship.
We know each other so well that when
I jump in the back of the car, I am
often doing work, pounding away on
texts, on the phone, so we don’t even
have to talk. He has learned to read my
mind. Telepathic powers have emerged
between us.
So as we are driving past that
McDonald’s, he looks in the rearview
mirror and immediately turns into the
drive-through. He looked at me and
read my mind. Maybe he didn’t read
my mind; he just saw weakness in my
soul. I needed to have some McDonald’s
french fries.
Now, at this point in my life when
this story takes place, I was not a
plant-based man. I did not know that
McDonald’s to this day—this is not libelous—they soak their french fries in
some kind of beef product. I don’t know
what it is. But still I love McDonald’s
french fries. I get two large french
fries.
Now we are driving out of the drivethrough, and I see a guy in a trash can
rooting around, and I don’t say a word.
Kevin knows me. I look in the rearview
mirror, our eyes meet, and he immediately stops the car. I roll down the
window. He knows that I am going to
want to try to see what is going on
here three blocks from my home. I am
trying to live my values.
I say, ‘‘Hey man, you all right?’’ and
he sort of waves me off. But, immediately, I realized my tone wasn’t
right. This is a man with equal dignity,
God’s creation made in God’s image,
and I said—my words weren’t respectful enough.
So I lowered my tone, and I said: Excuse me, sir. I am sorry to bother you,
but do you need anything?
He turns around and looks at me, and
he goes: I am hungry.
Now, I have talked to a lot of you. A
lot of different faiths. We have a lot of
different faiths for Senators here. It is
more diverse than it has ever been. But
in my faith, I think Jesus said something like, if you have two McDonald’s
french fries and your neighbor has no
McDonald’s french fries—I think it was
the sermon on the McMount. Yes. The
Parliamentarian can fact-check that. I
think that is what the Bible said. But
if I have two McDonald’s french fries
and my neighbor has none, I think
Jesus said: Give one of your McDonald’s french fries.
So I reach into my bag, and I hand
the man one of my treasures. I mean,
before that, I was holding them like
that movie, ‘‘The Lord of the Rings.’’
My precious. My precious. But now I go
into my bag, and I hand him one of my
fries. He takes the fries. He seems
happy. I feel satisfied that I showed up

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

in that moment. And he looks at me,
grateful, steps away from the car, and
then steps back to the car, and he goes:
Excuse me. One more thing. Do you
have any socks?
Now, all of us who have done any voluntary work in homeless shelters or
worked with folks who are experiencing homelessness, you know if he is
asking, there must be an urgent need
for him. So I felt bad. I sort of vainly
looked in my car left and right. I don’t
carry extra socks in my car.
I said: No, sir. I am sorry, I don’t
have socks.
He shook his head and stepped back
and raised the fries to me like saying:
Cheers. Thanks for the fries.
I whipped my head around, looked in
the rearview mirror, giving him all the
telepathy I could. I need to get home.
I need to turn on the British baking
show—I should say the American baking show, American baking shows. And
there is nothing worse than cold
McDonald’s french fries. But Kevin
doesn’t move the car. I stare harder—
more telepathy. Move the car. He
doesn’t move the car.
Suddenly, what he does is he puts the
car in park, and he reaches between the
steering wheel and his legs, kicks off
his shoes, and takes off the socks he is
wearing. He folds them as neat as he
can and offers them up to the man, who
then takes the socks like he just received a bar of gold and steps away
from the car and says: Thank you.
I am a U.S. Senator, and I talk about
kindness all the time, but in that moment, I failed to use my moral imagination to see how I could show up. I am
three blocks from my house. I have
socks in my drawer. Some of them, I
don’t even wear anymore. But I didn’t
think about taking off my socks.
Pages, you all are special. I tell you,
I really have come to have a lot of affection for you. I am going to miss you.
This place is going to miss you. I hope
if I see you out and about, you don’t
pretend like you don’t know me and I
can tell you what an honor it was that
we served together in the U.S. Senate.
I think I speak for 99 other people in
telling you how grateful we are.
If there is one request I have, it is to
just remind you that our Founders
knew about this country, that we needed improvement. They wanted this in
every generation of us to make this a
more perfect Union. If I could prescribe
one great need our country has, it is
you. This country needs your heart and
your spirit; it needs your brilliance and
ideas; it needs your grit and hard work;
but most of all, it needs you to be kind.
Those seeds are in you. I see it.
I hope that as you go out into the
world and encounter challenges and
stresses, that you can always show up
with your heart and your kindness and
your love. And that perhaps you remember better than I do that sometimes in life, you got to take off your
socks.

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 9801

RECESS UNTIL 8:30 A.M.
TOMORROW
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the provision of S. Res. 585, the Senate
stands in recess until 8:30 a.m. on Friday, January 16, and does so as a further mark of respect to the late Ben
Nighthorse Campbell, a former Senator
from the State of Colorado.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 4:59 p.m.,
recessed until Friday, January 16, 2026,
at 8:30 a.m.
f

NOMINATIONS
Executive nominations received by
the Senate:
IN THE ARMY
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY TO THE GRADE INDICATED
WHILE ASSIGNED TO A POSITION OF IMPORTANCE AND
RESPONSIBILITY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 601:

To be lieutenant general
MAJ. GEN. BRIAN W. GIBSON

IN THE AIR FORCE
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE UNITED STATES AIR FORCE TO THE GRADE INDICATED WHILE ASSIGNED TO A POSITION OF IMPORTANCE
AND RESPONSIBILITY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION
601:

To be lieutenant general
MAJ. GEN. B. MARK PYE

IN THE MARINE CORPS
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS TO THE GRADE
INDICATED WHILE ASSIGNED TO A POSITION OF IMPORTANCE AND RESPONSIBILITY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 601:

To be lieutenant general
LT. GEN. CALVERT L. WORTH, JR.
LT. GEN. ROBERT C. FULFORD
LT. GEN. JAMES H. ADAMS III
LT. GEN. MELVIN G. CARTER
LT. GEN. ANDREW M. NIEBEL
LT. GEN. BENJAMIN T. WATSON
LT. GEN. JOSEPH A. MATOS III

IN THE ARMY
THE FOLLOWING NAMED ARMY NATIONAL GUARD OF
THE UNITED STATES OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT IN
THE RESERVE OF THE ARMY TO THE GRADE INDICATED
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 12203 AND 12211:

To be major general
BRIG. GEN. DEREK L. ADAMS
BRIG. GEN. JAIME A. AREIZAGA
BRIG. GEN. MATTHEW M. BACON
BRIG. GEN. JONATHAN P. BEDDALL
BRIG. GEN. MATTHEW P. BEILFUSS
BRIG. GEN. LAVETTA L. BENNETT
BRIG. GEN. LELAND D. BLANCHARD II
BRIG. GEN. TIMOTHY M. BROWER
BRIG. GEN. MARLENA A. DECELLE
BRIG. GEN. MICHAEL D. EVANS
BRIG. GEN. TOD M. FENNER
BRIG. GEN. SEAN M. FLYNN
BRIG. GEN. MICHAEL M. GREER
BRIG. GEN. JAMES B. HAYNIE
BRIG. GEN. MURRAY E. HOLT II
BRIG. GEN. MICHAEL A. IZZO
BRIG. GEN. DAVID L. KAUFFMAN
BRIG. GEN. MICHAEL J. LIESMANN
BRIG. GEN. JUSTIN L. MANN
BRIG. GEN. WILLIAM F. MCCLINTOCK
BRIG. GEN. CRISTINA MOORE
BRIG. GEN. CHARLES W. MORRISON
BRIG. GEN. ROBERT J. PAYNE
BRIG. GEN. TRACEY L. POIRIER
BRIG. GEN. ERIC J. RILEY
BRIG. GEN. CHRISTOPHER J. SAMULSKI
BRIG. GEN. MICHAEL T. SCATES
BRIG. GEN. JEFFERY M. SMITH
BRIG. GEN. MATTHEW J. STRUB
BRIG. GEN. WILLIAM E. TEMPLE V
BRIG. GEN. KENDRICK D. TRAYLOR
BRIG. GEN. TANYA R. TROUT
BRIG. GEN. DANIEL R. WATERS
BRIG. GEN. BRIAN F. WERTZLER
BRIG. GEN. MATTHEW S. WOODRUFF
THE FOLLOWING NAMED ARMY NATIONAL GUARD OF
THE UNITED STATES OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT IN
THE RESERVE OF THE ARMY TO THE GRADE INDICATED
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 12203 AND 12211:

To be major general
BRIG. GEN. DIANE L. DUNN

IN THE MARINE CORPS
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS TO THE GRADE

E:\CR\FM\G15JA6.059

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026
To be lieutenant general

THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY
MEDICAL CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 624
AND 7064:

To be lieutenant commander
NATASHA RAI MORRIS

ANDREW J. WITHINGTON

IN THE NAVY
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE UNITED STATES NAVY TO THE GRADE INDICATED
WHILE ASSIGNED TO A POSITION OF IMPORTANCE AND
RESPONSIBILITY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 601:

To be vice admiral
IN THE AIR FORCE
THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUAL FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR AIR
FORCE UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

To be major
IN THE ARMY
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY
MEDICAL SPECIALIST CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTIONS 624 AND 7064:

To be major
JOSEPH D. FRJELICH
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 624:

Jkt 069060

THE FOLLOWING NAMED ARMY NATIONAL GUARD OF
THE UNITED STATES OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT TO
THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE RESERVE OF THE ARMY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 12203 AND 12211:

To be colonel

To be major
EMILY E. BOBENRIETH
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR ARMY VETERINARY CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 531
AND 7064:

To be major
KIERA K. ZIMMERMAN

IN THE NAVY

Frm 00043

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 9801

To be lieutenant commander
THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICERS FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR NAVY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531 AND 8132:

To be lieutenant commander
LAWRENCE E. BURKART
BRENDON W. KIELY

CLYDE B. GORE, JR.
MATTHEW B. MCDONALD

PO 00000

THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR NAVY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

IAN W. MCMENAMIN

THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUALS FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADES INDICATED IN THE REGULAR
NAVY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

SCOTT D. GALE
ALLIE M. SCOTT

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

To be major

THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
IN THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR ARMY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

MARCUS W. C. MACNEALY

04:52 Jan 16, 2026

THE FOLLOWING NAMED OFFICER FOR APPOINTMENT
TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY
MEDICAL CORPS UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTIONS 624
AND 7064:

CASEY C. GOWER

REAR ADM. RICHARD E. SEIF, JR.

To be colonel

To be commander
JOHN B. NEWMAN

To be major

MAJ. GEN. MARCUS B. ANNIBALE

VerDate Sep 11 2014

S269

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE

INDICATED WHILE ASSIGNED TO A POSITION OF IMPORTANCE AND RESPONSIBILITY UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C.,
SECTION 601:

THE FOLLOWING NAMED INDIVIDUALS FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE GRADE INDICATED IN THE REGULAR NAVY
UNDER TITLE 10, U.S.C., SECTION 531:

To be lieutenant commander
ALI A.W. ABDUL WAHID
GARY L. ARENDS, JR.
LUIS ARRAZOLA
ANDREW J. BERSON
ORLANDO CONTY
LEE A. DUDLEY
SHAIMAA M. EL SHAARAWY
MADELINE R. ELLIS
JEFFREY M. ERFE
DERRICK G. HICKEY
DAVID M. KRUSE
ALI K. OZCAN
SEETHALAKSHMI RAMANATHAN
KIMBERLY J. SALENE
IMANI N. WILLIAMS–VAUGHN

E:\CR\FM\A15JA6.001

S15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

E45

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS
HONORING FIRE CHIEF KRISTIAN
CONCEPCION

HON. MIKE THOMPSON
OF CALIFORNIA

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 15, 2026
Mr. THOMPSON of California. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today to honor Fire Chief Kristian Concepcion, as he retires after 35 years of dedicated commitment to the fire service, including
10 years leading our Vacaville Fire Department.
Chief Concepcion was born in Cavite, Philippines, and moved with his family to Southern
California at a young age. He received his
Bachelor of Arts in Economics from the University of California, Los Angeles in1986 and
earned his Master of Business Administration
from Pepperdine University in 1989. He graduated from the Executive Fire Officer Program
at the National Fire Academy in 2016. Chief
Concepcion and his wife, Peggy, have been
married for 38 years and have called Vacaville
home for the past 10 years. They are the
proud parents of four adult daughters and two
sons-in-law.
Chief Concepcion’s commitment to public
safety is clear from his distinguished career.
He began his service in 1991 as a firefighter
with the Orange County Fire Authority. Over
the next 25 years, he rose through the ranks,
serving as a paramedic, hazardous materials
specialist, public affairs chief, administrative
officer, and Division Chief. In 2016, he became Fire Chief of the Vacaville Fire Department, where he has led the department with
vision and compassion for the past decade.
Chief Concepcion has rightfully been recognized for his leadership and innovation. Under
his direction, the Vacaville Fire Department
experienced remarkable growth and progress.
Daily staffing increased from 19 to 29 firefighters, two new fire stations were opened,
and the number of staffed ambulances expanded from three to five. He launched the
city’s Ready, Set, Go! Wildfire Preparedness
Program, strengthened fire prevention and
code enforcement staffing to keep pace with
community growth, and served as Interim City
Public Information Officer for nearly two years
during the COVID–19 pandemic. He also
helped establish the Firefighter Apprentice
Program, creating pathways for aspiring firefighters and ensuring a well-trained workforce
for years to come.
Chief Concepcion’s dedication extends beyond the fire department to community service. He served as Treasurer of the Solano
County Fire Chiefs Association from 2015 to
2021 and as President from 2021 to 2023. He
also served as President of the Vacaville
Christmas Fund, a nonprofit organization that
supports local victims of severe fire incidents
and families in need during the holidays. He
actively serves on the California State Sudden
Infant Death Syndrome Advisory Council and
was an Honorary Commander for the 60th Operations Group at Travis Air Force Base. He

was also a longtime member of the Orange
County Fire Authority Pipes and Drums and
has spent many years as a high school and
college football referee.
Mr. Speaker, we thank Chief Kristian Concepcion for his dedicated service to our community. Therefore, it is fitting and proper that
we honor him here today as he retires after 35
years of service.
f

HONORING THE WORK OF CODY
MCCARTY

On behalf of the people of New Mexico’s
2nd Congressional District, I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to Cody for his continued work for New Mexicans and our veterans. He has been an integral member of our
team who will be dearly missed, and I look forward to seeing what he accomplishes next.
f

HONORING AMIE FRALEY’S DEDICATED SERVICE TO HABITAT
FOR HUMANITY

HON. RICHARD HUDSON

HON. GABE VASQUEZ

OF NORTH CAROLINA

OF NEW MEXICO

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 15, 2026
Mr. HUDSON. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize Ms. Amie Fraley for her dedicated
service to Habitat for Humanity of the North
Carolina (NC) Sandhills, and to congratulate
her on her new role with Habitat for Humanity
International.
After nearly sixteen years as executive director of Habitat for Humanity of the NC
Sandhills, Amie announced she would be
transitioning to a new role with Habitat for Humanity International, as an organizational development consultant. Throughout her many
years of service, Amie played an immeasurable role in the growth of the nonprofit.
Under her leadership, Habitat for Humanity increased its homebuilding pace from 10 to almost 13 houses per year. In addition, the nonprofit increased its focus on its Aging in Place
repair program, providing more repairs for the
disabled and over 55 populations in the region. Her efforts and collaboration significantly
contributed to the growing influence of Habitat
for Humanity across the state of North Carolina, acquiring a 103-acre property in Aberdeen to create a community called Sandhills
Station, made possible by a $3 million dollar
grant. I am honored to represent Amie, who
has worked so diligently to improve our district
and the state of North Carolina.
It is my honor to take this opportunity to recognize Ms. Amie Fraley for her incredible
service to Habitat for Humanity. I wish her all
the best in her new role and hope she continues doing what she loves while also helping
our community and country.
Mr. Speaker, please join me today in honoring Ms. Amie Fraley for her nearly 16 years
of dedicated service to Habitat for Humanity
and the continued impact she will have in her
new role with Habitat for Humanity International.

Thursday, January 15, 2026
Mr. VASQUEZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize my Deputy District Director, Cody
McCarty, for his many years of public service
to New Mexico, as he continues his pursuit of
higher education. His tireless work and strong
leadership were critical in delivering results
every day for New Mexico’s 2nd District.
Cody is a fifth generation New Mexican
raised in Reserve in Catron County. He is a
two-time graduated Aggie and has earned two
degrees from New Mexico State University—
also my alma mater. He is a proud veteran
and previously served in the United States
Marine Corps as a Sergeant in the 2nd Light
Armored Reconnaissance Battalion. During
college, he worked for NMSU Military and Veterans Programs and advised military and veteran students on their education benefits.
Cody’s Congressional public service is extensive and began when he interned for Senator MARTIN HEINRICH’s office in 2018, followed by his work as a Field and Constituent
Services Representative for Congresswoman
Xochitl Torres Small. Most recently he served
as the Deputy District Director out of my Las
Cruces office and worked on veterans, military, public safety, agriculture, and LGBTQ+
issues.
While working for New Mexico’s 2nd District,
Cody established invaluable relationships with
veterans across the state and enjoyed getting
to work with groups like the Marine Corps
League, El Perro Diablo, and the Lincoln/
Otero County Veterans Leadership Council.
His expertise and dedication played a critical
role in the introduction of legislation that has
improved the lives of veterans, such as the
New Mexico Rural Veteran Health Care Health
Access Act. He is truly dedicated to supporting
veterans both inside and outside of his work
schedule, and since my first term, he has volunteered with a local veterans group in Las
Cruces, placing flags at a local cemetery to
honor veterans on Memorial Day. Cody is a
true public servant and represents the best
that New Mexico has to offer.
Cody is leaving his role with my office on
January 20, 2026, to pursue a third degree
from NMSU, and while it is bittersweet to say
goodbye to him, I am excited to soon call him
Dr. McCarty.

f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. ANDRÉ CARSON
OF INDIANA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 15, 2026
Mr. CARSON. Mr. Speaker, I inadvertently
voted YEA on Roll Call No. 31. My intent was

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:48 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

E:\CR\FM\A15JA8.001

E15JAPT1

E46

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

to vote NAY on Roll Call No. 31, passage of
H.R. 2988, Protecting Prudent Investment of
Retirement Savings Act.
f

RECOGNIZING THE MADDY
INSTITUTE

HON. DAVID G. VALADAO
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

Thursday, January 15, 2026
Mr. VALADAO. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize the Maddy Institute on its 25th anniversary and to thank them for their significant
contributions to the Central Valley.
Established in 1999 by the California Legislature, the Maddy Institute honors the life and
service of Senator Kenneth L. ‘‘Ken’’ Maddy.
Senator Maddy’s integrity, legislative expertise, and commitment to bipartisanship left a
lasting legacy—one that the Maddy Institute
continues to uphold.
Since its founding, the Maddy Institute has
inspired citizens of all ages to learn about the
democratic process and engage in civil dialogue. Through partnerships with four universities, it has offered young adults hands-on
opportunities to participate in civic engagement, serve their communities, and develop
strong leadership skills. Nearly 600 alumni
now serve in business, government, and the
nonprofit sector, which is a testament to the
Maddy Institute’s impact.
My District and Washington, D.C. offices
have welcomed interns from the Maddy Insti-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:48 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

tute throughout my time in Congress. Their
local expertise and interest in government
make the interns invaluable members of my
team. I’m proud to support a program that promotes the next generation of public servants.
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues in the
House of Representatives to join me in congratulating the Maddy Institute on 25 years of
service. By educating, engaging, and empowering young people, the Maddy Institute is
helping shape the next generation of leaders
in the Central Valley and across our Nation.
f

HONORING JENNIFER A. GOEDKE

HON. MIKE THOMPSON
OF CALIFORNIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 15, 2026
Mr. THOMPSON of California. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today to honor Jennifer A. Goedke, who
is retiring from Congress after 25 years of
public service.
Jennifer comes from a hard-working family
in Illinois, Her father, Richard A. Goedke, was
a member of IBEW and PATCO, and she
walked the picket line with him to fight for better labor conditions. Her mother, Dolores, was
a working mom who successfully ran a medical practice while raising two children. Jennifer was the first in her family to earn a college diploma. It was there, at Monmouth College, where Professors Ira Smolensky and
Stacy Cordery inspired her to spend a semester in Washington, D.C. as an intern for Congressman Lane Evans.

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 15, 2026

After graduation, Jennifer’s love of the institution led her back to Congress where she
has spent 25 years working for distinguished
Members, including Representatives Henry
Waxman, Lane Evans, MARCY KAPTUR, Lynn
C. Woolsey, and myself. She capped her career as Chief of Staff for Congressmen JARED
HUFFMAN and GEORGE WHITESIDES.
In her time on Capitol Hill, Jennifer has
championed landmark gun safety legislation,
including H.R. 8, the Bipartisan Background
Check Act. As my lead staffer on the Gun Violence Prevention Taskforce, she sat with
countless families as they worked through
their grief and fought for solutions to end gun
violence. She also helped to negotiate the
USMCA trade agreement, expanded FMLA for
military families, and shepherded countless
community district projects to improve education, transportation, and wetlands restoration.
Public service is in Jennifer’s DNA. She
finds practical solutions to problems and works
across the aisle without reservation. Though
she never forgot her Midwestern roots, she
dedicated most of her career to California. In
that time, she changed the landscape of
Northern California policy and redistricting.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you join me in recognizing the noteworthy career of Jennifer A.
Goedke, her 25 years in Congress, and her
dedication to the institution. It is my pleasure
and honor to congratulate her on her years of
service. I wish her the best in her next adventures.

E:\CR\FM\A15JA8.004

E15JAPT1

Thursday, January 15, 2026

Daily Digest
HIGHLIGHTS
Senate passed H.R. 6938, Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water
Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations Act.

Senate

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Chamber Action
Routine Proceedings, pages S227–S269
Measures Introduced: Forty-two bills and four resolutions were introduced, as follows: S. 3647–3688,
S. Res. 583–585, and S. Con. Res. 26. Pages S256–58
Measures Passed:
Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water
Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations Act: By 82 yeas to 15 nays (Vote No.
11), Senate passed H.R. 6938, making consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending September
30, 2026, taking action on the following amendments and motions proposed thereto: Pages S227–49
Withdrawn:
Thune Amendment No. 4208, to change the enactment date.
Page S248
During consideration of this measure today, Senate
also took the following action:
By 85 yeas to 14 nays (Vote No. 10), three-fifths
of those Senators duly chosen and sworn, having
voted in the affirmative, Senate agreed to the motion
to close further debate on the bill.
Page S230
Thune motion to commit the bill to the Committee on Appropriations, with instructions, Amendment No. 4210, to change the enactment date, fell
when cloture was invoked on the bill.
Page S230
Thune Amendment No. 4211 (to the instructions
(Amendment No. 4210)), of a perfecting nature, fell
when Thune motion to commit the bill to the Committee on Appropriations, with instructions, Amendment No. 4210 (listed above), fell.
Page S230
Thune Amendment No. 4212 (to Amendment
No. 4211), of a perfecting nature, fell when Thune
Amendment No. 4211 (to the instructions (Amendment No. 4210)), fell.
Page S230
Thune Amendment No. 4209 (to Amendment
No. 4208), of a perfecting nature, when Thune
Amendment No. 4208 (listed above), was withdrawn.
Page S248

Honoring former Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell: Senate agreed to S. Res. 585, honoring the life,
achievements, and legacy of Ben Nighthorse Campbell.
Page S263
Honoring Reverend Richard Smallwood: Senate
agreed to S. Res. 584, honoring the life and legacy
of Reverend Richard Smallwood, a world-class composer, pianist, and arranger.
Page S263
AH–64 Apache Attack Helicopter: Committee on
Armed Services was discharged from further consideration of S. Res. 519, recognizing the achievements
and contributions of the AH–64 Apache attack helicopter to the national defense of the United States
and its allies and honoring the dedication, service,
and sacrifice of the United States Army aviators,
maintainers, and support personnel who operate and
sustain the Apache, and the resolution was then
agreed to, after agreeing to the following amendment proposed thereto:
Page S263
Barrasso (for Kelly) Amendment No. 4233, to improve the preamble.
Page S263
Measures Considered:
Pregnant Student’s Fairness Act—Cloture: Senate
began consideration of the motion to proceed to consideration of S.3627, to require institutions of higher
education to disseminate information on the rights
of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant
students.
Page S262
A motion was entered to close further debate on
the motion to proceed to consideration of the bill,
and, in accordance with the provisions of Rule XXII
of the Standing Rules of the Senate, and pursuant to
the unanimous-consent agreement of Thursday, January 15, 2026, a vote on cloture will occur at 5:30
p.m., on Monday, January 26, 2026.
Page S262
A unanimous-consent agreement was reached providing that notwithstanding Rule XXII, the motion
to invoke cloture filed during today’s session of the

D84

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:01 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D15JA6.REC

D15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

Senate ripen at 5:30 p.m., on Monday, January 26,
2026.
Page S264
Breaking the Gridlock Act—Agreement: A unanimous-consent agreement was reached providing that
the papers with respect to H.R. 1834, to advance
policy priorities that will break the gridlock, be returned to the House of Representatives at their request.
Page S263
Pro Forma Sessions—Agreement: A unanimousconsent agreement was reached providing that the
Senate convene for pro forma sessions, with no business being conducted on the following dates and
times: Friday, January 16, 2026, at 8:30 a.m.; Tuesday, January 20, 2026, at 10 a.m.; Thursday, January 22, 2026, at 11 a.m.; and that when the Senate
recesses on Thursday, January 22, 2026, it next convene at 3 p.m., on Monday, January 26, 2026.
Page S264

Nominations Received: Senate received the following nominations:
1 Air Force nomination in the rank of general.
37 Army nominations in the rank of general.
8 Marine Corps nominations in the rank of general.
1 Navy nomination in the rank of admiral.
Routine lists in the Air Force, Army, and Navy.
Pages S268–69

Messages from the House:
Page S254
Measures Referred:
Page S254
Measures Read the First Time: Pages S254, S262–63
Nomination Referred:
Page S254
Executive Communications:
Pages S254–56
Executive Reports of Committees:
Page S256
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages S258–59
Statements on Introduced Bills/Resolutions:

abonner on LAPGK3WLY3PROD with CONG-REC-ONLINE

Pages S259–61

Additional Statements:
Pages S253–54
Amendments Submitted:
Pages S261–62
Authorities for Committees to Meet:
Page S262
Privileges of the Floor:
Page S262
Record Votes: Two record votes were taken today.
Pages S230, S248–49
(Total—11)
Recess: Senate convened at 10 a.m. and recessed, as
a further mark of respect to the memory of the late
Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell, of Colorado, in
accordance with S. Res. 585, at 4:59 p.m., until
8:30 a.m. on Friday, January 16, 2026. (For Senate’s
program, see the remarks of the Acting Majority
Leader in today’s Record on page S264.)

VerDate Sep 11 2014

01:21 Jan 28, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

CORRECTION

D85

Committee Meetings
(Committees not listed did not meet)

NOMINATIONS
Committee on Armed Services: Committee concluded a
hearing to examine the nominations of Lieutenant
General Francis L. Donovan, USMC, to be general
and Commander, United States Southern Command,
and Lieutenant General Joshua M. Rudd, USA, to be
general and Director, National Security Agency/
Chief, Central Security Service/Commander, United
States Cyber Command, both of the Department of
Defense, after the nominees testified and answered
questions in their own behalf.
IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGY ON AMERICA’S
YOUTH
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation:
Committee concluded a hearing to examine the impact of technology on America’s youth, after receiving testimony from Jean M. Twenge, San Diego
State University, San Diego, California; Jared Cooney
Horvath, LME Global, Scottsdale, Arizona; Emily B.
Cherkin, The Screentime Consultant, Seattle, Washington; and Jenny Radesky, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor.
BUSINESS MEETING
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions:
Committee ordered favorably reported the following
business items:
S. 1157, to direct the Secretary of Health and
Human Services to conduct a review to evaluate the
status of research on lung cancer in women and underserved populations, with an amendment in the
nature of a substitute;
S. 921, to direct the Secretary of Health and
Human Services to issue guidance on whether hospital emergency departments should implement
fentanyl testing as a routine procedure for patients
experiencing an overdose, with an amendment in the
nature of a substitute;
S. 2169, to require the development of a comprehensive rural hospital cybersecurity workforce development strategy, with an amendment in the nature of a substitute; and
S. 272, to improve the safety of infant formula
through testing of infant formula for microorganisms
and toxic elements with an amendment in the nature
of a substitute.
BUSINESS MEETING
Committee on the Judiciary: Committee ordered favorably reported the following business items:
S. 2132, to amend title 18, United States Code,
to prevent and mitigate the potential for conflicts of

Sfmt 0627

E:\RECORD26\JANUARY\D15JA6.REC

D15JA6

D86

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

interest following government service, with an
amendment in the nature of a substitute; and
The nominations of Daniel E. Burrows, of Colorado, to be an Assistant Attorney General, Megan
Blair Benton, to be United States District Judge for
the Western District of Missouri, David Clay
Fowlkes, to be United States District Judge for the
Western District of Arkansas, Nicholas Jon Ganjei,
to be United States District Judge for the Southern
District of Texas, Brian Charles Lea, to be United
States District Judge for the Western District of
Tennessee, Justin R. Olson, to be United States District Judge for the Southern District of Indiana,
Aaron Christian Peterson, to be United States Dis-

January 15, 2026

trict Judge for the District of Alaska, Andrew Benson, to be United States Attorney for the District of
Maine for the term of four years, William Boyle, to
be United States Attorney for the Eastern District of
North Carolina for the term of four years, Kevin
Holmes, to be United States Attorney for the Western District of Arkansas for the term of four years,
Brian David Miller, to be United States Attorney for
the Middle District of Pennsylvania for the term of
four years, Richard Price, of Missouri, to be United
States Attorney for the Western District of Missouri
for the term of four years, and Darin Smith, to be
United States Attorney for the District of Wyoming
for the term of four years.

h

House of Representatives

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Chamber Action
Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 45 public bills, H.R. 7082–7126; and 6 resolutions, H.
Con. Res. 70; and H. Res. 1002–1006 were introduced.
Pages H918–20
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages H921–22
Reports Filed: Reports were filed today as follows:
H.R. 5577, to amend the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 to reauthorize the National Flood
Insurance Program, with an amendment (H. Rept.
119–456); and
H.R. 6644, to increase the supply of housing in
America, and for other purposes, with amendments
(H. Rept. 119–457, Part 1).
Page H918
Protecting Prudent Investment of Retirement
Savings Act: The House passed H.R. 2988, to
amend the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974 to specify requirements concerning the
consideration of pecuniary and non-pecuniary factors,
by a yea-and-nay vote of 213 yeas to 205 nays, Roll
No. 31.
Pages H897–H907
Rejected the Kaptur motion to recommit the bill
to the Committee on Education and Workforce by
a yea-and-nay vote of 206 yeas to 210 nays, Roll
No. 30.
Pages H905–07
Pursuant to the Rule, the amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee
on Education and Workforce now printed in the bill
shall be considered as adopted.
Pages H897–99
Agreed to:
Huizenga amendment (No. 1 printed in part A of
H. Rept. 119–440) that requires GAO to publish a

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:01 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

study on brokerage accounts (by a yea-and-nay vote
of 395 yeas to 22 nays, Roll No. 29). Pages H903–05
H. Res. 988, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills H.R. 2988, H.R. 2262, H.R. 2270,
H.R. 2312 and H.R. 4366, was agreed to Tuesday,
January 13th.
Meeting Hour: Agreed by unanimous consent that
when the House adjourns today, it adjourn to meet
at 3 p.m. tomorrow, January 16th; and further when
the House adjourns on that day, it adjourn to meet
at noon on Tuesday, January 20, 2026 for morninghour debate.
Page H907
Quorum Calls—Votes: Two yea-and-nay votes and
one recorded vote developed during the proceedings
of today and appear on pages H904–05, H906–07,
and H907.
Adjournment: The House met at 9 a.m. and adjourned at 12:20 p.m.

Committee Meetings
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Subcommittee on
Communications and Technology held a markup on
H.R. 6505, the ‘‘Next Generation 9–1–1 Act’’; H.R.
2076, the ‘‘LuLu’s Law’’; H.R. 5200, the ‘‘Emergency Reporting Act’’; H.R. 5201, the ‘‘Kari’s Law
Reporting Act’’; H.R. 7022, the ‘‘Mystic Alerts
Act’’; and H.R. 1519, the ‘‘Public Safety Communications Act’’. H.R. 6505, H.R. 2076, H.R. 5200,
H.R. 5201, H.R. 7022, and H.R. 1519 were forwarded to the full Committee, without amendment.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D15JA6.REC

D15JAPT1

January 15, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR FRIDAY,
JANUARY 16, 2026

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

NEW PUBLIC LAWS

Senate

(For last listing of Public Laws, see DAILY DIGEST, p. D12)

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

S. 222, to amend the Richard B. Russell National
School Lunch Act to allow schools that participate in
the school lunch program to serve whole milk.
Signed on January 14, 2026. (Public Law 119–69)

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:01 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

D87

Fmt 0627

No meetings/hearings scheduled.

House
No hearings are scheduled.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D15JA6.REC

D15JAPT1

D88

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 15, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

8:30 a.m., Friday, January 16

3 p.m., Friday, January 16

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Friday: Senate will meet in a pro forma
session.

Program for Friday: House will meet in a Pro Forma
session at 3 p.m.

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE
Carson, André, Ind., E45
Hudson, Richard, N.C., E45
Thompson, Mike, Calif., E45, E46
Valadao, David G., Calif., E46
Vasquez, Gabe, N.M., E45

E PL

U

IB
U

NU

M

S

DMwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Congressional Record

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:01 Jan 16, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D15JA6.REC

D15JAPT1

